                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




   DO RECESSIONS ACCELERATE ROUTINE-BIASED TECHNOLOGICAL CHANGE?
                   EVIDENCE FROM VACANCY POSTINGS

                                        Brad Hershbein
                                         Lisa B. Kahn

                                      Working Paper 22762
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w22762


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                         October 2016, Revised September 2017




We are grateful to Jason Abaluck, Joe Altonji, David Autor, Tim Bartik, David Berger, Nick
Bloom, Jeff Clemens, David Deming, David Green, John Horton, Hilary Hoynes, Peter Kuhn,
Fabian Lange, Steve Malliaris, Adrien Matray, Alicia Sasser Modestino, Daniel Shoag, Henry
Siu, Basit Zafar, four anonymous referees and seminar participants at the 2016 AEAs, the Atlanta
Fed, Boston College, Boston University, Brookings, Georgetown University, Harvard, the LSE,
MIT, NBER Summer Institute (Macro and Labor), Northwestern, Princeton, Rutgers, SOLE/
EALE 2015 meetings, Trans Pacific Labor Seminar 2015, University of British Columbia,
University of Chicago, University of Illinois, University of Kansas, University of Michigan,
University of Notre Dame, University of Pennsylvania, University of Pittsburgh, University of
South Florida, and the WEAI 2016 meetings. We are especially indebted to Dan Restuccia, Jake
Sherman, and Bledi Taska for providing the Burning Glass data. Jing Cai provided excellent
research assistance with CPS data. A previous version of this paper was titled "Is College the
New High School? Evidence from Vacancy Postings." The views expressed herein are those of
the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2016 by Brad Hershbein and Lisa B. Kahn. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Do Recessions Accelerate Routine-Biased Technological Change? Evidence from Vacancy
Postings
Brad Hershbein and Lisa B. Kahn
NBER Working Paper No. 22762
October 2016, Revised September 2017
JEL No. D22,E32,J23,J24,M51,O33

                                         ABSTRACT

We show that skill requirements in job vacancy postings differentially increased in MSAs that
were hit hard by the Great Recession, relative to less hard-hit areas. These increases persist
through at least the end of 2015 and are correlated with increases in capital investments, both at
the MSA and firm-levels. We also find that effects are most pronounced in routine-cognitive
occupations, which exhibit relative wage growth as well. We argue that this evidence is
consistent with the restructuring of production toward routine-biased technologies and the more-
skilled workers that complement them, and that the Great Recession accelerated this process.


Brad Hershbein
W.E. Upjohn Institute for Employment Research
hershbein@upjohn.org

Lisa B. Kahn
Yale University
School of Management
P. O. Box 208200
New Haven, CT 06520
and NBER
lisa.kahn@yale.edu
1      Introduction
The employment shift from occupations in the middle of the skill distribution toward those

in the tails is one of the most important trends in the U.S. labor market over the last 30

years. Previous research makes the compelling case that a primary driver of this job polar-

ization is routine-biased technological change (RBTC), whereby new machine technologies

and overseas labor substitute for middle-skill jobs in the U.S. and are in turn complementary
                                1
to high-skill cognitive jobs.       Until recently, RBTC had been thought to be a gradual, secular

phenomenon. However, a long theoretical literature beginning with Schumpeter's creative

destruction (1939) suggests adjustments to technological change may be more episodic. In

boom times, high opportunity costs, or frictions such as adjustment costs, may inhibit re-

sources from being reallocated optimally in the face of technological change. Recessions lower
                                                                                                    2
the opportunity cost and can produce large enough shocks to overcome these frictions.

    Whether adjustments to new technology are smooth or lumpy is important for policy

and for our understanding of recoveries. The recoveries from the last three U.S. recessions

(1991, 2001, 200709) have been jobless: employment was slow to rebound despite recovery

in aggregate output. The reasons for jobless recovery are not well understood, but a small

theoretical literature points to adjustment costs as a potential mechanism, since they can

generate reallocation that is concentrated in downturns (Berger 2012, Koenders and Roger-

son 2005, Jaimovich and Siu 2012). Such lumpy adjustment may leave a mass of displaced

workers with the wrong skills for new production. Jaimovich and Siu (2015) provide sugges-

tive evidence that countercyclical reallocation, in the form of RBTC, and jobless recovery

are linked. They show that the vast majority of the declines in middle-skill employment have

occurred during recessions and that, over the same time period, recovery was jobless only

in these occupations.       However, there is still relatively little direct evidence on how rms

restructure employment in the face of technological change, and, in particular, whether this
                                           3
restructuring is gradual or episodic.

    In this paper we investigate how the demand for skills changed over the Great Recession.

We use a new data set collected by Burning Glass Technologies that contains the near-

universe of electronically posted job vacancies in 2007 and 20102015.               Exploiting spatial

variation in economic conditions, we establish a new fact: the skill requirements of job ads

increase in metropolitan statistical areas (MSAs) that suered larger employment shocks in

    1 See for example the seminal work of Autor, Levy, and Murnane (2003); Autor, Katz, and Kearney
(2008); Goos and Manning (2007); and Autor and Dorn (2013).
    2 Many theoretical papers predict this phenomenon. See for example Hall (1991, 2005); Mortensen and
Pissarides (1994); Caballero and Hammour (1994, 1996); Gomes, Greenwood, and Rebelo (2001); and Koen-
ders and Rogerson (2005).
    3 For example, Acemoglu and Restrepo (2017) nd that the the diusion of industrial robots across U.S.
commuting zones reduced aggregate employment and wages, Harrigan, Reshef, and Toubal (2016) show that
job polarization was more pronounced in French rms with greater shares of technology-related occupations,
and Hawkins, Michaels and Oh (2015) show that capital investments and employment reductions frequently
occur together in Korean manufacturing plants, but these papers focus on long run changes.




                                                    2
the Great Recession, relative to the same areas before the shock and other areas that experi-

enced smaller shocks. Our estimates imply that ads posted in a hard-hit metro area are about

5 percentage points (16%) more likely to contain education and experience requirements and

about 23 percentage points (8-12%) more likely to state requirements for cognitive and

computer skills. Moreover, the vast majority of this upskilling persists through the end of

our sample in 2015. That is, even while most measures of local labor-market strength had

converged back to pre-recession levels, dierences in advertised skill demands remain. This

is true holding constant a rich set of controls for the availability of skilled labor and the

composition of ads across rms and occupations. In fact, we nd that the very rms that

upskilled early in the recovery drive the persistence later in our sample period.

   These patterns collectively raise the possibility that a structural shift in the demand for

skill occurred disproportionately in harder-hit MSAs. In particular, the skill requirements we

explore (education, experience, cognitive, and computer) are known to complement routine-

biased technologies (Autor, Levy, and Murnane 2003; Brynjolfsson and McAfee 2011).          If

a structural shift in line with RBTC is occurring, we would expect changes in these skill

requirements to be accompanied by an accelerated adoption of such technologies, as well.

Indeed, we nd that increases in skill requirements are correlated with capital investments at

both the MSA and rm levels. First, using the Ci Technology Database from Harte-Hanks,

a market intelligence rm, we show that harder-hit MSAs exhibited a relative increase in

IT investments, as measured by the adoption of personal computers, at the same time as

they upskilled in job postings. These dierences across MSAs emerge only after the Great

Recession and, once again, persist through our sample period. Second, we link rms in our

job postings database to those in the Harte-Hanks database, as well as to publicly traded

rms in Compustat. We show that the rms increasing their capital investments, based on

PC adoption and physical capital holdings, are also more likely to upskill. Thus, increased

demand for labor skill appears closely linked to both general and IT capital investment.

   If this increased investment is in fact related to routine-biased technologies, we would

expect to see the strongest changes to labor characteristics for the jobs most susceptible to

such technologiesroutine ones.    We thus additionally focus on dierent types of routine

occupations, exploring joint changes in skill requirements, employment, and wages. Follow-

ing Acemoglu and Autor (2011), we distinguish routine-cognitive occupations (e.g., clerical,

administrative, and sales) from routine-manual ones (e.g., production and operatives), and

we supplement the job ads data with Current Population Survey (CPS) and Occupational

Employment Statistics (OES) data. For routine-manual occupations, we see evidence con-

sistent with rms' substitution of technology for labora sharp increase in layo risk for

harder-hit MSAs early on, and persistently depressed employment, with no particular impact

on skill requirements. This is the traditional view exhibited in the polarization literature:

employment losses concentrated in occupations we expect to be most readily replaceable

by machines. Consistent with Jaimovich and Siu (2015), we show that these changes also



                                              3
appear to be episodic around the Great Recession. However, in contrast to this conventional

view of labor substitution, routine-cognitive occupations in harder-hit MSAs surprisingly

exhibit only modest increases in layo risk and no relative employment losses. Instead, we

show that these occupations experience pronounced upskilling, as well as modest relative

wage and employment growth after the recession. That is, rather than disappearing entirely,

surviving routine-cognitive occupations appear to have become both relatively higher-skilled

and more productive. These occupations thus became episodically less routineand more

cognitiveas a result of the Great Recession.

    Taken together, our results suggest that rms located in areas more severely aected

by the Great Recession were induced to restructure their production toward greater use of

technology and higher-skilled workers; that is, the Great Recession hastened the polarization

of the U.S. labor market.

    This paper is related to a number of important literatures. First, we provide evidence

that the Great Recession spurred persistent changes in labor inputs, in a manner consistent

with technological change. Several classes of models with adjustment costs can rationalize

this result.   For instance, rms may make productivity enhancing improvements in a re-

cession because of a decline in the opportunity cost of restructuring (Hall 2005), a shift in

managerial attention from growth to eciency (Koenders and Rogerson 2005), or changes

in the costs and benets of making layos (Berger 2012, Jaimovich and Siu 2012). In ad-

dition, recessions may drive Schumpeterian cleansing, whereby, older, less-productive rms

die, making way for newer, more-productive rms. Empirical support for adjustment-cost

models has focused on the impacts of competition or trade shocks on productivity.                        For

example, Bloom, Draca and Van Reenen (2016) show that increased Chinese import compe-
                                                                    4
tition in Europe led to technological change within rms.               Our paper adds to this literature

by highlighting recession-induced changes in the rm-level demand for skill. This may have

important consequences for labor market recoveries, since it implies potential for a sudden

skill mismatch.

    Second, the Burning Glass job postings data provide a unique opportunity to measure

changes in skill requirements both across and within occupations. In contrast, the extant

literature on job polarization has focused on shifts across occupations and has therefore

been unable to ascertain the importance of the intra-occupational margin. We show that

the bulk of upskilling occurs within occupations, suggesting this margin is quite important.

Moreover, our nding that upskilling is concentrated within routine-cognitive occupations

and is accompanied by relative wage growth implies that RBTC occurs both within and

across occupations.      This result helps to clarify work by Beaudry, Green, and Sand (2014

   4 Additionally, Nickell (1996) provides evidence that increased competition is associated with faster total
factor productivity growth; Syverson (2004a and 2004b) shows that productivity is higher in industries and
geographies with greater substitutability of products across rms; and Bernard, Redding, and Schott (2011)
show rms shift towards higher productivity products upon the liberalization of rm trade. Other examples
are cited in each of these papers.




                                                      4
and 2016) and others documenting the great reversal in demand for cognitive skill. They

show that since 2000, cognitive occupations have seen no gains in employment or wages,

and that college graduates have become more likely to work in routine occupations than

previously. They argue that a decrease in demand for cognitive occupations drove college

graduates to take jobs lower in the occupational distribution, squeezing out the high school

graduates who formerly held them.                This is something of a puzzle, especially given the

common belief that technological change continues and the fact that more-skilled workers

still earn a sizable premium in the labor market (Card, Heining, and Kline 2013; Card,

Cardoso, and Kline 2016). We hypothesize part of the solution to this puzzle is that cognitive

workers are being drawn into (formerly) routine-task occupations as the skill content of these

occupations evolves. These changes make the occupations more-skilled and therefore likely

more desirable than before, although probably still not as desirable as traditional high-skilled
        5
jobs.

    Third, we contribute to a growing literature exploiting data on vacancy postings.                  Al-

though several studies have used aggregate vacancy data, and even vacancy microdata, from

the Bureau of Labor Statistics' Job Openings and Labor Market Turnover (JOLTS) survey

(Davis, Faberman, and Haltiwanger 2012, 2013), these data contain little information on the

characteristics of a given vacancy or the rm that is posting it.             Fewer studies have used

vacancy data that contain information on the occupation or specic requirements of the job

posted, and these have generally used narrow slices of the data (Rothwell 2014), or data

that are limited to one vacancy source (Kuhn and Shen 2013, Marinescu 2014).                      To our

knowledge, we are the rst study to use data based on a near-universe of online job postings

that covers every metropolitan area in the United States. Online job vacancies represent but

one slice of the labor market, and, by their nature, will overrepresent growing rms (Davis,

Faberman, and Haltiwanger 2013). Nonetheless, we show that linking vacancies to data on

employment, wages, and capital investmentsthe last at the rm levelpresents consistent

evidence on how labor markets changed following the Great Recession.

    We demonstrate that during the Great Recession rms changed not only whom they

would hire in the recovery, but how they would produce.                 Instead of occurring gradually,

with relatively few workers needing to be reallocated at any given time, we nd support that

changes in demand for skill were episodic, resulting in a swath of displaced workers whose

skills were suddenly rendered obsolete as rms ratcheted up their requirements. The need to

reallocate workers on such a large scale may help drive jobless recoveries. It also has distribu-

tional consequences, given that low-skill workers are well known to suer worse employment
                                             6
and wage consequences in recessions.             Finally, this type of episodic reallocation likely plays

a role in the well-noted and marked decline in male employment-to-population ratios over

   5 Our analyses, however, do not explain why employment and wages have not grown in high-skill occupa-
tions. Deming (2017) proposes a compelling hypothesis that a rising importance of social skills, especially
in conjunction with cognitive skills, can help account for this fact.
   6 See von Wachter and Handwerker (2008); Hoynes, Miller, and Schaller (2012); and Forsythe (2016).



                                                       5
the past 25 years, especially since these declines have been stair-step around recessions (Mof-
              7
tt 2012).        The evidence provided in this paper is thus integral for understanding worker

reallocation, and can help inform policymakers about the optimal mix during a downturn of

worker retraining and subsidizing job search through unemployment insurance.

    The remainder of this paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 introduces the data, while

section 3 summarizes our methodology.             Section 4 presents new facts on changes in skill

requirements as a function of local labor market conditions. Section 5 investigates how these

changes are linked to capital investments. Section 6 examines cross-occupation heterogeneity

in response to local labor market shocks on skill requirements, employment, and wages, with

a particular focus on routine occupations. Section 7 concludes.




2      Data
Our data come from a unique source:              microdata from nearly 100 million electronic job

postings in the United States that span the Great Recession (between 2007 and 2015). These

job postings were collected and assembled by Burning Glass Technologies, an employment

analytics and labor market information rm.               In this section, we describe the data and

our particular sample construction.           We provide a detailed examination of the sample's

characteristics and representativeness in appendix A.



2.1       Burning Glass Overview

Burning Glass Technologies (henceforth BG or Burning Glass) examines some 40,000 online

job boards and company websites to aggregate the job postings, parse and deduplicate them

into a systematic, machine-readable form, and create labor market analytic products. Thanks

to the breadth of this coverage, BG believes the resulting database captures a near-universe

of jobs that were posted online. Through a special agreement, we obtained these posting-

level data for the years 2007 and from 2010 through 2015, covering every MSA in the United
          8
States.

    The two key advantages of our data are its breadth and detail. The broad coverage of

the database presents a substantial strength over data sets based on a single vacancy source,

    7 Supporting the notion that episodic restructuring drives stair-step declines in male employment, Foote
and Ryan (2015) point out that middle-skill workers, the most vulnerable to RBTC, are most at risk of
leaving the labor force when unemployed.
    8 Our dataset was provided in February 2016. Although BG's algorithms for removing duplicates and
coding ad characteristics changes over time, each iteration is applied to all postings in the data.      The
database unfortunately lacks postings from 2008 and 2009. These years would be useful for completeness
and for understanding the precise timing over which skill requirements changed; however, since hiring volume
fell by one-third in 2008 and did not begin to recover until 2010 (per JOLTS), and our focus is on longer-term
changes in hiring demand, additional data for the recession years is not integral for this paper. We also have
data on jobs posted in Micropolitan Statistical Areas, which we do not use for lack of some of the labor
market indicators in these areas, and substantial noise in the ones that are available. They represent 5.6%
of all posted ads.



                                                      6
such as CareerBuilder.com.         While the JOLTS asks a nationally representative sample of

employers about vacancies they wish to ll in the near term, it is typically available only

at aggregated levels, and contains relatively little information about the characteristics of

vacancies. In contrast, the BG data contain some 70 possible standardized elds for each

vacancy. We exploit detailed information on occupation, geography, skill requirements, and

rm identiers. The codied skills include stated education and experience requirements, as
                                                                                                     9
well as thousands of specic skills standardized from open text in each job posting.                     The

data thus allow for analysis of a key, but largely unexplored, margin of rm demand: skill
                                       10
requirements within occupation.             Moreover, they allow for a rm-level analysis, which, as

we show below, is key to disentangling mechanisms for upskilling.

    However, the richness of the BG data comes with a few shortcomings.                      Notably, the

database covers only vacancies posted on the Internet. First, Davis, Faberman, and Halti-

wanger (2013) show that the distribution of vacancies in JOLTS overrepresents growing

rms.    Although roughly two-thirds of hiring is replacement hiring (Lazear and Spletzer

2012), vacancies in general will be somewhat skewed towards certain areas of the economy.

Second, even though vacancies for available jobs have increasingly appeared online instead

of in traditional sources, such as newspapers, one may worry that the types of jobs posted

online are not representative of all openings. In appendix A, we provide a detailed descrip-

tion of the industry-occupation mix of vacancies in BG relative to other sources (JOLTS, the

Current Population Survey, and Occupational Employment Statistics), an analysis of how it

has changed over our sample period, and various validity checks conducted on the data both

by us and by other researchers. To briey summarize, although BG postings are dispropor-

tionately concentrated in occupations and industries that typically require greater skill, the

distributions are relatively stable across time, and the aggregate and industry trends in the

quantity of vacancies track other sources reasonably closely.

    Another downside of the BG data is that vacancies represent just one margin by which

a rm may adjust labor inputsthrough stated, but not necessarily realized, demand. For

a complete picture, one would also like to see hires, separations, wages, and other measures

(e.g., incumbent worker training, recruitment intensity (Davis, Faberman, and Haltiwanger

2013)). Thus, we also provide corroborating evidence on some of these margins using sup-

plemental datasets, as described later.

    We restrict our main BG sample to ads with non-missing employers that posted at least

   9 For example, an ad might ask for a worker who is bilingual or who can organize and manage a team.
BG cleans and codes these and other skills into a taxonomy of thousands of unique, but standardized
requirements. Beginning with a set of pre-dened possible skills, BG searches text in an ad for an indication
that the skill is required. For example, for team work, they search for the key words team work but also
look for variations such as ability to work as a team.
  10 Other private-sector rms, such as Wanted Analytics, used by the Conference Board's Help-Wanted
Online Index, also oer disaggregated data, but not skill requirements. State vacancy surveys, conducted
by a limited number of states, sometimes collect certain skill requirements, but cover only a few geographic
areas and are generally not comparable across states (Carnevale, Jayasundera, and Repnikov 2014; Rothwell
2014).



                                                      7
10 ads over the sample period of 2007 and 2010-2015.              Employer name is missing in 40%

of postings, primarily from those listed on recruiting websites that typically do not reveal
                 11
the employer.         Many of our analyses exploit rm-level information to distinguish among

possible mechanisms for upskilling. We therefore choose to focus our entire analysis on the

consistent sample of ads with non-missing rms, with a sucient number of observations

per rm to estimate rm-level characteristics. However, we have performed analyses not re-

quiring rm-level information on the full data set and obtain very similar results. Moreover,

we have conrmed that the probability of satisfying this sample criterion (having a valid

rm identier) does not vary over the business cycle (see appendix A.8). Thus, our sam-

ple restriction should not confound the estimated relationship between local labor market

conditions and the skill requirements of postings.



2.2     Skill Requirements in Burning Glass

In our analyses, we exploit four categories of skill requirements: stated education and ex-

perience requirements, stated demand for skills that we classify as cognitive, and stated

demand for computer skills. We choose these skill requirements for two reasons. First, they

represent a broad swath of human capital measures in which both employers and economists

have interest.    Second, they reect what the economics discipline has learned about tech-

nological change over the past 20 years (Autor, Levy, and Murnane 2003; Brynjolfsson and

McAfee 2011). In particular, the RBTC literature emphasizes that new information tech-

nology or cheap overseas labor substitute for routine, algorithmic, middle-skill tasks. These
                                                                                                 12
new technologies are in turn complementary with high-skill cognitive, abstract tasks.                 High-

skilled workers favored by RBTC may be required to work with computers and perform a

more versatile set of functions. Indeed, the non-algorithmic tasks that complement routine-

task performing machines or overseas labor involve more complexity, problem solving and

analytical skills, and the ability to determine which tasks need to be performed at a given

moment.

    In accord with human capital theory, we believe more-educated workers or those with
                                                                                         13
greater experience on the job will be better able to perform these functions.                 In appendix

  11 When name is available, Burning Glass uses a proprietary algorithm to group name variants into a
standard set: for example, Bausch and Lomb, Bausch Lomb, and Bausch & Lomb would be grouped
together. We also perform some additional cleaning on rm name, removing any remaining punctuation,
spaces, and a few problematic words, such as Incorporated or Inc. The 10-ad restriction drops about 4%
of job ads that list a rm name. However, employer names with very few ads are likely to be miscoded (for
example, capturing a fragment of the city name).
  12 This literature nds also that RBTC may indirectly aect low-skill, manual tasks (Autor and Dorn
2013). However, a downside of the BG sample is that low-skill jobs are underrepresented. We thus focus our
analysis on the former margin, the degree to which employers shift demand from medium- toward high-skill
tasks and workers.
  13 In the raw data, there are two elds each for education and experience requirements: a minimum level
(degree or years of experience) and a preferred level. Postings that do not list an education or experience
requirement have these elds set to missing. We use the elds for the minimum levels to generate variables




                                                    8
A.3, to cross-validate the data, we show that education requirements strongly correlate with

average education levels of employed workers at the MSA and occupation levels.

    We categorize cognitive and computer skill requirements based on the open text elds for

skills. We designate an ad as requiring computer skills if it contains the key word computer
                                                 14
or it is categorized as software by BG.               We dene cognitive skill requirements based on a

set of key words chosen deliberately to match the non-routine analytical job tasks used in

Autor, Levy, and Murnane (2003) and subsequently used by the majority of papers studying

RBTC and polarization. We also ensure that the presence of these key words correlates with
                                                                          15
external measures of cognitive skill at the occupation level.

    This set of skills (education, experience, cognitive, and computer) aligns well with our

priors on how jobs change with the availability of computers (Brynjolfsson and McAfee

2011).     For example, a sales person who previously devoted most of his or her energy to

client relations may now be required to use data analytics to better target packages to

clients.   This salesperson now needs computer and analytical skills, and some experience

in the eld may help in mapping data recommendations to practice. Similarly, thanks to

machine vision technology, a quality control operator no longer need spend his or her time

measuring and identifying the shapes of produced goods, but instead can be diverted to other

tasks such as troubleshooting and making judgment calls in design optimization. This set of
                                                                                                              16
tasks requires higher cognitive function and intuition that can be gained by experience.
                                                                                   17
    Table 1 summarizes data for the primary regression sample.                          In 2007, 34% of the

weighted ads list any education requirement (column 1, row 1). Among ads with an edu-

cation requirement, half (17% of all ads) specify minimum education of a bachelor's degree,

another quarter ask for a high school diploma, and the remainder are roughly evenly split

between associate degrees (not shown), master's degrees, and professional degrees or PhDs.

Converting the degrees to their modal equivalent years of schooling, the average education

requirement, conditional on one being specied, is nearly 15 years.

    The second column shows skill requirements averaged over 20102015. The third column

for the presence of an education or experience requirement as well as the number of years of education or
experience required; the minimum is much more commonly specied than the preferred, and it is always
available when a preferred level is listed.
  14 BG includes common software (e.g., Excel, PowerPoint, AutoCAD), as well as less common software
and languages (e.g., Java, SQL, Python).
  15 Specically, an ad is categorized as requesting a cognitive skill if any listed skills include at least one of
the following phrases or fragments: research, analy, decision, solving, math, statistic, or thinking.
The fraction of ads at the occupation level that contain each of these skills is strongly correlated with an
O*NET measure developed by Deming (2017) meant to categorize cognitive occupations. We obtain this
measure from Deming and Kahn (2017), who categorize a wide range of keywords found in the BG job ads
into 10 general skills, including cognitive.
  16 It has been suggested by Deming (2017) and others that technology complements workers with interper-
sonal skills, since machines are still poor at reading and inferring human emotion. We have also analyzed
changes in demand for a composite social skill requirement and obtained results very similar to those
presented here on cognitive and computer skills.
  17 In the top two panels, observations are weighted as they are in our regression analyses: we give equal
weight to ads within an MSA-year, but upweight larger MSAs, based on the size of the labor force in 2006.




                                                         9
                        Table 1: Summary Statistics


                                                      mean (sd) in:
                                                     2007   2010-15          Change
Education Requirements:
                                            Any      0.34          0.57      0.23***
                                                    (0.06)        (0.05)
                                            HS       0.09          0.20      0.10***
                                                    (0.03)        (0.05)
                                            BA       0.17          0.27      0.10***
                                                    (0.05)        (0.08)
                                           >BA       0.03          0.05      0.02***
                                                    (0.01)        (0.01)
                 Years, Conditional on any          14.84         14.67      -0.18***
                                                    (0.40)        (0.44)
Experience Requirements:
                                            Any      0.32          0.52      0.20***
                                                    (0.06)        (0.07)
                                            0-3      0.13          0.24      0.11***
                                                    (0.03)        (0.03)
                                            3-5      0.14          0.21      0.07***
                                                    (0.03)        (0.04)
                                             >5      0.05          0.08      0.03***
                                                    (0.02)        (0.04)
                 Years, Conditional on any           3.52          3.34      -0.18***
                                                    (0.47)        (0.54)
Skill Requirements:
                            Any Stated Skills        0.73          0.91      0.18***
                                                    (0.05)        (0.04)
              Cognitive, conditional on any          0.22          0.34      0.11***
                                                    (0.05)        (0.06)
             Computer, conditional on any            0.28          0.39      0.11***
                                                    (0.06)        (0.08)
              share of ads in 2010-2015:
Missing ACS match                                    0.08
Continuing firm                                      0.65
In Harte-Hanks, among continuing                     0.78
In Compustat, among continuing                       0.40
                                                    Mean            Min          Max
# MSAs                                               381
Posts per MSA-year                                 21,779          132        1,231,417
# Occupations (4-digit)                              108
Posts per occupation-MSA-year                        228             1         194,558
# Firms                                            170,809
Posts per Firm-MSA-year                               13             1          16,413
*** indicates means are statistically significantly (1% level) different from each other.
Notes: Burning Glass data 2007 and 2010-2015. Sample is restricted to ads with non-
missing firms that posted at least 10 ads over our sample period. In the top panel,
observations are weighted by the size of the MSA labor force in 2006. Missing ACS match is
the share of weighted observations to MSAs that cannot be matched to the American
Community Survey (weighted by the MSA labor force). Continuing firms are the fraction of
2010-2015 observations posted by a firm that also posted in 2007. In Harte Hanks
(Compustat) among continuing firms are the share of weighted observations that post to a
firm that can be matched to Harte Hanks (Compustat). All three statistics are calculated
weighting by the firm's ad share in the MSA-year times the size of the MSA labor force in
2006.




                                           10
shows the within-MSA change in skill requirements across the two sample periods, and indi-

cates statistical signicance. The share of ads specifying an education requirement increased

by 23 percentage points (ppts), on average. This is roughly evenly split across ads requiring

high school and ads requiring college; because the proportional increase is slightly larger for

high school, the overall (conditional) years of schooling falls slightly. All dierences in means

are statistically signicant at the 1% level.

    Experience requirements follow a very similar pattern to education requirements. In 2007,

almost one-third of ads specify some amount of experience in the eld. Among ads with a

requirement, the vast majority ask for less than ve years, with much of the remainder

asking for between ve and 10 years.          Conditional on posting an experience requirement,

the average ad asks for 3.5 years.        In the later time period, the propensity to specify an

experience requirement increases by 20 ppts. These increases are again concentrated in the

lower categories, so that the average, conditional on specifying any requirement, falls by

about one-fth of a year.

    Finally, in 2007, 73% of weighted ads specify at least one specic, text-based skill require-

ment. Among these, 22% specify a cognitive skill requirement, and 28% have a computer

requirement. In 20102015, 91% of ads have at least one text-based skill requirement, and

the shares specifying cognitive skills or computer skills increase to roughly one-third and

two-fths, respectively. In regression analyses, we use the probability of posting a cognitive

or computer skill requirement, conditional on posting a specic text-based skill, as depen-

dent variables, rather than the unconditional probabilities, which might instead pick up a

tendency for ads to become more verbose as postings costs decline.

    These increases in stated skill demand could be driven by the national recession that

took place between 2007 and the 20102015 period.               However, they could also be driven

by a variety of other factors, such as changing composition of rms posting ads online or

pre-existing national trends. Because of these issues and the relatively short panel we have

to work with, our regression analyses always control for year dummies. We therefore fully

absorb the overall change in skill requirements illustrated in table 1. Instead, we identify

dierences in the change in skill requirements across metro areas as a function of how they

weathered the Great Recession.

    The bottom panel of table 1 provides an idea of our sample coverage. We have a balanced

panel of 381 MSAs, which contain an (unweighted) average of 21,779 posts per MSA-year.

When we disaggregate to the four-digit occupation level, we have 108 occupations repre-
                                                                                  18
sented, with an average of 228 posts in each occupation-MSA-year.                      Finally, our data

contain roughly 171,000 unique rms, which translate into an average of 14 posts in each

  18 Though occupation is available in the BG data at the 6-digit Standard Occupation Classication (SOC)
level, we restrict our attention to comparisons across and within 4-digit SOC codes, which provide more ads
per occupation-MSA-year cell and ensure a balanced panel of occupation-MSAs across years in nearly all
cases. Virtually all ads posted in the 20102015 period are in occupation-MSAs that also posted in 2007;
for within-occupation analyses, we drop the 0.36% of ads that cannot be matched.




                                                    11
rm-MSA-year.




3       Methodology
Our goal is to understand how the Great Recession aected the demand for skill. Because we

have only a short panel and need to worry about concurrent trends that may have aected

online job ads (e.g., utilization, prices, pre-existing national trends in upskilling), we exploit

cross-sectional geographic variation in the severity of the Great Recession.                  Our general

approach is to examine temporal changes in skill requirements as a function of an MSA-level

employment shock generated by the Great Recession.

      Our initial regression specication is shown in equation (1).          outcomegmt   is any of several

dierent measures associated with changes in labor skill demand (and eventually changes in

other production inputs, as discussed later) in MSA         m,   year   t,   and sometimes in subgroup

g,   (for example, occupation or rm).         The left-hand side is the dierence in the outcome

variable between 2007 and year        t.   The regression sample thus includes each post-recession

yeart ∈ [2010, 2015]. shockm is a measure of the local employment shock generated by the
                  t
Great Recession, I are year dummies, controls are additional control variables described in

more detail below, and εgmt is an error term.



(1)       outcomegmt − outcomegm2007 = α0 + [shock m ∗ I t ]α1 + I t + controls + εgmt .

      The variable   shockm   is xed at the MSA-level for our entire sample period; we describe

its construction in detail below.          Through an exhaustive set of        shockm -year   interactions,

the regression estimates the impact of the local employment shock on the change in skill re-

quirements (or other outcomes) for a given MSA (and group) between 2007 and a subsequent

year. The dierence specication implicitly controls for time-invariant factors at the MSA

(or group-MSA) level. We use 2007 as the base year in most analyses since this is the only

pre-recession year available in BG. Such a specication allows us to empirically investigate

the timing and persistence of upskilling in relation to local labor market shocks through the
                                                                    t
vector of coecients,    α1 .   The inclusion of year xed eects (I ) means we identify the key

coecients purely o of dierences across metro areas in the employment shock, rather than

relying on the national shock itself.

      We cluster standard errors by MSA to address possible serial correlation within an area.

For regressions at the MSA-year level, we weight observations by the size of the MSA's labor

force in 2006. This weighting scheme allows us to upweight areas with larger populations,

helping with precision, while xing the weight applied to each MSA-year.                   The latter en-

sures that we identify o of the same MSA weighting mix in each year, regardless of any

(endogenous) changes in ads posted. When we further disaggregate to the MSA-year-group

level, we weight cells by the product of the 2006 MSA labor force and the group's observation



                                                    12
share within MSA-year (the observation shares sum to unity), so that more aggregate regres-

sions produce results identical to those using more disaggregated data when the underlying

specication is the same.

      The key explanatory variable,      shockm ,   is the MSA-specic change in projected annual

employment growth between 2006 and 2009, the national peak and trough years surrounding

the Great Recession. We project employment growth in an MSA based on its employment

shares in 3-digit NAICS industry codes averaged over 2004 and 2005 and national employ-

ment changes at the 3-digit industry level.          This type of shift-share method is sometimes
                                                                               19
referred to as a Bartik shock, following the strategy of Bartik (1991).

      Specically, we dene projected employment growth,  ∆Êmt in equation (2), where for K
3-digit industries, φ is the employment share of industry k in MSA m at time τ (in practice,

τ is the average of 2004 and 2005), lnEkt is the log of national employment in industry k in
                                                                                      20
year t, and lnEkt−1 is the log of national employment in the industry one year prior.


                              ∆Êmt = K
                                     P
                                       k=1 φm,k,τ (lnEkt − lnEk,t−1 )
(2)
                                 shockm = ∆Êm2009 − ∆Êm2006

We then dene      shockm   as the change in projected employment growth from peak to trough

(2006 to 2009). The calculated values of        shockm    range from about   =0.12 to =0.04 across
MSAs, but to make the coecients easier to interpret, we renormalize this variable so that

a one unit change is equal to the dierence between the 10th and 90th percentile MSAs,

=0.026 log points; a larger value corresponds to a worse economic shock.
      We use this Bartik measure, instead of actual employment growth, for two reasons. First,

actual employment growth at the MSA level is measured with substantial error, while the

Bartik measure allows for more precision.           Second, actual employment growth will reect

shocks to labor demand as well as other city-specic shocks, including those to labor sup-
                                    21
ply, which may be problematic.           We note that other direct measures of local labor market

tightness, such as the local unemployment rate, have similar shortcomings in terms of mea-

surement error or reverse causality; for instance, an unemployment rate may be high precisely

because a sudden demand shift toward more-skilled labor generates structural mismatch. We

examine the robustness of our results to other ways of dening the Bartik shock.

      The top left panel of gure 1 summarizes the relationship between the Bartik employment

  19 Some other papers utilizing a form of Bartik shock include Blanchard and Katz (1992), Notowidigdo
(2013), and Yagan (2016).
  20 We obtain seasonally adjusted national employment for each 3-digit industry-month from the BLS
Current Employment Statistics program, and take an unweighted average over months to obtain        Ekt .
We construct   φ   using County Business Patterns data and the algorithm of Isserman and Westervelt
(2006) to overcome data suppressions; the resulting county-level statistics are mapped to MSAs using
the denitions provided by the Census Bureau and set by the Oce of Management and Budget.          See
http://www.census.gov/population/metro/data/def.html.
  21 For example, MSAs with secular increases in population due to migration ows may experience em-
ployment changes that are higher than average but still have a weakening labor market. The Bartik shock
addresses this issue.



                                                     13
shock and actual annual (log) employment growth at the MSA level (obtained from the BLS

State and Metro Area Employment program). We estimate equation (1), which nets out the

actual employment growth rate in 2007 through the dierences specication, for 20002015,

controlling only for year xed eects.             The coecients,   α1 ,   thus represent dierence-in-

dierences estimates: the change in actual employment growth between a given year                   t   and

2007, for a hard-hit MSA (90th percentile employment shock) relative to a less hard-hit MSA

(10th percentile employment shock).

   We plot the coecients        α1   and   95%   condence-interval bars (results for gure 1 are also

displayed in columns 14 of table C1). For example, the point estimate of            =0.04 in 2009 (top
left panel of gure 1) indicates that a one-unit change in the Bartik shock is associated with an

additional 0.04 log-point drop in employment growth between 2007 and 2009. Employment

growth actually peaked in 2006, so the peak-to-trough dierence associated with a one unit

increase in   shockm   is   =0.053 (= =0.040 = 0.013).       This is roughly double the Bartik 90-10

gap of   =0.026 associated with a one unit change of shockm used in the regression. The actual
BLS variables are likely substantially noisier than projected employment growth and also

are inuenced by other factors, such as supply shocks.

   The gure also shows that the shock is episodic, such that employment growth (relative

to that in 2007) looks similar across MSAs early in the decade, regardless of the size of the

shock they will eventually face in the Great Recession. Hard-hit MSAs peak slightly higher

than less hard-hit MSAs in 2005 and 2006, then experience a sharp dip in employment growth
                                                  22
from 20072010, followed by a recovery.

   The Bartik shock measure is also highly correlated with movement in the unemployment

rate (obtained from the BLS Local Area Unemployment Statistics program). The top right

panel of gure 1 shows that a hard-hit MSA experiences an additional 2 percentage-point

increase in the unemployment rate from 2007 to 2009, relative to a less hard-hit MSA. Again,

areas look very similar in the period before the recession, and converge a few years after the

recession ends.

   Our primary regressions of interest involve changes in skill requirements within MSA

using data that begins in 2007. Although the rst-dierence specication nets out dierences

across MSAs in the level of posted skill requirements, we cannot control for (or observe) any

preexisting trends within MSAs in skill demand.              Identication may be threatened if, for

example, preexisting trends in upskilling were more prevalent in MSAs with industry mixes

that would make them more or less susceptible to the demand shock.

   The bottom panel of gure 1 helps speak to this concern by examining employment-to-

population ratios (epop) by education group. We calculate these variables by MSA using

CPS micro data, so they are naturally a bit noisier than the variables in the top panel (see

appendix A.7 for details about this sample construction).              The epops for workers with at

  22 Even though this is not the case for the Bartik shock, actual employment growth peaks slightly earlier
for hard-hit MSAs, in 2005, but remains at almost the same magnitude in 2006.




                                                       14
             Figure 1: Labor Market Variables and the MSA-Specic Employment Shock



                                                       Employment Growth Rate                                                 Unemployment Rate


                              .02 .04




                                                                                                     .01 .02 .03
                              -.04 -.02 0




                                                                                                     -.01 0
             Coefficient




                                                2000           2005    2010               2015                         2000     2005          2010               2015


                                                   Epop Some College or More                                                   Epop HS or Less
                              .05




                                                                                                     .05
                                                                                                     -.05 -.02 0 .02
                              -.05 -.02 0 .02




                                                2000           2005    2010               2015                         2000     2005          2010               2015

                                                                                             Year
                           We regress the MSA-level change in local labor market variables from 2007 on an exhaustive set of MSA employment shock-by-year
                           interactions, controlling for year fixed effects (see equation 1). Graph plots the coefficients on Bartik shock*year, as well as 95% CI bars.
                           Unemployment and employment growth rates are from the BLS LAUS. Employment-to-population ratios (Epops) are author calculations
                           based on the CPS.




least some college (bottom left) and for workers with a high school diploma or less (bottom

right) are fairly similar across MSAs before the Great Recession. This is shown in the gure

by point estimates that are small in magnitude and generally statistically indistinguishable

from zero prior to 2007. As with employment growth, the college epop does peak slightly

higher in 2005 and 2006 for MSAs that will experience a worse shock; additionally, the epop

for less-educated workers fared modestly better in these MSAs in 2000. However, dierences

are small and do not appear to be systematic trends.

    After 2007, both education groups experience relative drops in epops, though that for

college workers is shallow and recovers quickly. The decline in epop for less-educated workers

is both more severe and more sluggish to recover, and a gap of roughly 1 ppt still remains in
        23
2015.        This lack of convergence may suggest that harder-hit areas had not fully recovered

from the Great Recession by 2015. We revisit this lack of complete recovery below when we

discuss our proposed mechanism.

    To alleviate remaining concerns about dierential pre-trends, we control, where specied,

for a wide range of MSA characteristicsincluding demographics, educational attainment,

and economic indicatorsobtained from the American Community Survey (ACS), averaging
                                                          24
years 2005 and 2006.                                            These controls help adjust for dierences across MSAs in their

  23 This nding is consistent with Yagan (2016) who uses IRS tax data to show that while unemployment
rates had converged across U.S. commuting zones following the Great Recession, employment probabilities
had not, holding constant a rich set of worker characteristics.
  24 We chose years just prior to the Great Recession that allow for MSA identication (prior to 2005, the




                                                                                             15
preexisting tendency to upskill, to the extent that such a tendency is correlated with the

skill distribution of the population or the health of its economy before the Great Recession.

    To summarize, we nd that our constructed Bartik employment shock is episodic: al-

though it is highly correlated with changes in employment growth rates and the unemploy-

ment rate during the Great Recession, the shock is not correlated with these labor market

fundamentals before the Great Recession or several years into the recovery. As we cannot

observe skill requirements before 2007, this is reassuring: the lack of pre-trends in the labor

market variables in gure 1, and for others described below, makes it less likely that areas

were dierentially trending in skill demand before 2007. We explore the relationship between

the shock measure and a range of additional labor market variables, below.




4     Skill Requirements and Local Employment Conditions
4.1     Main Results

Figure 2 summarizes regression results from equation (1) for our four main dependent vari-

ables: the change in the share of ads posting any education requirement, any experience

requirement, any cognitive requirement, and any computer requirement (results are also dis-

played in columns 58 of table C1).           The gures plot the estimated impact of the Bartik

shock on the change in skill requirements for each year, relative to 2007 (coecients                α1 ),   as

well as 95% condence intervals. We use our preferred specication, which includes controls

for MSA characteristics and year xed eects.

    Beginning with the top left panel, we nd that, relative to 2007 levels, the probability of

specifying any education requirement increases by 5.4 ppts in 2010 for an MSA experiencing

a large employment shock (90th percentile) compared to an MSA experiencing a small shock

(10th percentile). This dierence-in-dierences estimate implies an increase of 16% of the

average requirement in 2007 and is signicant at the 1% level. The eect persists at fairly

similar magnitudes and signicance levels for subsequent years, with a small dip in 2012. In

2015, we estimate that the probability of posting an education requirement is still 4.1 ppts

larger than it was in 2007 for a hard-hit MSA, compared to a less hard-hit one. That is,

76% of the initial upskilling eect in 2010 remains ve years later. Estimates in each year

except 2012 are signicant at the 1% level.

    The remaining panels of gure 2 exhibit remarkably similar patterns in both magnitudes

ACS lacks sub-state identiers). Specically, we include the share of the population that is female, black,
Hispanic, Asian, married, migrated in the last year, is a high school drop out, has exactly a high school
diploma, has some college, has exactly a bachelor's degree, is enrolled in school, is less than age 18, is age
1929, is age 3039, is age 4049, and is age 5064. We also control for the employment-to-population ratio
and the average weekly wage of full-time workers. We can match all but 8% of weighted ads to the ACS (see
the middle panel of table 1), with unmatched ads consisting of small MSAs not identiable in the ACS. In
such cases, we set the ACS controls to zero and include an indicator for not matching. In appendix B.2, we
also include specications that add controls for   changes since 2000 in these variables.

                                                       16
                  Figure 2: Skill Requirements and the MSA-Specic Employment Shock



                                                           Education Requirement                                          Experience Requirement




                                                                                                 .02 .04 .06 .08
                            .02 .04 .06 .08
                            0




                                                                                                 0
           Coefficient




                                                    2007    2009   2011   2013       2015                          2007     2009   2011      2013          2015


                                                       Cognitive Skill Requirement                                    Computer Skill Requirement
                            0 .01 .02 .03 .04 .05




                                                                                                 .02 .04 .06
                                                                                                 0
                                                                                                 -.02
                                                    2007    2009   2011   2013       2015                          2007     2009   2011      2013          2015

                                                                                         Year
                         We regress the MSA-level change in BG skill requirements from 2007 on an exhaustive set of MSA employment shock-by-year interactions,
                         controlling for year fixed effects and MSA characteristics (see equation 1). Graph plots the coefficients on Bartik shock*year and 95% CIs.




and statistical signicance. The probability of listing an experience requirement increases

by 5.0 ppts (16%) between 2007 and 2010, and 85% of this increase remains in 2015. The

probability of listing a cognitive requirement increases by 2.0 percentage points (12%), and

this gap possibly widens slightly by 2015. Finally, the probability of listing a computer skill

requirement also increases by roughly 2 ppts and remains elevated through 2015.

   These patterns are in stark contrast to the labor market variables in gure 1. For em-

ployment growth, the unemployment rate, and the epop for college workers, hard-hit MSAs

experience a more severe impact of the Great Recession that fully recovers within our sample

time frame. For illustration, compare Detroit and Pittsburgh. The former, a hard-hit MSA,

experienced a shock at about the 90th percentile, while the latter was at roughly the 10th

percentile. Both MSAs had similar skill requirements in 2007; for example, in both areas

about one-third of ads had an education requirement. By 2010, skill requirements increased

in both MSAs, but Detroit's (actual, not predicted) increase was nearly 10 ppts larger for

education and experience requirements and 24 ppts larger for cognitive and computer skill

requirements. While unemployment rates had converged back to pre-recession levels in both

MSAs, Detroit's elevated skill requirements persisted through 2015.

   Figure 2 demonstrates that the case of Detroit and Pittsburgh is not isolated but sys-

tematic.         In terms of their skill requirements, MSAs that looked similar before the Great

Recession look quite dierent from each other in 2015, several years after the Great Reces-

sion ended.




                                                                                        17
      To better understand the mechanisms underlying gure 2, table 2 provides regression

results for within-occupation changes in skill requirements. In general, the distribution of

postings across high- and low-skilled jobs may vary for a variety of reasons. For example,

dierential job survival, use of word-of-mouth in recruiting, or time-to-ll across skill groups

might generate patterns observed in gure 2, especially early in the recovery. However, we

nd that the primary driver of these patterns is increased skill requirements within similar

types of jobs.

      Each column of table 2 summarizes a separate regression of equation (1), at the occupation-

MSA-year level, including MSA characteristics and year xed eects. The results show sig-

nicant upskilling eects of a magnitude comparable to the overall MSA-level eects. For

example, within occupation, the propensity to post an education requirement increases by

5.3   ppts in a hard-hit MSA, relative to a less hard-hit MSA, between 2007 and 2010. Al-

though there is a temporary dip in 2012, at least three-quarters of this eect persists from

2013 through 2015. Similar patterns obtain for the remaining skill requirements. Indeed,

these within-occupation increases in skill requirements completely account for the MSA-level

upskilling eects found in gure 2; our upskilling results are not driven at all by changes in

the occupation mix of postings. (This does not preclude variation in eects across occupa-

tions, and we examine such heterogeneity, with a particular focus on routine jobs, in section

6.)

      In order to understand within-occupation skill demand changes along the intensive mar-

gin, we also explore the eect of the shock on specic levels of education and experience

requirements in appendix B.1.          To summarize, we nd eects throughout the distribution

along expected channels: low-skilled jobs become more likely to ask for a high school diploma,

higher-skilled jobs become more likely to ask for a college degree, and experience requirement

increases are concentrated especially within the 15 year range.

      One hypothesis for these results is that rms may become pickier when labor, and espe-
                                                    25
cially skilled labor, becomes more plentiful.            Then elevated skill requirements might reect

opportunistic behavior on the part of rms that cannot ordinarily attract (or aord) more-
                                        26
skilled workers in a tight market.           This hypothesis would be compelling if the market for

skilled workers remained more slack towards the end of our sample period, even while some

labor market indicators had recovered.           However, our results are similar when we include

additional controls for local labor market variables by skill level, such as education-specic

MSA-level unemployment rates, quit rates, and employment-to-population ratios.                         These

controls account for changes in the supply of skilled labor due to, for example, dieren-

tial quit behavior or changes in educational attainment brought on by the Great Recession

  25 Or, as in Menzio and Shi (2011), rms require a higher-quality match in a recession because of the
negative productivity shock.
  26 Evidence shows that in downturns workers are more likely to take worse jobs, relative to their skills, but
it is unclear whether this is driven by changes in rm recruitment strategy and/or worker search behavior
(Devereux 2002; Kahn 2010; Oreopoulos, von Wachter, and Heisz 2012; Altonji, Kahn, and Speer 2016).




                                                     18
                     Table 2: Within-Occupation Changes in Skill Requirements



Dependent Variable:                     Education               Experience                 Cognitive                Computer

                                             (1)                       (2)                      (3)                      (4)

                                        0.0528***                 0.0494***                0.0276***                 0.0203**
Shock*2010
                                        (0.0137)                  (0.0135)                 (0.00728)                (0.00862)

                                        0.0478***                 0.0445***                0.0284***                0.0241***
Shock*2011
                                        (0.0131)                  (0.0134)                 (0.00734)                (0.00718)

                                          0.0241*                    0.0260*               0.0190***                 0.0207**
Shock*2012
                                         (0.0128)                   (0.0136)               (0.00695)                (0.00851)

                                        0.0403***                 0.0364***                0.0256***                0.0250***
Shock*2013
                                        (0.0121)                  (0.0122)                 (0.00642)                (0.00664)

                                        0.0430***                 0.0435***                0.0265***                0.0225***
Shock*2014
                                        (0.0144)                  (0.0140)                 (0.00657)                (0.00675)

                                        0.0488***                 0.0465***                0.0299***                  0.0131
Shock*2015
                                        (0.0143)                  (0.0141)                 (0.00727)                (0.00800)

# Occ-MSA-Year Cells                     192,842                    192,842                 177,971                  177,971

R-Squared                                  0.045                     0.069                    0.040                    0.034
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
Notes: Regressions are estimated at the msa-occupation (4-digit SOC) year level using BG data from 2010-2015 (see equation 1).
The dependent variable is the MSA-occupation level annual change in skill requirements from 2007. All regressions control for year
fixed effects and MSA characteristics from the ACS. Observations are weighted by the size of the MSA labor force in 2006 multiplied
by the occupation's ad share in the MSA-year. Standard errors are clustered at the MSA level. Shock is the change in projected year-
over-year employment growth in the MSA from 2006 to 2009, divided by the 90-10 differential in the variable across all MSAs.
Columns 3-4 restrict to the sample of ads that have any specific skill requirements and therefore estimate the change in the probability
of listing a cognitive or computer skill, conditional on having any requirement.




                                                               19
or over the preceding decade (Charles, Hurst, and Notowidigdo 2015).                     We conclude that
                                                                                  27
opportunistic upskilling cannot be the primary driver of our results.

    Appendix B.2 discusses these and other robustness checks in detail, which are summarized

in appendix tables B1-B4.          Our results broadly hold up to additional controls, dierent

samples, variants of the Bartik shock, and dierent weights.                 For example, our estimates

are robust to controls for occupation xed eects and occupation-specic time trends, which

allow occupations to systematically dier in their change in skill requirements from 2007,

as well as in the slope of the change, across all MSAs. These could be important if some

occupations are both more likely to upskill or accelerate upskilling because of preexisting

trends and are disproportionately located in hard-hit MSAs.

    We have also explored heterogeneity within and across industry. We show in appendix

table B5 that our results hold up to industry xed eects and time trends, which is im-

portant in light of our identifying variation: industry composition in an MSA before the

Great Recession. Our identication would be threatened by independent technology shocks

concurrent to industries that experienced worse employment shocks or by systematic mea-

surement error in industry shares (which could lead to spurious correlations in the shock

across MSAs). The fact that our results obtain even within industry alleviates this simul-

taneity or measurement concern. We further show in appendix gure B3 that the upskilling

eects tend to be concentrated in industries with locally consumed products, as would be

expected given their greater sensitivity to local demand shocks.

    Finally, one may be concerned about changes in the use of online job ads over our

sample period. Rising familiarity with the internet, falling costs of posting jobs, increasing

labor market tightness in the later period, and other factors may have brought more rms

online to search for labor.       The within-occupation and -industry results partially address

the role that compositional changes in the use of online job ads may have on our results by

restricting comparisons to similar types of jobs. However, they may not adequately control

for heterogeneity across rms in, say, changes to their recruiting strategies or hiring needs.

Such variations may be particularly pronounced during and after a recession.

    In appendix B.3 we conduct a formal decomposition exercise to apportion upskilling

eects as a function of within- and between-rm responses. Indeed, we do nd a large role

for substitution between rms that stopped posting after 2007 and rms that began posting

in 2010. As the latter post for higher skill requirements on average than the former, this

  27 In a pair of related papers and concurrent with our analysis, Sasser Modestino, Shoag, and Ballance
(2016a and 2016b), using a version of our dataset, nd evidence of upskilling in harder-hit US counties after
the Great Recession and subsequent downskilling as markets improved, and argue that this pattern is driven
entirely by rms opportunistically seeking more-skilled workers in a slack labor market. We disagree with
this conclusion, which relies heavily on the small downward blip in 2012, seen also in our gure 2, rather than
the more careful picture generated by using all available data. In our paper, we also examine heterogeneity
within and across rms and occupations and other margins of adjustmentsuch as capital, employment,
and wages. This richer analysis implies more fundamental changes in production inputs and longer-lasting
impacts.




                                                      20
substitution can account for nearly half of the full upskilling eect from gure 2. However,

we also nd that nearly half of the eects can be attributed to changes in skill requirements

within rms, with a minimal role for compositional shifts across rms that post before

and after the recession.   This suggests that our results are not completely driven by the

compositional changes mentioned above.



4.2      Discussion

We thus present strong evidence that employers in harder-hit MSAs were dierentially in-

duced to increase stated preferences for a range of skills.    While most measures of local

labor-market strength had converged back to pre-recession levels by 2015, dierences in ad-

vertised skill demands remained. Furthermore, variation in the availability of skilled labor

and compositional changes in the ads observed in our sample period are unlikely to explain

the entire eects that we nd.

   This set of results raises the possibility that harder-hit MSAs dierentially experienced a

structural change in demand for skill. In particular, the skill requirements we investigate are

complementary to routine-biased technologies. Did the Great Recession push an accelerated

adoption of such technologies and accompanied hiring of cognitive workers to complement

them? This could explain why skill requirements increase even within similar types of jobs.

For example, community and social service specialists at a food bank in Washington, D.C.

might be required not only to interact with clients to assist with food security, but may have

to understand and use database software and GIS, as well, to better serve them (McCoy

2016).   Simultaneously, in order to better reach and understand online readers, venerable

journalistic organizations such as the New York Times now hire individuals with science

training, not just journalism training, to be chief data ocers (Greeneld 2014). It is also

consistent with our nding that epops for workers with less education were slow to recover:

rapid adoption of new technologies in hard-hit MSAs over this time period may have rendered

certain worker skills obsolete, inducing labor force exit (also see Foote and Ryan 2015).

Perhaps the epop of educated workers recovered rapidly precisely because of an increased

demand for skill spurred by the Great Recession.

   Several theoretical mechanisms may have induced rms to restructure. For example, in

the classic Schumpeter (1939) cleansing model, this would occur because low-productivity

rms shut down in the recession and resources are reallocated to rms with more-modern

production technologies (see also Caballero and Hammour (1994, 1996) and Mortensen and

Pissarides (1994)).   Furthermore, this type of episodic restructuring could also occur be-

cause rms in harder-hit MSAs experience a greater negative product-demand shock that:

(1) lowers the opportunity cost of adjusting production (Hall 2005), (2) shifts managerial

attention from growth to eciency (Koenders and Rogerson 2005), (3) alters the costs of




                                              21
                                                                       28
making layos (Mortensen and Pissarides 1994, Berger 2012)                  , and changes the incentives

for a rm to invest in their workers' human capital (Jaimovich and Siu 2012). We do not

feel we have the ability to disentangle these mechanisms or provide strong support for any

one model. Instead, we point out that these types of workhorse models in macroeconomics

can rationalize the results that we see.

    If rms are changing how they produce, and not simply whom they hire, changes to

skill demand should persist among the same rms that initially upskilled.                 Note that the

nding of within-rm upskilling, mentioned above, does not necessarily imply this point, as

dierent rms may have upskilled at dierent times.             The Burning Glass data provide an

unprecedented glimpse at this margin at a detailed level, and we examine this prediction in

gure 3. Here, we divide rms into (posting-weighted) quartiles based on changes in skill

requirements between 2007 and 2010. We then plot the average skill requirements for each
                      29
quartile over time.        Firms began at fairly similar average skill levels in 2007, although

this similarity is not imposed by our exercise.          By construction there is a sharp contrast

across rm quartiles in 2010, with the darker shaded lines representing rms with larger

skill increases. Interestingly, and not by construction, these quartiles remain spread apart

throughout the remainder of the sample period, and by 2015, rms in the higher quartiles

still had substantially higher skill requirements in their new ads than rms in the lower

quartiles.

    This within-rm persistence in upskilling holds up in regression analysis and is sub-

stantial. Though not shown, we nd that, on average, 6070% of a rm's increase in skill

requirements between 2007 and 2010 persists through 2015. Estimates are even larger when

we instrument for the initial increase in upskilling with the Bartik shock. It could have been

the case that the majority of rms increased skill requirements during the recession and

reverted back later in the recovery (for example, in an attempt to opportunistically recruit

while markets were slack), with higher skill demand in later years unrelated to the recession

and driven by dierent rms. Instead, we nd upskilling persists among the same rms both

early and late in the recovery.

    Furthermore, our nding that a substitution across old and new rms accounts for some

of the upskilling eect could also be consistent with episodic restructuring.               Substitution

from failing (low-productivity) rms to new (high-productivity) rms is a hallmark predic-

tion of cleansing models of recessions (Schumpeter 1939). In our data, we do not observe

rm births and deaths, so the Schumpeter angle is dicult to fully assess. However, we can

gain some general intuition by comparing rms that post in 2007 but not again (possibly

  28 Though not formalized, a suciently large negative product-demand shock could make layos worth-
while, osetting any stigma or losses in terms of rm-specic human capital.
  29 We exploit the subsample of rms in our data that post at least ve observations in each of 2007 and
2010, comprising 66% of weighted observations. Appendix A.8 shows that the probability of satisfying this
restriction does not vary with the local labor market shock. Quartiles are dened separately for each skill
measure, weighting by the rm average number of posts across 20072010.




                                                    22
                                                              Figure 3: Skill Requirements by Firm 2007-2010 Change



                                                                Education Requirement                                 Experience Requirement




                                                                                                          .8
                                     .3 .4 .5 .6 .7 .8




                                                                                                          .6
            Average Requirement




                                                                                                          .4
                                                                                                          .2
                                                         2006   2008   2010   2012   2014      2016            2006      2008       2010       2012       2014       2016


                                                              Cognitive Skill Requirement                          Computer Skill Requirement
                                     .6




                                                                                                          .6
                                     .5




                                                                                                          .5
                                     .4




                                                                                                          .4
                                     .3




                                                                                                          .3
                                     .2




                                                                                                          .2
                                     .1




                                                         2006   2008   2010   2012   2014      2016            2006      2008       2010       2012       2014       2016

                                                                                                  Year
                                  Graph plots average BG skill requirement by year and quartile of 2007-10 firm-level skill change. Circles, diamonds, triangles, and squares
                                  indicate skill change quartile from largest to smallest, respectively.




representing rm closures) to rms that begin posting in the later period but not in 2007

(possibly representing rm openings).                                                    (We readily acknowledge we are abstracting away

from hiring freezes and migration toward online job postings; we view this exercise as illus-

trative, not denitive.) We nd that opening rms indeed have higher skill requirements

than closing rms, even within occupation, and this is consistent with the Schumpeterian
                                                         30
cleansing view.

   The episodic restructuring hypothesis has additional predictions that we can take to the

data. First, if changes in skill requirements reect changes in production inputs, we should see

greater investments in capital, and in particular routine-labor replacing technologies, for rms

located in harder-hit MSAs. Moreover, the two activities should be linked: the very rms

upskilling in their labor demand should be the ones increasing their investments. Second,

routine workers whose skills can be substituted with these technologies should experience

an immediate contraction in labor demand, as well as relative employment declines in the

recovery and beyond. In contrast, the occupations that are complementary to new technology

should become more productive, from the increase in both physical and human capital, and

thus should exhibit increases in relative wages. We explore these predictions in the next two

sections.
  30 Moreira (2016), who shows that rms that begin in a recession are more productive than those that
begin in an expansion, also provides support for the Schumpeterian view.




                                                                                                  23
5       Capital
Under episodic restructuring, rms automate routine tasks with technology, which comple-

ments skilled labor. If this restructuring is occurring, then rms should also invest in physical

capital around the time that they upskill. Information technologies (IT), in particular, have

been linked to RBTC (Michaels, Natraj, and Van Reenen 2014). While investments in capi-

tal tend to be procyclical, and production of IT, in particular, has exhibited a secular decline

(Byrne, Fernald, and Reinsdorf 2016), these trends could mask substantial heterogeneity.

     We rst investigate whether harder-hit MSAs are more likely to invest in IT over the Great

Recession. To measure IT investment, we use the Ci Technology Database from Harte-Hanks

(now known as Aberdeen), a market intelligence rm. The Harte-Hanks database (hereafter,

HH) is created from surveys and interviews with high-level IT sta at millions of businesses

worldwide each year. They collect data primarily to sell to major IT rms like IBM, Dell,
             31
and Cisco.

     Following previous work using these data, our primary outcome measure is the number

of personal computers (PCs) at a site (akin to business establishments).                  We have this

measure consistently available in even years between 2000 and 2014, and we normalize by
                                                                   32
dividing by site employment in the pre-recession period.                We aggregate to the MSA-year

level by taking an employment weighted average across sites.

     Figure 4 (and column 9 of table C1) summarizes results from equation (1), with the

MSA-level change in PCs per employee from 2006 as the outcome.                      This graph provides

evidence that rms located in harder-hit MSAs are more likely to intensify IT investment

over the same time period. Our estimates imply that sites in a hard-hit MSA add an average

of 1.5 PCs (per each pre-recession employee) between 2006 and 2012, relative to sites in

less hard-hit MSAs.        Though the condence intervals are wide, this eect is statistically

signicant at the 5% level in 2008, 2010, and 2012. This dierential increase experienced by

hard-hit MSAs is substantial, roughly 60% more than the average increase across all MSAs

    31 We thank Nick Bloom for graciously sharing with us extracts of the HH data as used in Bloom, Draca,
and Van Reenen (2016). In that paper, they show that Chinese import penetration increased technological
change for exposed rms in Europe. The data have also been used in several other studies. Bloom, Sadun,
and Van Reenen (2012), for example, use HH data to show that US multinationals operating in Europe
obtain higher productivity from IT investments than non-multinationals; Beaudry and Lewis (2014) show
that variation in PC adoption across U.S. space can account for variation in declines in the gender pay gap;
and Bresnahan, Brynjolfsson, and Hitt (2002) provide evidence that IT use, work organization that shifts
more responsibility to workers, and worker skill are complements in production.
    32 A measure of PCs per employee is desirable to better understand capital intensity (rather than simply
growth in size), but as employment may be varying (endogenously) over this time period, we x the nor-
malization at a period before the Great Recession: the average of each available year among 2002, 2004,
and 2006. This normalization means that variation in the outcome is strictly due to the numerator (total
PCs), and ensures that greater employment losses in harder-hit MSAs will not mechanically induce a positive
association between our PCs measure and the size of the shock. The xed normalization requires that our
sample be restricted to sites that are observed both prior and subsequent to the Great Recession, and this
covers 65% of employment in HH across our sample years. Appendix A.8 shows that meeting this restriction
is unrelated to our shock measure.




                                                     24
                              Figure 4: PC Adoption and the MSA-Employment Shock




                4
                3    2
           Coefficient
           1    0
                -1




                         2000            2002             2004             2006              2008             2010              2012             2014
                                                                                    Year
                          We regress the MSA-level change in IT investment from 2006 on an exhaustive set of MSA employment shock-by-year interactions,
                          controlling for year fixed effects and MSA characteristics (see equation 1). Graph plots the coefficients on Bartik shock*year,
                          as well as 95% CI bars. MSA-year IT investment is the employment-weighted average of site-level PCs per pre-recession
                          employment from Harte Hanks.




(a 0.93 increase in PCs per employee o a base of 0.75).

    By 2014 the point estimate has fallen somewhat and is no longer statistically signicant,

possibly reecting the beginning of a more gradual catch-up of technology adoption in less

hard-hit MSAs. However, the point estimate implies that harder-hit MSAs remain 1 PC per
                                                                                                                                    33
worker ahead of less hard-hit areas, relative to their pre-recession levels.

    Furthermore, the estimated coecients for 2000, 2002, and 2004 are all close to zero

and statistically insignicant, implying that MSAs that would be severely aected had fairly

similar IT investment trends before the Great Recession. If anything, there is a slight relative

decline in per-worker PCs in these areas between 2000 and 2006, mostly in the last two years

of this range, but these estimates are somewhat noisy.                                                     Thus, there is no evidence of a

capital intensifying trend in harder-hit MSAs before the recession, as the modest relative

movement goes in the opposite direction. As with the employment and unemployment rates

in gure 1, it is comforting that the identifying assumptions of the Bartik shock appear to

hold. Although we cannot observe skill requirements before 2007, that both employment-

to-population ratios by education group and IT investments trend similarly across MSAs in

the period before the Great Recession should reduce concern about preexisting trends.

  33 These relatively large magnitudes are in part driven by long right tails in the distribution of PCs per
worker across MSAs and years.                       To reduce the role of outliers, we have also estimated PC adoption on
a sample trimmed of the top and bottom 1% of observations; we nd qualitatively similar patterns of
statistically signicant increases in 20082012 that gradually decrease to insignicance by 2014, with point
estimates that are somewhat smaller in magnitude.




                                                                                 25
      In section 4, we showed not only that advertised job skill requirements increased and

persisted in harder-hit MSAs, but that these increases occurred within rms. Since harder-

hit MSAs also intensied their IT investments over the same time period, we next explore

whether this investment and upskilling are linked at the rm level.

      To do so, we link BG job ads at the rm level to two measures of investment from

external data sources:         PCs per worker from the HH database and capital holdings from

Compustat North America by Standard & Poors (hereafter Compustat). Compustat is the

most complete database of accounting and balance sheet data among publicly traded U.S.

rms. Although PCs is a good proxy for overall IT investments, it may miss broader routine-

labor replacing investments, such as new machinery, telecom infrastructure, or inventory
                          34
management systems.             Thus, a rm's overall holdings of property, plant, and equipment

(hereafter, PPENT) from Compustat is a useful supplement.

      We link both datasets to the BG data by rm name.                  See appendix A.4and A.5 for

details on these mergers. In general, we can match more rms to HH than to Compustat,

as the former is meant to cover all businesses while the latter is restricted to publicly traded

companies.     Among employers observed in both 2007 and the later period in BG (which

cover 65% of postings), we are able to match about 80% of postings to rms in HH and 40%

of postings to rms in Compustat. Appendix A.8 shows that the share of ads matching to

these samples does not vary with the local employment shock.

      We estimate upskilling regressions at the rm-MSA-year level, dened in equation (3).

This equation allows for an additional interaction between the shock-by-year variables and

the rm-level change in capital investments over the Great Recession (Capitalf ). To reduce

measurement error, we dene these rm-level changes in capital investment as the dierence

(PCs) or ratio (PPENT) between the average value in 2010, 2012, and 2014, and the average
                                    35
value in 2002, 2004, and 2006.


                                           α0 + [shock m ∗ I t ]α1 + [shockm ∗ I t ∗ Capitalf ]α2
(3)      outcomef mt − outcomef m07      =
                                                           +I t + Xm β + εmt

      Figure 5 plots the estimated coecients       α2     (see also table C2). To make them easier to

  34 The Harte-Hanks database contains other measures of IT investment, including servers (for which we
generally nd results consistent with those from PCs), and specic types of software.     Unfortunately, the
latter are consistently available only from 2010 onward.
  35 As before, for PCs, we normalize this dierence by average employment in the pre-period. Note that
even though observations are rm-MSA-year cells, the investment change is at the rm level, regardless
of location. This is a necessary restriction of the Compustat data, which exists only for the rm and not
individual establishments; for comparability, we aggregate sites in the HH data to the rm level, weighting
by site employment. When we instead measure investment change at the rm-MSA level in the HH data, the
results are qualitatively similar for most skill outcomes. However, both for comparability with the Compustat
measure and to avoid additional noise from more demanding match criteria, we prefer dening investment
change at the rm level. To limit the inuence of extreme outliers in the PCs measure, we trim the top and
bottom 2.5% of rms in the full HH database, which amounts to roughly 4% of weighted observations in our
regressions.




                                                     26
interpret, we plot the tted eect for the 90-10 percentile dierential in rm-level capital

change. The 90th percentile rm in our sample added roughly two-thirds of a PC per worker

at each of its establishments and roughly tripled PPENT. In contrast, the 10th percentile

rm lost nearly one-third of a PC per worker and dropped PPENT holdings by about 20%.

    We nd that rms with larger capital investments dierentially and persistently increase

their skill requirements. For example, the top left panel of gure 5 (sub-gure a) shows that

between 2007 and 2010, holding the employment shock xed, a rm at the 90th percentile of

PC investment increased the likelihood of an education requirement in its job postings by 0.7

ppts more than a rm at the 10th percentile of PC investment. This dierential uctuates

somewhat, but persists and grows to about 1.0 ppt by 2015. This pattern and approximate

relative magnitude hold for experience, cognitive skill, and computer skill requirements, with

statistically signicant dierentials in most post-recession years, usually at the 1% level.

Overall, we nd that in harder-hit MSAs, skill requirements increase by roughly 30% to 50%

more in high-investment rms than in low-investment rms, and these dierentials hold over

the post-recession period.

    We nd quantitatively similar eects when using the Compustat PPENT measure (sub-

gure b).   For example, in harder-hit MSAs high-investment rms increase the likelihood

of specifying an education requirement by 0.6 to 0.8 ppts, relative to low-investment rms.

This reects roughly 35% greater responsiveness in upskilling. Results for the other skills

variables are comparable, with most impacts signicant at the 1% level.

    Thus, throughout our sample period, rms with larger increases in capital stock around

the time of the Great Recession also had larger increases in their posted skill requirements.

These patterns are consistent with both human and physical capital deepening at the rm

level.




6        Routine Occupations
Thus far, we have provided evidence that MSAs more severely aected by the Great Reces-

sion experienced persistent increases in the skill demand of job postings as well as greater

increases in capital.   Moreover, the upskilling and capital investment occurred within the

same rms. Both these ndings are consistent with episodic restructuring. In this section

we explore additional predictions of an RBTC-style restructuring: whether upskilling is more

prevalent in more-routine occupations, and related trends in employment and wages for these

occupations.

    Indeed, the literature on job polarization has successfully linked employment and wage

shifts across occupations to the tasks performed by workers in the occupations. Wages and

employment have fallen for occupations in the middle of the skill distribution, which, being

the most routine, are the kinds of occupations that can be replaced by machines or overseas




                                              27
Figure 5: Dierential Upskilling by 90-10 Change in Firm Capital Investments

                                                                       (a) PCs (HH)


                                               Education Requirement                                                   Experience Requirement
          .015




                                                                                      0 .002.004.006.008 .01
          .01
          .005
          0




                                      2007      2009    2011    2013       2015                                2007      2009    2011   2013         2015


                                             Cognitive Skill Requirement                                              Computer Skill Requirement



                                                                                      0 .002.004.006.008 .01
          0 .002.004.006.008




                                      2007      2009    2011    2013       2015                                2007      2009    2011   2013         2015

       We regress the firm-MSA-level change in BG skill requirements from 2007 on an exhaustive set of MSA employment shock-by-year interactions,
       and triple interactions between the shock, year, and the firm-level capital change. We also control for year fixed effects and MSA characteristics
       (see equation 3). Graph plots the coefficients on the triple interactions, fitted to the 90-10 differential in firm capital change, and 95% CI bars. The
       capital change variable is the firm level change in average PCs (Harte-Hanks) per pre-recession employment between 2010-14 and 2002-06.




                                                          (b) Capital Holdings (Compustat)


                                               Education Requirement                                                   Experience Requirement
          0 .002 .004 .006 .008 .01




                                                                                      0 .002.004.006.008 .01




                                      2007      2009    2011    2013       2015                                2007      2009    2011   2013         2015


                                             Cognitive Skill Requirement                                              Computer Skill Requirement
          .006




                                                                                      .002 .004 .006 .008
          .004
          .002
          0




                                                                                      0




                                      2007      2009    2011    2013       2015                                2007      2009    2011   2013         2015

       See notes to sub-figure (a). The capital change variable is the ratio of firm-level average capital holdings (Compustat) in 2010-2014
       to holdings in 2002-2006.




                                                                              28
         36
labor.        Autor (2014) and Jaimovich and Siu (2015) have noted that employment continued

to shift away from middle-skill occupations in the Great Recession.                 Our BG data aord

the unique opportunity to measure changes in skill requirements within occupations, while

the bulk of work on polarization has measured shifts in employment and wages only across

occupations. Therefore, we next ask whether upskilling was relatively concentrated within

routine occupations, the very jobs thought to be most aected by technological change in

recent decades.

    To determine an occupation's routineness, we use Acemoglu and Autor's (2011) routine-

cognitive and routine-manual indices, derived from O*NET (see appendix A.6). These in-

dices provide continuous scores based on the intensity of routine tasks performed, are simple

to create, distinguish between tasks that use mental and physical capacities, and have been

used in several other papers (e.g., Aaronson and Phelan 2017, Keister and Lewandowski
         37
2017).        Routine-cognitive tasks tend to be clustered in clerical, administrative and sales

occupations, while routine-manual tasks tend to be found in production and operative oc-

cupations. As a whole, employment in both types of occupations has been declining for at

least the past two decades (Acemoglu and Autor 2011).

    We begin by examining changes in skill requirements as a function of these routine index

scores and the Bartik shock.           To simplify our analysis, we focus on the top quartile of

routine-cognitive and routine-manual occupations. The general pattern of results is similar

when we allow for ner distinctions. We estimate regressions of the following form, where

Routineio is an indicator equal to       1 if occupation,   o,   is in the top quartile of categorization,

i, where i∈{cognitive, manual}.           The parameter vector        α2   in equation (4) thus captures

the additional eect of the shock, each year, for top-quartile routine occupations relative

to the eect in occupations in the bottom three quartiles of the relevant routineness index.

Henceforth, for exposition, we will refer to these top-quartile occupations as routine-cognitive

  36 The original work by Autor, Levy, and Murnane (2003, ALM) uses the US Department of Labor's
Dictionary of Occupational Titles (DOT; US Department of Labor 1977) to categorize tasks (and indirectly
occupations) into nonroutine manual, routine manual, routine cognitive, and nonroutine cognitive.      They
chose this categorization, arguing that new technologies can successfully replace American workers performing
routine, algorithmic tasks, and are complementary to nonroutine, cognitive/analytical functions.     Indeed,
this grouping successfully predicted employment changes in the 1990s and has been used in a number of
subsequent papers, including Autor, Katz, and Kearney (2008).
  37 The AA measures use O*Net (the successor of DOT) to essentially update the original categorization
of ALM. Some papers in the literature (e.g., Autor and Dorn 2013; Autor, Dorn, and Hanson 2015b) use a
simpler routine-manual-abstract categorization (based on the original ALM categories) that does not allow
for a distinction between routine-manual and routine-cognitive occupations; we nd this distinction to be
important.      Jaimovich and Siu (2015) use broad occupation categories to generate their binary routine
classication. For our purposes, the AA measures are preferable because they allow for ner (continuous)
distinctions.    The Spearman correlation between our adapted AA measures and the Jaimovich and Siu
measures is 0.66 for routine manual but only 0.21 for routine cognitive, indicating that the AA measures
likely avoid some miscategorization inherent in the binary denition.




                                                     29
or routine-manual, as appropriate.


                                              α0 + [shockm ∗ I t ]α1 + [shockm ∗ I t ∗ Routineio ]α2
(4)      outcomeomt − outcomeom07 =
                                                              +I t + Xm β + εmt

      Figure 6 (and table C3) plots estimates of       α2   for each routineness index for the four skill

requirements. The coecients for routine-cognitive occupations are indicated with blue cir-

cles, while coecients for routine-manual occupations (estimated with separate regressions)

are shown as maroon squares.

      The gure's primary pattern is a greater degree of upskilling in routine-cognitive occupa-

tions: these estimates are positive, statistically signicant, and persistent in all cases (except

for experience in 2015). For example, the blue circle in the top left panel in 2010 indicates

that in hard-hit MSAs, job posts for routine-cognitive occupations saw about a 0.5 ppt larger

increase in the probability of having an education requirement, relative to other occupations.

For 2013 through 2015, the dierential impact is roughly twice as large. As a whole, these

dierentials are approximately         25   (education/experience) to    50%   (cognitive/computer) as

large as the baseline within-occupation upskilling eects (table 2).

      In contrast, routine-manual occupations do not exhibit a persistent dierential in up-

skilling.   In fact, in the case of cognitive and computer skills, these occupations experi-

ence relative downskilling compared to occupations that are not routine-manual. (That is,

routine-manual occupations upskill less than other occupations.) For education and experi-

ence requirements, routine-manual occupations do exhibit temporary dierential upskilling,

indicated by positive and signicant point estimates in 2010 that converge to zero (or neg-

ative values) over the next few years. This could reect opportunistic behavior on the part

of rms during a slack market that quickly fades when markets recover.

      Upskilling thus appears to be relatively concentrated within routine-cognitive jobs. Our

hypothesized explanation for this pattern is that the recession accelerated technological adop-

tion, but that some types of jobsroutine-cognitive onescould be made more complemen-

tary to the new technology with additional human capital, while labor for other types of

jobsroutine-manual oneswas more subject to substitution by the new technology. For

example, the use of data analytics may make a salesperson more productive by allowing her

to better target customers' needs, but software alone will not close a salea salesperson

capable of using the software is still needed to do the job.             On the other hand, machine-

vision technology may render obsolete the manual inspection of parts on an assembly line,
                                  38
essentially replacing that job.

      To investigate this paradigm, we turn to the implications for employment and wages. If

rms do not seek greater skills for routine-manual jobs because those jobs can be substituted

with technology more readily than work with it, we would expect rms to disproportionately

  38 Indeed, Hawkins, Michaels, and Oh (2015) present recent evidence of this type of capital-labor substi-
tution in the Korean manufacturing sector.



                                                     30
                                                      Figure 6: Dierential Upskilling for Routine Occupations



                                                          Education Requirement                                                  Experience Requirement




                                                                                                  -.005 0 .005 .01 .015
                           -.005 0 .005 .01 .015
          Coefficient




                                                   2007    2009   2011   2013         2015                                2007     2009   2011   2013        2015


                                                      Cognitive Skill Requirement                                            Computer Skill Requirement




                                                                                                  -.02 -.01 0 .01 .02
                                  -.0050 .005.01
                               -.01
                           -.015




                                                   2007    2009   2011   2013         2015                                2007     2009   2011   2013        2015

                                                                                          Year
                        Blue circles = routine-cognitive, maroon squares = routine-manual
                        We regress the occupation-MSA-level change in BG skill requirements from 2007 on an exhaustive set of MSA employment shock-by-year
                        interactions, and triple interactions between the shock, year, and whether the occupation is routine. We also control for year fixed effects and
                        MSA characteristics (see equation 4). Graph plots the coefficients on the triple interactions, and 95% CI bars. The routineness measures are
                        whether the occupation is in the top quartile of routine-cognitive or routine-manual index scores based on Acemolgu and Autor (2011).




shed these types of jobs through layos, with little employment recovery over time. Since

rms do seek greater skill for routine-cognitive jobs, these workers may complement new

technology, and if so, their productivity and relative wages should rise.                                                                               (Predictions for

relative wages of routine-manual jobs and relative employment (or job loss) for routine-

cognitive jobs are less clear cut, and depend on product demand.)

    We explore all three marginsinvoluntary separations, relative employment, and wagesfor

routine-cognitive and routine-manual occupations. We examine the rate of involuntary job

loss in the population (not just the unemployed), as measured in the CPS by the propensity

to report being a job loser. For employment and wages, we use Occupational Employment

Statistics (OES) data. Both data sets allow us to capture trends back to 2000, and the earlier

years help to check the validity of our identifying assumption, that harder-hit MSAs would

have been on a similar trendin terms of skill demandif not for the Great Recession. (See

appendix A.7 for details on sample construction and an analysis of the overall impact of the

Bartik shock on these outcomes.)

    In gure 7, we focus on the dierential impacts of the Bartik shock on layos, employment,
                                                                                                                                                                           39
and wages for routine-manual (red squares) and routine-cognitive (blue circles) occupations.

  39 OES data are based on a three-year moving average, so annual snapshots are not independent and
trends are likely smoother than true annual snapshots would be. We have conrmed that this trait does not
substantively aect our estimates, as our results do not change appreciably if we use data for every third year
(which is independent) instead of annually. Additionally, we get similar results for employment and wages
using the CPS or ACS, albeit with fewer included MSAs (CPS) or data years (Census/ACS). We prefer the
use of OES for these outcomes for its fuller coverage across occupations, MSAs, and time.



                                                                                         31
    Beginning with the top left panel, we nd evidence of a large dierential layo eect for

routine-manual occupations. At the peak in 2009, individuals whose current or most recent

job was in a routine-manual occupation suer an additional 1.5 ppt increase in involuntary

separations, relative to those not in routine-manual occupations, due to a 90-10 percentile

MSA shock. For comparison, the same-sized shock increased the probability of having been

laid o for those not in routine-manual occupations by 0.8 percentage points in 2009 (see

column 1 of table C4 for the full regression output); that is, individuals in routine-manual

occupations experienced nearly triple the chance of involuntary separation as did individuals

in other occupations. Although routine-cognitive occupations also experience a statistically
                                                                         40
signicant dierential increase, the magnitude is modest.                     Importantly, there appears to

be little pre-trend for either routine occupation type, as, except for a tiny blip in 2003, the

layo rate dierential is close to zero in all years from 2000 to 2007.

    The top right panel (and columns 10 and 11 of table C1) shows how the share of MSA

employment in each type of routine occupation varies with the Bartik shock. Following the

Great Recession, there is a large and persistent drop in routine-manual employment and a
                                                                    41
steady and modest rise in routine-cognitive employment.                   At their trough, the employment

share of routine-manual occupations fell by about 2 ppts more in harder-hit MSAs, recov-

ering only half of this gap by the end of the sample period. In contrast, routine-cognitive

occupations dierentially rise as a share of employment in harder-hit MSAs, (or, more aptly,

experience smaller magnitude losses in employment share, relative to less hard-hit MSAs)

though only modestly. Also, unlike for routine-manual occupations, it is harder to rule out a

pre-trend, although it is small and generally statistically insignicant. This pair of results is

generally consistent with Jaimovich and Siu (2015), who show that employment in routine

occupations as a whole fell episodically, and more so in harder-hit U.S. states, in each of the

past three recessions and did not recover fully.

    The bottom left panel (and column 2 of table C4) shows the dierential impact on log

median hourly wages. For routine-cognitive occupations, there is a slight but persistent rise

in wages in harder-hit MSAs beginning after 2010. By 2015, the median routine-cognitive

worker in a hard-hit MSA has experienced 0.5% faster wage growth than a worker in a

job that was not routine cognitive. Conversely, routine-manual occupations exhibit almost

no post-recession change; wages evolve similarly in the subsequent period regardless of the

MSA shock. In the single major exception to the absence of pre-trending, wages for routine-

manual jobs were dierentially trending downward before the Great Recession in areas that

would experience a more severe shock, even though relative employment trended similarly,

suggesting other factors (such as declining unionization) were possibly involved.

    The sharpest predictions of our hypothesisepisodic increases in layos and persistent

  40 It is possible, but not central to our argument, that workers laid o from a routine-cognitive job have
an easier time nding reemployment and thus do not report their current status as laid o.
  41 For this result, we estimate versions of equation (1), using as dependent variables the share of employment
in the MSA (relative to 2007) that is routine-cognitive or routine-manual.



                                                      32
       Figure 7: Dierential Employment and Wage Eects for Routine Occupations



                                                    Involuntary Separations (CPS)                                          Relative Employment (OES)




                                                                                                -.03-.02-.01 0 .01.02
                          -.005 0 .005.01.015
         Coefficient




                                                  2000       2005     2010          2015                                2000     2005     2010            2015


                                                         Log Median Wage (OES)
                          -.005 0 .005 .01 .015




                                                  2000       2005     2010          2015

                                                                                        Year
                       Blue circles = routine cognitive, maroon squares = routine manual
                       Top left and bottom panels plot coefficients on the triple interactions of shock-year-routine (see equation 4 and figure 6). Top right plots
                       coefficients on shock-by-year, where the dependent variable is the MSA change in the employment share of routine occupations (see
                       equation 1). All regressions control for year fixed effects and MSA characteristics; we also include 95% CI bars. The routineness measures
                       are whether the occupation is in the top quartile of routine-cognitive or routine-manual index scores based on Acemolgu and Autor (2011).




decreases in employment share for routine-manual workers and increases in wages for routine-

cognitive workersare borne out by the data, and for these outcomes there is little evidence

of dierential pre-trending.

   To summarize, in harder-hit MSAs routine-manual occupations experience a sharp in-

crease in layo risk but there is no evidence of upskilling; rather, there appears to be relative

downskilling accompanied by employment losses and at wages. For these occupations, the

story is therefore consistent with rms' substitution of technology for labor. This is the tra-

ditional view exhibited also in the polarization literature: employment losses concentrated

in occupations we expect to be most readily replaceable by machines. Our contribution is to

show that these changes appear episodic around the Great Recession, though we acknowledge

that secular relative wage losses preceded the employment shock.

   In contrast to this conventional view of labor substitution, routine-cognitive occupa-

tions in hard-hit MSAs surprisingly exhibit only a modest increase in layos and no loss in

employment share, relative to other occupations. These changes were concomitant with a

pronounced increase in upskilling. Even as the elevated dierential risk of layo declined, the

dierential in upskilling persisted, and was met with modest relative wage and employment

growth after the recession. This pattern is quite consistent with an intensive margin restruc-

turing due to technological adoption that eectively shifts out the labor demand curve.

   These results are especially enlightening, given recent ndings by Beaudry, Green, and

Sand (2014, 2016) that more-educated workers have increased their presence in lower-skilled




                                                                                       33
jobs since 2000. They term this shift, along with stagnating employment in cognitive occu-

pations, the great reversal in the demand for cognitive skill (see also Castex and Dechter

2014).   They hypothesize that lessened demand for cognitive occupations induces college

graduates to take jobs lower in the skill distribution, squeezing out less-educated workers

who formerly held these jobs. In light of the evidence above, we propose that any declining

demand in cognitive occupations was accompanied by an increased demand for cognitive skill

within routine-task occupations, and this shift accelerated in the Great Recession. Even as

employment has shifted away from routine occupations, the tasks performed in the routine

occupations that remain may be becoming less routine and more cognitive. Our work thus

highlights a complementary hypothesis for why high-skilled workers are increasingly found

in lower-skilled occupations: these latter occupations are becoming more skilled (and more

highly paid), and it is possible that less-skilled workers are displaced because they are unable

to perform the new duties required.




7     Conclusion
During the recovery following the Great Recession, anecdotal evidence suggested that the

composition of new hires shifted toward higher-skilled workers, resulting in many workers

being overeducated for their jobs (Burning Glass Technologies 2014). However, it was not

clear how broad, deep, or enduring these eects were, or the extent to which they were

driven by labor supply or labor demand responses. In particular, rms may have treated the

recession as a time of cleansing, enabling them to restructure their production in a manner

consistent with routine-biased technological change.

    In this paper we draw upon detailed job postings data to provide comprehensive, broad-

based evidence of upskillingrms demanding higher-skilled workerswhen the local econ-

omy suers a recession. Using empirical skill measures that reect what the discipline has

learned about technological change and task-based production over the past 20 years (Au-

tor, Levy, and Murnane 2003; Brynjolfsson and McAfee 2011), we show that job postings in

harder-hit MSAs experienced larger increases in their education, experience, cognitive, and

computer requirements following the Great Recession. These increases primarily reected

changes in demand within, and not across, occupations.        Furthermore, skill requirements

remained elevated through the end of our sample in 2015, even as most measures of labor

market conditions had converged back to their pre-recession levels.      Importantly, we nd

that the increases in skill requirements are accompanied by increases in capital investments,

both at the MSA and rm-levels.       We also show that upskilling is relatively concentrated

in routine-cognitive occupations, which exhibit modest wage growth as well.        In contrast,

routine-manual occupations in harder-hit MSAs exhibit a sharp relative decline in employ-

ment shares following the Great Recession.

    We argue that the most likely explanation for this body of results is that the Great Re-



                                              34
cession did indeed provide rms a catalyst to restructure production according to a paradigm

of routine-biased technological change. While rms may respond to changes in labor market

conditions through posted skill requirements for a variety of other reasons, these cannot

rationalize our full body of ndings.   For example, rms may worry that a ood of ap-

plicants early in the recovery will create a bottleneck in screening, and therefore raise

requirements to signal that certain (unwanted) applicants need not apply.        Alternatively,

rms that typically cannot attract (or aord) more-skilled workers in a tight labor market

may opportunistically seek them out in a slack one. However, while both of these cyclical

behaviors may have been important early in the recovery, they cannot generate persistent,

within-rm increases in skill requirements that stand up to controls for the availability of

labor by skill group, occur concomitantly with greater investment in multiple measures of

physical capital, and are concentrated in the types of occupations acknowledged to be most

susceptible to routine-biased technological change. While it is possible that labor markets

have been slower to recover than indicators such as employment growth, the unemployment

rate, and education-specic employment-population ratios indicate, it is telling that we nd

little overall convergence in skill requirements as markets improve, even though the data do

indicate such convergence in some (e.g., routine-manual) occupations.

   Simply put, the evidence supports that shifts in skill requirements reect technologically-

driven changes in the means of production, not just changes in whom rms seek to hire. Our

work is thus consistent with the important, but suggestive, evidence provided by Jaimovich

and Siu (2015) that the vast majority of employment lost in routine occupations was lost

during recessions and never recovered. It also contributes to the many models in macroeco-

nomics that assume adjustment costs and imply that recessions will be times of cleansing

in terms of production (Schumpeter 1939, Koenders and Rogerson 2005, Berger 2012). As

hypothesized by many, these kinds of episodic, productivity-enhancing changes can result in

jobless recovery. Our ndings are thus extremely relevant for policy makers, who allocate

billions of taxpayer dollars to subsidize workers' job searches in a downturn.

   We also demonstrate how electronic job postings data can provide a unique opportunity to

understand real-time changes in skill demand, both across and within occupations. This level

of detail can provide new insight relative to earlier literature. For example, our result that

routine-cognitive occupations are apparently becoming higher skilled and more productive

can help to clarify studies by Beaudry, Green, and Sand (2014, 2016) and others documenting

the great reversal in demand for cognitive skill. While it may be the case that employment

in high-skill occupations did not grow, on average, over the past decade, our results show that

cognitive workers still retain a substantial advantage over the low-skilled. They are drawn

into formerly middle-skill jobs, which are becoming higher-skilled. This is indicated by the

persistence in both the relative upskilling and wage growth in routine-cognitive occupations

located in harder-hit MSAs. Our ndings can thus help explain why skilled workers still earn

a premium in the labor market even though the returns to cognitive occupations appear to



                                              35
have diminished.

   The U.S. economy has seen remarkable changes over the past 30 years, brought on by the

computer revolution and globalization. These changes have led to great increases in produc-

tivity and wealth, but the benets have not been shared across all workers. Indeed, mount-

ing evidence suggests that a large population of workers, formerly employed in routine-task

jobs, have suered permanent labor market, health, and social consequences from structural

changes in the economy (Autor et al.     2014; Autor, Dorn, and Hanson 2015a; Foote and

Ryan 2015; Pierce and Schott 2015). Our results highlight that a worker's ability to adjust

to these changes may be especially dicult because the changes are episodic, concentrated

in recessions. Thus, large numbers of workers can nd their skills depreciated at the same

time. This is perhaps evident in the stair-step declines in male labor force participation that

have tended to be concentrated around recessions (Mott 2012, Foote and Ryan 2015). If

the changes to production instead occurred more gradually, workers would still need to be

retrained, but over a longer time period, and on a much smaller scale at any given time.

Future policy work should be directed at understanding how to reallocate workers on a large

scale following a recession.




References
 [1] Aaronson, Daniel, and Brian J. Phelan (Forthcoming), Wage Shocks and the Techno-

    logical Substitution of Low-Wage Jobs, Economic Journal.


 [2] Acemoglu, Daron and Pascual Restrepo (2017), Robots and Jobs: Evidence from US

    Labor Markets, MIT mimeo.


 [3] Acemoglu, Daron, and David Autor (2011), Skills, Tasks and Technologies:          Impli-

    cations for Employment and Earnings, in David Card and Orley Ashenfelter (Eds.),

    Handbook of Labor Economics: Volume 4B. Amsterdam: Elsevier, pp. 10431171.


 [4] Altonji, Joseph G., Lisa B. Kahn, and Jamin D. Speer (2016), Cashier or Consultant?

    Entry Labor Market Conditions, Field of Study, and Career Success, Journal of Labor

    Economics, 34(S1 Part 2): S361S401.


 [5] Autor, David (2014), Polanyi's Paradox and the Shape of Employment Growth, NBER

    working paper #20485.


 [6] Autor, David, and David Dorn (2013), The Growth of Low Skill Service Jobs and the

    Polarization of the U.S. Labor Market, American Economic Review, 103(5): 15531597.


 [7] Autor, David, David Dorn, and Gordon Hanson (2015a), The Labor Market and the

    Marriage Market:     How Adverse Employment Shocks Aect Marriage, Fertility, and

    Children's Living Circumstances, MIT mimeo.


                                              36
 [8] Autor, David, David Dorn, and Gordon Hanson (2015b), Untangling Trade and Tech-

    nology: Evidence from Local Labor Markets, Economic Journal, 125(584): 621646.


 [9] Autor, David, David Dorn, Gordon Hanson, and Jae Song (2014), Trade Adjustment:

    Worker-Level Evidence, Quarterly Journal of Economics, 129(4): 17991860.


[10] Autor, David H., Lawrence F. Katz, and Melissa S. Kearney (2008), Trends in U.S.

    Wage Inequality: Revising the Revisionists, Review of Economics and Statistics, 90(2):

    300323.


[11] Autor, David H., Frank Levy, and Richard J. Murnane (2003), The Skill Content of

    Recent Technological Change: An Empirical Exploration, Quarterly Journal of Eco-

    nomics, 118(4): 12791333.


[12] Bartik, Timothy J. (1991), Who Benets from State and Local Economic Development

    Policies, Kalamazoo, MI: W.E. Upjohn Institute for Employment Research.


[13] Beaudry, Paul, David A. Green, and Benjamin M. Sand (2014), The Declining Fortunes

    of the Young since 2000, American Economic Review, 104(5): 381386.


[14] Beaudry, Paul, David A. Green, and Benjamin M. Sand (2016), The Great Reversal

    in the Demand for Skill and Cognitive Tasks, Journal of Labor Economics, 34(S1 Part

    2): S199S247.


[15] Beaudry, Paul, and Ethan Lewis (2014), Do Male-Female Wage Dierentials Reect

    Dierences in the Return to Skill?    Cross-City Evidence from 19802000, American

    Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 6(2): 178194.


[16] Berger, David (2012), Countercyclical Restructuring and Jobless Recoveries, mimeo.


[17] Bernard, Andrew B., Stephen J. Redding, and Peter K. Schott (2011), Multiproduct

    rms and trade liberalization, Quarterly Journal of Economics 126(3): 12711318.


[18] Blanchard, Olivier J., and Lawrence F. Katz (1992), Regional Evolutions, Brooking

    Papers on Economic Activity, 175.


[19] Blinder, Alan S., and Alan B. Krueger (2013), Alternative Measures of Oshorability,

    A Survey Approach, Journal of Labor Economics, 31(no. 2 part 2): S97S128.


[20] Bloom, Nicholas, Raaella Sadun, and John Van Reenen (2012), Americans Do IT

    Better: U.S. Multinationals and the Productivity Miracle, American Economic Review

    102(1): 167201.


[21] Bloom, Nicholas, Mirko Draca, and John Van Reenen (2016), Trade Induced Technical

    Change? The Impact of Chinese Imports on Innovation, IT, and Productivity, Review

    of Economis Studies, 83(1): 87117.


                                            37
[22] Brynjolfsson, Erik, and Andrew McAfee (2011), Race Against the Machine. Lexington:

    Digital Frontier Press.


[23] Bresnahan, Timothy F., Erik Brynjolfsson, and Lorin M. Hitt (2002), Information

    Technology, Workplace Organization, and the Demand for Skilled Labor: Firm-Level

    Evidence, Quarterly Journal of Economics 117(1): 339376.


[24] Burning Glass Technologies (2014), Moving the Goalposts: How Demand for a Bache-

    lor's Degree is Reshaping the Workforce, mimeo.


[25] Byrne, David M., John G. Fernald, and Marshall B. Reinsdorf (2016), Does the United

    States Have a Productivity Slowdown or a Measurement Problem? Brookings Papers

    on Economic Activity, Spring.


[26] Caballero, Ricardo, and Mohamad Hammour (1994), The Cleansing Eect of Reces-

    sions, American Economic Review, 84(5): 13501368.


[27] Caballero, Ricardo, and Mohamad Hammour (1996), On the Timing and Eciency of

    Creative Destruction, Quarterly Journal of Economics, 111(3): 805852.


[28] Card, David, Ana R. Cardoso, and Patrick Kline (2016), Bargaining, Sorting, and the

    Gender Wage Gap: Quantifying the Impact of Firms on the Relative Pay of Women,

    Quarterly Journal of Economics, 131(5): 633686.


[29] Card, David, Jörg Heining, and Patrick Kline (2013), Workplace Heterogeneity and

    the Rise of West German Wage Inequality, Quarterly Journal of Economics, 128(3):

    9671015.


[30] Carnevale, Anthony P., Tamara Jayasundera, and Dmitri Repnikov (2014), Understand-

    ing Online Jobs Data: A Technical Report, Washington D.C.: Georgetown University

    Center on Education and the Workforce.


[31] Castex, Gonzalo, and Evgenia K. Dechter (2014), The Changing Role of Education

    and Ability in Wage Determination, Journal of Labor Economics, 32(4): 685710.


[32] Charles, Kerwin K., Erik Hurst, and Matthew J. Notowidigdo (2015), Housing Booms

    and Busts, Labor Market Opportunities, and College Attendance, mimeo.


[33] Davis, Stephen J., Jason Faberman, and John Haltiwanger (2012), Labor Market

    Flows in the Cross Section and over Time, Journal of Monetary Economics, Carnegie-

    Rochester Series on Public Policy special issue, 59(1): 118.


[34] Davis, Stephen J., Jason Faberman, and John Haltiwanger (2013), The Establishment-

    Level Behavior of Vacancies and Hiring, Quarterly Journal of Economics, 128(2):

    581622.


                                            38
[35] Deming, David J. (2017), The Growing Importance of Social Skills in the Labor Mar-

    ket, NBER Working Paper #21473.


[36] Deming, David J., and Lisa B. Kahn (2017), Firm Heterogeneity in Skill Demands,

    Journal of Labor Economics, forthcoming.


[37] Devereux, Paul (2002), Occupational Upgrading and the Business Cycle, Labour Eco-

    nomics, 16(3): 423452.


[38] Foote, Christopher L., and Richard W. Ryan (2015), Labor Market Polarization Over

    the Business Cycle, NBER Macroeconomics Annual, 29: 371413.


[39] Forsythe, Eliza (2016), Why Don't Firms Hire Young Workers in Recessions? mimeo.


[40] Goos, Maarten, and Alan Manning (2007), Lousy and Lovely Jobs: The Rising Polar-

    ization of Work in Britain, Review of Economics and Statistics, 89(1): 118133.


[41] Gomes, Joao, Jeremy Greenwood, and Sergio Rebelo (2001), Equilibrium Unemploy-

    ment, Journal of Monetary Economics, 48(1): 109152.


[42] Greeneld, Rebecca (2014), Why the New York Times Hired a Biology Researcher as

    Its Chief Data Ocer, Fast Company, February 12.


[43] Hall, Robert (1991), Labor Demand, Labor Supply and Employment Volatility, in

    NBER Macroeconomics Annual. Cambridge: MIT Press.


[44] Hall, Robert (2005), Employment Fluctuations with Equilibrium Wage Stickiness,

    American Economic Review, 95(1): 5065.


[45] Harrigan, James, Ariell Reshef, and Farid Toubal (2016), The March of the Techies:

    Technology, Trade, and Job Polarization in France, 19942007, NBER Working Paper

    #22110.


[46] Haltiwanger, John, Henry Hyatt, Lisa B. Kahn, and Erika McEntarfer (2017), Cyclical

    Job Ladders by Firm Size and Firm Wage, American Economic Journal: Macroeco-

    nomics, forthcoming.


[47] Hawkins, William B., Ryan Michaels, and Jiyoon Oh (2015), The Joint Dynamics of

    Capital and Employment at the Plant Level, mimeo.


[48] Hoynes, Hilary, Douglas L. Miller and Jessamyn Schaller (2012), Who Suers During

    Recessions?, Journal of Economic Perspectives, 26(3): 2748.


[49] Isserman, Andrew M., and James Westervelt (2006), 1.5 Million Missing Numbers:

    Overcoming Employment Suppression in County Business Patterns Data, International

    Regional Science Review, 29(3): 311335.


                                           39
[50] Jaimovich, Nir, and Henry E. Siu (2012), The Trend is the Cycle: Job Polarization and

    Jobless Recoveries, http://faculty.arts.ubc.ca/hsiu/research/polar20120331.pdf.


[51] Jaimovich, Nir, and Henry E. Siu (2015), The Trend is the Cycle: Job Polarization and

    Jobless Recoveries, http://faculty.arts.ubc.ca/hsiu/work/polar20150503.pdf.


[52] Jensen, J. Bradford, and Lori G. Kletzer (2005), Tradable services: Understanding the

    Scope and Impact of Services Oshoring. In J. Bradford Jensen, Lori G. Kletzer, Jared

    Bernstein, and Robert C. Feenstra (Eds.) Brookings Trade Forum. Washington, D.C.:

    Brookings Institution Press, pp. 75133.


[53] Kahn, Lisa B. (2010), The Long-Term Consequences of Graduating from College in a

    Recession, Labour Economics, 17(2): 303316.


[54] Keister, Roma, and Piotr Lewandowski, (2017), A Routine Transition in the Digital

    Era? The Rise of Routine Work in Central and Eastern Europe, Transfer: European

    Review of Labour and Research, 23(3): 263279.


[55] Koenders, Kathryn, and Richard Rogerson (2005), Organizational Dynamics Over the

    Business Cycle:   A View on Jobless Recoveries, Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis

    Review, 87(4): 555580.


[56] Kuhn, Peter, and Kailing Shen (2013), Gender Discrimination in Job Ads: Evidence

    from China, Quarterly Journal of Economics, 128(1): 287336.


[57] Lazear, Edward P., and James R. Spletzer (2012), Hiring, Churn, and the Business

    Cycle, American Economic Review, 102(3): 575579.


[58] Marinescu, Ioana (2014), The General Equilibrium Eects of Unemployment Insurance:

    Evidence from a Large Online Job Board, mimeo.


[59] Martins, Pedro S., Gary Solon and Jonathan P. Thomas (2012), Measuring What Em-

    ployers Do About Entry Wages Over the Business Cycle: A New Approach, American

    Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 4(4): 3655.


[60] McCoy,   Terrence (2016),   The Technology that Could Revolutionize the War on

    Hunger, Washington Post, June 16.


[61] Menzio, Guido, and Shouyong Shi (2011), Ecient Search on the Job and the Business

    Cycle, Journal of Political Economy 119(3): 468510.


[62] Michaels, Guy, Ashwini Natraj, and John Van Reenen (2014), Has ICT Polarized

    Skill Demand? Evidence from Eleven Countries Over Twenty-Five Years." Review of

    Economics and Statistics, 96(1): 6077.



                                              40
[63] Mott, Robert (2012), The Reversal of the Employment-Population Ratio in the 2000s:

    Facts and Explanations, Brooking Papers on Economic Activity, fall.


[64] Moreira, Sara (2016), Firm Dynamics, Persistent Eects of Entry Conditions, and

    Business Cycles, Northwestern mimeo.


[65] Mortensen, Dale, and Christopher Pissarides (1994), Job Creation and Job Destruction

    in the Theory of Unemployment, Review of Economic Studies, 61(3): 397415.


[66] Nickell, Stephen J. (1996), Competition and Corporate Performance, Journal of Po-

    litical Economy, 104(4): 724746.


[67] Notowidigdo, Matthew J. (2013), The Incidence of Local Labor Demand Shocks, Uni-

    versity of Chicago, mimeo.


[68] Oreopoulos, Philip, Till von Wachter, and Andrew Heisz (2012), The Short- and Long-

    Term Career Eects of Graduating from College in a Recession, American Economic

    Journal: Applied Economics, 4(1): 129.


[69] Pierce, Justin R., and Peter K. Schott (2015), Trade Liberalization and Mortality:

    Evidence from U.S. Counties, Yale mimeo.


[70] Rothwell, Jonathan (2014), Still Searching: Job Vacancies and STEM Skills, Brook-

    ings mimeo.


[71] Sasser Modestino, Alicia, Daniel Shoag and Joshua Ballance (2016a), Upskilling: Do

    Employers Demand Greater Skill when Skilled Workers are Plentiful?, mimeo.


[72] Sasser Modestino, Alicia, Daniel Shoag and Joshua Ballance (2016b), Downskilling:

    Changes in Employer Skill Requirements Over the Business Cycle, mimeo.


[73] Schumpeter, Joseph (1939), Business Cycles. New York: McGraw-Hill.


[74] Syverson, Chad (2004a), Market Structure and Productivity: A Concrete Example,

    Journal of Political Economy, 112(6): 11811222.


[75] Syverson, Chad (2004b), Product Substitutability and Productivity Dispersion, Re-

    view of Economics and Statistics, 86(2): 534550.


[76] U.S. Department of Labor (1977), Dictionary of Occupational Titles, 4th edition. Wash-

    ington, D.C.: U.S. Department of Labor.


[77] von Wachter, Till, and Elizabeth Handwerker (2009), Variation in the Cost of Job Loss

    by Worker Skill: Evidence Using Matched Data from California, 19912000, mimeo.


[78] Yagan, Danny (2016), The Enduring Employment Impact of Your Great Recession

    Location, mimeo.



                                            41
FOR ONLINE PUBLICATION

A      Data Appendix
It is estimated that as of 2014 between 60% and 70% of all job postings could be found online

(Carnevale, Jayasundera, and Repnikov 2014). Indeed, The Conference Board discontinued

its-long-running, print-based Help-Wanted Advertising Index in 2008, after having begun a
                                                     42
Help-Wanted Online Index in 2005 (HWOL).                  Several other private-sector rms also began

to track online job postings in the 2000s by using web-crawling and data-scraping methods.

In this study, we employ data from one such rm, Burning Glass Technologies. This appendix

discusses the representativeness of the data and investigates whether representativeness has

changed over the time period of analysis.



A.1      Industry-Occupation Composition in BG

The BG database covers only vacancies posted on the Internet, as opposed to JOLTS or

state vacancy reports that directly survey a representative sample of employers.                   To the

extent that vacancies from certain industries and occupations are less likely to be posted

electronically, as might be the case for many less-skilled jobs, they will be underrepresented
               43
in the data.        It is also possible that the BG database is not representative even of online job

postings, as comprehensiveness rests on the strength of the company's algorithms to code

information in the ads and get rid of duplicates.             Carnevale, Jayasundera, and Repnikov

(2014) show that the occupation-industry composition of the BG data are similar to that

of the Conference Board's HWOL. Moreover, the authors audited a sample of job postings

in the BG database and compared them to the actual text of the postings, nding that the
                                                                                      44
codings for occupation, education, experience were at least 80% accurate.

    Figure A1 plots the distribution of BG ads across major industry groups, sorted from

largest to smallest (solid bars), as well as the distribution of job vacancies in JOLTS

(diagonal-lined bars). As mentioned, the BG database is meant to capture only electroni-

cally posted job ads; the universes of the data sources are thus not identical, but JOLTS is
                                     45
the best comparison available.            Despite the sample dierences, the industry distributions

  42 See https://www.conference-board.org/data/helpwantedonline.cfm.
  43 Rothwell (2014) compares the occupational distributions from an extract of BG to those from state
vacancy surveys for select metropolitan areas for which data are available. He nds that computer, manage-
ment, and business occupations are overrepresented relative to the state vacancy surveys, while health care
support, transportation, maintenance, sales, and food service workers are underrepresented.
  44 Furthermore, since BG regularly revises and attempts to improve its algorithms (applying them retroac-
tively on the complete historical database of postings), and our extract is more recent than the one studied
by Carnevale, Jayasundera, and Repnikov, it seems reasonable that their accuracy gure would be a lower
bound for our sample.
  45 Both data sets cover 2007 and 20102015. The BG distribution is from our primary estimation sample
(notably excluding ads with missing rms), though we obtain similar results for the distribution across all
ads. JOLTS data are based on a monthly, nationally representative sample of approximately 16,000 business




                                                    42
match each other reasonably well. BG is overrepresented in health care and social assistance,

as well as in nance and insurance and education.              It is underrepresented in accommoda-

tion and food services, public administration/government, and construction. However, most

dierences are small in magnitude.

    A great advantage of the BG data over the JOLTS is that they allow us to categorize

jobs by occupation at a detailed level. We thus also compare the occupational distribution

of BG job ads to both the stock and ow of employment in the United States. We should

not expect online job ads to precisely match either comparison group since occupations dier

in turnover rates that would necessitate new hires (ows), and since they also dier in the

extent to which they use vacancy postings (rather than informal hiring channels) to ll a

slot. However, these comparisons help build intuition for the BG data set.

    Figure A2 plots the distribution of BG ads across major occupation groups, sorted from
                                    46
largest to smallest (blue bars).         We show the distribution of the stock of employment based

on the Bureau of Labor Statistics' Occupational Employment Statistics (OES) data (light

blue, horizontal lines). We also show the occupational distribution of new job starts (job

ows) based on longitudinally linked Current Population Survey (CPS) data (dark blue,
                   47
diagonal lines).

    Perhaps not unexpectedly, BG has a much larger representation of computer and math-

ematical occupations, more than four times the OES and CPS shares. BG is also overrepre-

sented among management, healthcare practitioners, and business and nancial operations,

although to lesser degrees. On the other hand, BG data are underrepresented in many of

the remaining occupationsfor example, in transportation, food preparation and serving,

production, and construction. The OES and CPS distributions agree more closely, although

there are notable gaps among occupations known to have very high (or very low) rates of

turnover.



A.2      Representativeness of BG Data over Time

As noted in the text, our primary concern is that the representativeness of the sample

changes over time. This would be a threat to internal validity in our analysis. Figure A3

gives a general sense of whether the representativeness of BG has changed over our sample

period. On the x-axis we plot the deviation of the BG occupation share in 2007 from that

establishments drawn from unemployment insurance records; they count as a vacancy or job opening any
position (including temporary and seasonal ones) that could start within 30 days and that the employer is
actively trying to ll through a variety of means, of which posting a job ad (electronic or otherwise) is only
one.
  46 For clarity, we use 2-digit Standard Occupational Classication codes in the gure.      The regression
analyses use more granular codings.
  47 All data sets cover 2007 and 20102015. The BG distribution is from our primary estimation sample,
though, again, the distribution is similar for the full sample of ads. We dene a new hire in the CPS as an
individual who, from month   t to month t+1, transitioned from non-employment to employment, reported a
new employer, or reported changing occupations.




                                                     43
occupation's share of CPS new job starts in the same year.      For example, computer and

mathematical occupations are shown on the far right, at roughly 11 percentage points (ppts)

overrepresentation in BG compared to CPS. Construction is on the far left, at roughly 7 ppts

underrepresented. On the y-axis we plot the deviation of the BG occupation share from its

CPS share for each of the later years in the data.     The markers are color-coded by year.

The darkest markers plot the (2007, 2010) representativeness pair for each occupation; the

lightest markers plot the (2007, 2015) representativeness pair. We also plot the 45-degree

line as a benchmark: if representativeness of the BG data, relative to the CPS, remained

constant over time, all markers should line up on the 45-degree line.

   The gure shows that changes in representativeness over this time period are very small

(most of the markers are close to the 45 degree line). To the extent that changes did occur,

there is a tendency for them to have been in the direction of closer representativeness to the

CPS. Computer and mathematical occupations, management occupations, and architecture

and engineering occupations appear to have become less overrepresented, while health care

and business and nance look fairly unchanged; administrative support, food, transportation,

and production occupations have become slightly less underrepresented. For most of these

occupations, though, the dierences are quite small.



A.3     Skills Measures in BG

One of the most unique features of the BG data is the availability of skills measures. We

argue that these stated preferences are informative about labor demand. Figures A4a and

A4b crosscheck the average education requirements in BG with average education levels of

employed workers at the MSA- and occupation-level, respectively. Using American Commu-

nity Survey (ACS) data for overlapping sampling years, we rank both MSAs and occupations

(four-digit SOC codes) by their average education of employed workers and plot the rela-

tionships between average education requirements and average education for 20 evenly sized

employment bins, using smoothed local linear regression. As can be seen, at the levels of

both MSA and occupation, the probability that an ad posts any education requirement is

increasing with the average years schooling of employed workers (top left), as is the years of

school conditional on any requirement (top right). Furthermore, the probability that an ad

has a high school requirement is positively correlated with the share of workers that have

exactly a high school diploma (bottom left), and the probability that an ad has a college re-

quirement is positively correlated with the share of workers with exactly a bachelor's degree

(bottom right).



A.4     Harte-Hanks Sample

We are grateful to Nick Bloom for providing us with an extract of the Harte-Hanks (HH)

database, based on Bloom, Draca, and Van Reenen (2016). To construct our merged BG-HH



                                             44
sample, we begin with 15,093 BG rms that post in the 20102015 period and can also be

matched to at least one ad in 2007 (9% of rms and 62% of ads). In this sample, we match a

total of 78% of BG 20102015 ads (58% of rms) to HH rms; we did not attempt to match
                                                              48
observations that did not meet the pre-post criterion.             We apply a multi-step approach to

match rms. First, we match based on exact name, after regularizing rm names in both

BG and HH (removing inc., LLC, and other common suxes, as well as punctuation and

spaces). This accounts for 89% of ultimately matched rms and 92% of ultimately matched

ads. Most of the remaining share of ultimate matches (6% of rms, 4% of ads) are obtained

by dropping one at a time common strings, such as hotel, group, or insurance, that

might be part of the rm name in one dataset but not the other. We also obtain a small

number of matches by removing any s at the end of the last word, either singularizing

or removing possessives, and by replacing univ with university; these steps combined

account for 3.7% of eventual rm and 2.6% of eventual ads matched.                  Finally, we match

based on the rst 10 characters of the rm name in each dataset, cleaning spurious matches

by hand. This accounts for the remaining 1% of total rm and 2% of total ad matches.



A.5      Compustat Sample

We obtain Compustat data via Wharton Research Data Services. To construct our merged

BG-Compustat sample, we again begin with the same sample as above, 15,093 BG rms

that post in the 20102015 period and can also be matched to at least one ad in 2007 (9%

of rms and 62% of ads).         In this sample, we match a total of 41% of BG ads (10% of

rms) to Compustat rms; we did not attempt to match observations that did not meet the
                      49
pre-post criterion.        We apply a multi-step approach to match rms. We rst match based

on exact name, after the same cleaning procedure described above (removing punctuation,

spaces, and words that are sometimes abbreviated). This step accounts for 84% of ultimately

matched rms and 80% of matched ads. We supplement these matches with the sample of

rms matched by Deming and Kahn (2017), which uses only BG rms posting in 2014 (16%

of rms and 20% of ads).

  48 The HH database sampled roughly 500,000 U.S. sites each year prior to 2010, and roughly three million
from 2010 onward. Although detailed sampling information is not available, and the HH database does not
contain sampling weights, total employment among the sampled sites ranges from 3957 million prior to the
Great Recession and 101114 million from 2010 onward. This represents about 3040 percent of total payroll
employment prior to 2010, and about 7085 percent from 2010 onward. Our restriction imposes that rms
be sampled in both periods.
  49 For context, the size of employment in Compustat is roughly half that of total employment in the U.S.
For example, in 2014, the sum of employment listed in companies in Compustat was 70,505,000 and total
payroll employment averaged 139,042,000. The Compustat employment gure includes both domestic and
foreign workers, with no way to distinguish between the two. However, the employment comparison provides
a useful benchmark.




                                                   45
A.6        Autor-Acemoglu routineness measures

Acemoglu and Autor (AA; 2011) use O*Net job attributes to dene six standardized mea-

sures capturing the task content of occupations: non-routine cognitive analytical, non-routine

cognitive interpersonal, non-routine manual physical, non-routine manual interpersonal, rou-

tine manual, and routine cognitive. We focus on the last two. The routine-manual index

is created by summing studentized versions of three attributes (Controlling Machines and

Processes [4.A.3.a.3], Spend Time Making Repetitive Motions [4.C.2.d.1.i], and Pace De-

termined by Speed of Equipment [4.C.3.d.3]) and re-studentizing the sum.                 The routine

cognitive index is created by summing studentized versions of three attributes (Importance

of Being Exact or Accurate [4.C.3.b.4], Importance of Repeating Same Tasks [4.C.3.b.7],

and (reverse-scaled) Structured v. Unstructured Work [4.C.3.b.8]) and re-studentizing the

sum. See AA for additional details. We depart slightly from AA in not using employment

weights when creating the indices at the 6-digit SOC level, as we are interested in the dis-

tribution of routineness across occupations, not workers.           In practice, this dierence does

not matter much.       We aggregate to the four-digit SOC occupation category by taking an

OES-employment weighted average across nested 6-digit occupations.



A.7        Current Population Survey and Occupational Employment Statis-

           tics Samples

Figure 7 in the main text explores the dierential impact of the Bartik shock for routine-

manual and routine-cognitive occupations, using Current Population Survey (CPS) micro-

data to calculate layos and Occupational Employment Statistics (OES) data to calculate

wages and employment.

    We work with the basic monthly CPS and harmonize both MSA and occupation codes.

To harmonize MSA codes, we begin with the 2013 Oce of Management and Budget (OMB)

CBSA delineations (which the CPS began using in May 2014) and work backward in time.

The CBSA codes from May 2004 though April 2014 can be converted to the 2013 standard

using Census delineation les; in most cases these are one-to-one code changes or absorptions

of an MSA into a larger one, although some MSAs stop being identiable in the CPS and
                                   50
others start being identiable.         Prior to May 2004, the CPS used the older PMSA coding

scheme. We apply a crosswalk initially developed by the Social Security administration and
                                                                              51
maintained by the NBER to convert PMSAs to 2013-vintage CBSAs.                     The more signicant

nature of the PMSA to CBSA switch results in several MSAs that do not cleanly map; the

crosswalk maps 267 of 317 PMSAs into CBSAs at the exact county-level denition, although

not all of these CBSAs are identiable in the CPS from 2005 onward. Using these procedures,

  50 See     https://www.census.gov/geographies/reference-les/time-series/demo/metro-micro/delineation-
les.html.
  51 See http://www.nber.org/data/cbsa-msa-ps-ssa-county-crosswalk.html.




                                                   46
we consistently identify 149 MSAs (out of 381 used in the BG sample) between 2000 and

2015 in the CPS.

    To harmonize occupation codes, we begin with the 2010 SOC coding scheme and work

backward. The CPS uses 2010 Census occupation codes starting January 2011; these are
                                                                     52
converted to 2010 SOC codes using a Census crosswalk.                     From January 2003 through

December 2010, the CPS uses 2000 Census occupation codes. These occupation codes are

rst converted to the 2000 SOC system using a crosswalk maintained by IPUMS at the
                             53
University of Minnesota.          The 2000 SOC codes are then converted to the 2010 SOC system

using a BLS crosswalk (see https://www.bls.gov/soc/soc_2000_to_2010_crosswalk.xls) for

occupations that match one-to-one and were simply recoded or for occupations that were

combined; for occupations that split at the 6-digit level, we apply a stochastic crosswalk

based on empirical shares observed in the IPUMS versions of the 2009 ACS (which contains
                                                                                        54
the 2000 SOC) and the 20102012 ACS (which contains the 2010 SOC).                           Finally, the CPS

uses 1990 occupation codes prior to January 2003.                 To convert CPS years 2000 through
                                                                                   55
2002, we use the NBER version of CPS extracts les released by BLS.                     These les contain

2000 Census occupation codes for CPS years 2000 through 2002, allowing use of the above

procedure.

    To determine layo status, we rst drop observations living in a non-metropolitan area

or without a valid occupation code (individuals who had not worked in the preceding ve

years), as we cannot match an MSA shock or occupational routineness measure to these out-

of-universe observations. We assign the status of an involuntary separation to individuals

who answer the reason for unemployment question (pruntype) either job loser/on layo 

or other job loser.      Although this question is asked only of the currently unemployed,

we include in the universe all members of the experienced labor force (those with a valid

occupation code). Note that this is a stock variable; we do not restrict layos to individuals

who had been employed the previous month.

    We also use CPS microdata to calculate employment-to-population ratios (bottom panel

of gure 1) and quit rates by education group (used as controls in appendix B.2). Note that

these variables will be noisier than the unemployment rates and employment series calculated
                                                             56
by the BLS (and used in the top panel of gure 1).                We calculate employment-population

ratios according to the standard denition (the sample-weighted share of employed persons

divided by the population). To measure quit rates, we longitudinally link observations and

  52 See https://www.census.gov/people/io/les/2010_OccCodeswithCrosswalkfrom2002-2011nov04.xls.
  53 See https://usa.ipums.org/usa/volii/census_occtooccsoc.shtml.
  54 Occupations that split were randomly assigned to one of the splits based on the empirical distribution
of the splits in 20102012. Since these splits almost never cross the 4-digit SOC level, which we use in all
analyses, measurement error from this stochastic assignment is trivial.
  55 See http://www.nber.org/data/cps_extract.html.
  56 BLS does not use microdata directly to calculate unemployment rates or payroll employment for local
areas.   Rather, these estimates are derived from time-series errors-in-variables models, using as primary
inputs unemployment insurance claims and state-level CPS and payroll employment survey estimates. See
https://www.bls.gov/lau/gen4models.pdf. Hence, demographic breakdowns are unavailable.



                                                    47
dene a quit as an individual who was either (a) employed in months t and t+1 but reported

having changing employers in month t+1 (using the variable puiodp1), or (b) employed in

month t, unemployed in month t+1, and gave as the reason for unemployment being a

job leaver (using the pruntype variable).       The denominator is the (weighted) count of

longitudinally matched individuals who were employed in month t.
                                                                                                  57
   We use OES data to calculate the wages and employment shares used in gure 7.                       To

make data comparable across years (from 2000 to 2015), we must use crosswalks for both

MSA and occupation codes.

   Data from 2000 to 2011 use SOC 2000 codes, which we map to SOC 2010 codes using

the same procedure as with the CPS data.          OES also uses a small number of temporary

occupation codes in 2010 and 2011, which we must drop.

   MSAs from 2005 onward use the OMB 2013 delineation, but years 20002004 use the 1999

delineation. We map old MSA codes to the new ones using data from the IPUMS versions

of the 2000 Census and 20052011 ACS samples, where both measures are available, and
                                                                      58
keeping the modal new MSA match (based on sample weights).

   To better understand how layos (CPS) and wages (OES) vary with our key right-hand-

side variables, we provide within-occupation-MSA estimates of equation (1).                 These are

summarized in gure A5. The dierential (rather than main) eects on these variables for

routine-cognitive and routine-manual occupations (described in equation (4)) are plotted in

the text in gure 7.

   We estimate that between 2007 and 2009, a hard-hit MSA experiences an additional 1.2

ppt increase in layo probability (the share of the sample that reports being involuntarily

unemployed), relative to a less hard-hit MSA. This is roughly two-thirds of the average

involuntary separation rate observed across the sample period. Eects remain elevated in

2010, before dropping to zero by 2012. Wage eects, in contrast, move more slowly. Although

issues of selection preclude us from making causal statements (Martins, Solon and Thomas

2012), we nd that hard-hit MSAs experience a drop in wages about 0.5% to 1.5% greater

than less hard-hit MSAs, with this dierential the largest over 20122014. As with the other

labor market measures in gures 1, 4, and 7, estimates preceding the Great Recession are

close to zero. Thus, layos and wages were evolving similarly across MSAs, regardless of the

size of the shock they would receive.



A.8     Sample Restrictions and the Bartik Shock

Table A1 examines how the probability of meeting certain sample criteria varies with the

MSA-employment shock over time. Because we use a rst-dierence specication (see equa-

tion (1)), the most relevant threat to internal validity would be if the change in the probability

  57 Annual   data   at   the   MSA-occupation     level   can   be    obtained      from   the    BLS:
https://www.bls.gov/oes/tables.htm.
  58 See https://usa.ipums.org/usa-action/variables/MET2013#comparability_section.



                                                 48
of meeting our sample criteria (from the base period) varies systematically with the Bartik

shock. We generally nd that this is not the case.

   Column 1 explores the probability of ads missing rm name, and thus being excluded

from our main sample. On average,      39%   of ads are missing rm name, likely because they

are posted to a recruiter's website.   However, we nd that the change in this probability

from 2007 does not vary meaningfully with the Bartik shock. Most coecients in column 1

are small in magnitude, change sign, and are statistically insignicant. The one exception

is in 2012, where the estimate implies that hard-hit MSAs are 6.6 ppts less likely to have

ads without a rm name, relative to 2007, than less hard-hit MSAs. This relative decline

is signicant at the 1% level. As pointed out in section 4, however, 2012 appears to be an

unusual year in the BG data, and we express caution in overinterpretting any nding from

this one year.

   Column 2 explores the probability of being excluded from the sample of rms used for

gure 3 (showing that upskilling in the later period is driven by the same rms that upskilled

initially), by rms not posting at least ve ads each in 2007 and 2010. About one-third of

weighted observations in our main sample do not satisfy this criterion. We again nd that

the change in the share of ads within an MSA is unrelated to this sample restriction except

for the anomalous 2012 (and weaklyat the 10% levelin 2011).

   Column 3 looks at a related criterion: the probability of exclusion from the sample used

for gure 5 (the dierential upskilling eects for rms that have invested heavily in capital).

For this sample we need to observe a rm in 2007 and again at least once in any later year.

Among weighted observations in the rm sample, 31% do not meet this criterion. However,

as can be seen, the change in satisfying the restriction does not vary with the Bartik shock.

Aside from the one in 2012, coecient estimates are statistically insignicant and small in

magnitude.

   In columns 4 and 5, we investigate whether the share of ads that can be matched at

the rm level to Harte Hanks and Compustat, respectively, varies over time and with the

Bartik shock. As noted in the text, about 80% and 40% of ads can be matched to HH and

Compustat, respectively, conditional on meeting the criteria in column 3. In the table, we

estimate the change in the probability of not matching to these samples among all ads with

a rm identier, not conditional on the column 3 criterion; here, non-match rates are 50%

for HH and 72% for Compustat. Relative to these rates, the estimates in columns 4 and 5

are small in magnitude; none is statistically insignicant, and signs vary.

   Finally, Column 6 explores whether a site (akin to an establishment) is present in the

database at least once in 2002, 2004, or 2006, among the entire sample of rms in HH (not

just those matching to BG). This restriction is necessary to generate PCs normalized by

pre-recession employment at the site level. We aggregate this probability to the MSA level,

taking an employment-weighted average across sites. Overall, 35% of employment in HH do

not meet this restriction. In general, we nd that the change in this probability from 2006



                                               49
does not vary with the Bartik shock. Point estimates are small and statistically insignicant,

with one marginal exception in 2000.




                                             50
               Figure A1: Industry Distributions: BG, JOLTS: 2007, 2010-2015

  0.2


 0.18


 0.16


 0.14


 0.12


  0.1


 0.08


 0.06


 0.04


 0.02


   0




                                           BG    JOLTS Vacancies



Figure A2: Occupation Distributions: BG, New Jobs (CPS) and Employment (OES)

        0.18



        0.16



        0.14



        0.12



         0.1



        0.08



        0.06



        0.04



        0.02



          0




                                  BG Ads   CPS New Jobs    OES Employment




                                                  51
Figure A3: Representativeness of BG Occupations, Relative to New Jobs (CPS)
                 .15
   Deviation from CPS 2010-2015
                             .1




                                                                                                                                            CompMath
                    .05




                                                                                                                       Health
                                                                                                                      BusFin
                                                                                                                       MGT
                                                                                               Sales
                                                                                      ArtEnt     ArchEng
              0




                                                                   Ed
                                                      Transp       Prsnl   AdminSupport
                                                      Food
   -.05




                                                           Prodn
                                             Constn
                 -.1




                                  -.09         -.06            -.03           0         .03    .06                          .09             .12            .15
                                                                            Deviation from CPS 2007
                                  The x-axis is the BG ad share in an occupation in 2007 minus the CPS new job share in the same occupation in 2007. The y-axis
                                  is these differences for each year from 2010-2015. Darker shades are earlier years, lighter shades are later. As a benchmark,
                                  the 45 degree line (black dash) indicates occupations where representation in BG, relative to CPS, did not change from 2007.




                                                                                          52
Figure A4: Comparison of BG Education Requirements and ACS Employment

                                                                                                (a) by MSA


                                                          Any Education Requirement                                                           Years Required, Conditional




                                                                                                                  14.3 14.5 14.7 14.9
                           .56
                           .54
                           .52
          Average (BG)
                           .5




                                                   12.5         13            13.5         14         14.5                              12.5       13           13.5        14        14.5


                                                                     High School                                                                           College


                                                                                                                  .35
                           .17 .18 .19 .2 .21




                                                                                                                  .3
                                                                                                                  .25
                                                                                                                  .2
                                                                                                                  .15




                                                   .15          .2            .25          .3          .35                               .1       .15            .2         .25        .3

                                                              Average Education of Employed in Occupation (ACS)
                         Smoothed local linear regression of occupation-level education requirement on ACS education percentile. Top panel uses average years of
                         schooling for employed workers in the MSA as the ACS variable; BG variable is the share of ads with any education requirement (left) or
                         average years required conditional on any (right). Bottom panel uses the share of employed workers with exactly a high school diploma
                         (left) or college degree (right) as the ACS variable; BG variables are the share of ads requiring the specified degree.




                                                                                          (b) by Occupation


                                                          Any Education Requirement                                                           Years Required, Conditional
                                                                                                                  17
                            .7




                                                                                                                  16
                            .6




                                                                                                                  15
                            .5




                                                                                                                  14
                            .4




                                                                                                                  13
          Average (BG)




                                                                                                                  12
                            .3




                                                   10           12             14          16           18                              10            12         14         16         18


                                                                     High School                                                                           College
                            .05 .1 .15 .2 .25 .3




                                                                                                                  .4
                                                                                                                  .3
                                                                                                                  .2
                                                                                                                  .1
                                                                                                                  0




                                                    0         .1         .2          .3         .4       .5                              0       .1        .2          .3        .4    .5

                                                    See notes to sub-figure (a). Here ACS variables are average education requirements in the occupation (instead of MSA).




                                                                                                        53
                                       Figure A5: Layos and Wages: Full Eects



                           Involuntary Separations (CPS)                                              Log Median Wage (OES)
                 .015




                                                                                        .02
                 .01
Coefficient




                                                                                        0
                 .005
                 0




                                                                                        -.02
                 -.005
                 -.01




                                                                                        -.04




                         2000          2005              2010               2015               2000           2005              2010               2015

                                                                                Year
              We regress the MSA-level change in local labor market variables from 2007 on an exhaustive set of MSA employment shock-by-year
              interactions, controlling for year fixed effects (see equation 1). Graph plots the coefficients on Bartik shock*year, as well as 95% CI bars.
              Involuntary separations are author calculations based on the CPS. Log median wages obtained from Occupational Employment Statistics.




                                                                               54
                                        Table A1: Probability of Being Missing from a Subsample


                                                                               Burning Glass:                                                           Harte Hanks:
                                                                                    Change in Pr(Missing from):
           Dep Var:                                                                                                                                           Site pre-
                                                                                 Firm pre-post
                                      Firm Sample       2007-10 match                                     Harte Hanks              Compustat                 recession
                                                                                     match
                                                                                                                                                               match
                                          (1)                    (2)                     (3)                      (4)                     (5)                    (6)
                                                                                                                                                              0.0148*
     Shock*2000
                                                                                                                                                             (0.00781)
                                                                                                                                                              0.00442
     Shock*2002
                                                                                                                                                             (0.00585)
                                                                                                                                                              0.00442
     Shock*2004
                                                                                                                                                             (0.00585)
                                                                                                                                                              0.00546
     Shock*2008
                                                                                                                                                             (0.00671)
                                         -0.0273              0.0136                 0.00921                  -0.0146                 -0.0139                  0.0110
     Shock*2010
                                        (0.0178)             (0.0146)                (0.0125)                (0.0147)                (0.0113)                (0.00927)




55
                                         -0.0299              0.0246*                 0.0199                 -0.00598               -0.000753
     Shock*2011
                                        (0.0184)             (0.0141)                (0.0122)                (0.0154)               (0.00953)
                                       -0.0656***            0.0344**                0.0289**                0.00622                 0.00165                  0.00491
     Shock*2012
                                        (0.0195)             (0.0161)                (0.0143)                (0.0153)               (0.00971)                (0.00935)
                                         -0.0155             0.00923                 0.00249                 -0.00843                -0.00174
     Shock*2013
                                        (0.0202)             (0.0108)               (0.00889)                (0.0141)               (0.00999)
                                        0.00305               0.0102                 0.00271                  -0.0112                0.00618                  0.00231
     Shock*2014
                                        (0.0269)             (0.0127)                (0.0100)                (0.0144)               (0.00973)                (0.00974)
                                         0.0269              -0.00140                -0.00764                 -0.0186                0.00226
     Shock*2015
                                        (0.0224)             (0.0129)                (0.0111)                (0.0156)                (0.0108)
     # MSA-Year Cells                     2,286                2,286                   2,286                   2,286                   2,286                     2,667
     R-Squared                            0.265                0.584                   0.689                   0.428                   0.355                     0.985
     *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
     Notes: Observations are MSA-year cells weighted by the MSA labor force in 2006; regressions also control for year effects and MSA characteristics; standard errors are
     clustered at the MSA level. We regress the change from 2007 (2006 in column 6) in the share of ads (site employment in column 6) not meeting the indicated sample criterion.
     Column 1 is estimated on the full BG sample of ads and examines the change in the probability of having a missing firm name. Columns 2-5 are estimated on our primary non-
     missing firm BG sample and examine the change in the probability of being missing from: the sample of firms that post at least 5 ads in 2007 and 2010 (column 2), the sample
     of firms that post in 2007 and a later year (column 3), the Harte Hanks firm match sample (column 4), the Compustat firm match sample (column 5). BG observations are
     restricted to 2010-2015. Column 6 examines the change in shares of employment that are in sites (akin to establishments) that can be matched to at least one year in 2002,
     2004, or 2006, in the Harte Hanks sample.
B     Additional Results
B.1     Education and Experience Intensive Margins

Appendix gure B1 summarizes results for additional education and experience outcomes

in order to understand changes in the intensive margin for these requirements.          The top

two panels of gure B1a show similar-sized increases in the probability of requiring a high

school diploma and the probability of requiring a bachelor's degree. These increases oset

each other, resulting in no overall change in the years of education required, conditional on

posting any requirement (bottom right panel). Also, there is no change in the propensity to

require a graduate degree (bottom left panel). This last nding is reassuring, since many pro-

fessional jobs, such as lawyers and professors, have long required postgraduate degrees; these

requirements would not be expected to change with improvements in technology. Figure B1b

exhibits a similar pattern for experience requirements. We observe increases in experience

requirements at the low (2 years or less) and middle (35 years) parts of the distribution;

there is little change at the high end. As with education, this pattern results in little net

change in total years of experience required, , conditional on posting any requirement.

    Are these increases in requirements plausible? For example if increases in college (high

school) requirements were found in typically very low- (high-) skilled jobs, we might worry

about the quality of the data. In gure B2 we explore heterogeneity in upskilling eects as

a function of the average years of schooling of workers in the occupation, as measured in

the ACS in 200506, before the Great Recession. We estimate separate within-occupation

upskilling regressions (equation (1)), by ventile of this occupational education variable, for

the change in the propensity to specify a high school diploma (left) or bachelor's degree (right)

requirement. We summarize these regression results by plotting the estimated coecients

on the Bartik shock for 2010 (blue, solid lines) and 2015 (maroon, dashed lines), smoothing

the 20 estimates in each series with local linear regression.

    Focusing rst on the left panel, we nd that increased demand for a high school credential

is largest for occupations that tend to employ workers with less education before the recession.

In fact, the strongest increases occur at the lowest ventiles, representing occupations whose

workers have an average of about 11 years of schooling. Eects monotonically decline with

the average education of occupations, and are essentially zero for occupations that typically

employ college graduates. This pattern is highly consistent with the increased propensity to

require a high school credential in job postings reecting upskilling. It does not appear to

be the case, for instance, that rms add the requirement to signal to workers that they do

not need even more education.

    The right panel shows that the increased propensity to require a bachelor's degree is

concentrated in occupations that tend to employ workers with at least some some college,

peaking for occupations that typically require a bachelor's degree (16 years). Requirement




                                               56
increases are non-existent for occupations that tend to employ high school graduates (12

years) or those with less education, and increases are smaller for occupations that tend to

employ workers with post-graduate degrees (more than 16 years). This pattern of targeted

increases in line with expectations is also reassuring that our estimates reect upskilling.

What's more, the persistence in upskilling in our main estimates shows up where it is ex-

pected, as the blue and maroon lines essentially overlap; it is not the case that increased

requirements are temporarily concentrated in overly high (or low) parts of the distribution.



B.2     Robustness Checks

Tables B1-B4 provide a range of robustness checks to the main within-occupation upskilling

regression results from table 2. For each table, column 1 replicates the main result, and the

remaining columns provide results from dierent specications, discussed below.



Local labor market controls
In column 2, we control for additional MSA-level labor market variables. As noted in the text,

controls proxying for the availability of labor across skill groups help to clarify the importance

of opportunistic upskilling, as well as rm reactions to the availability of skilled labor, more

broadly. We control for a wide range of labor market characteristics over our sample period,

and changes in these characteristics from the previous decade.       Specically, drawing from

the ACS, we include unemployment rates and employment-to-population ratios at the MSA

level for ve education groups (high school dropouts, high school graduates, those with some

college, those with a BA, and those with more than a BA). To reduce measurement error

from occasionally small samples, these rates and ratios are calculated as the average over

200507. Additionally, we include the change in the rates and ratios between 200507 and

the current year-pair (201011, 201213, 201415), as well as the change between 2000 (using

Census data) and 200507.

   The results in column 2 include two additional sets of controls.         The rst are MSA-

level quit rates and their changes, by education group, obtained from the CPS. Because

the sample size of the CPS is much smaller than that of the ACS, we aggregate across

broader education groups and pool more sample years. We distinguish between those with

no more than a high school diploma and those with some college or more. Quit rates are

averaged for each education group over 200507, and the changes are between 200507 and

the current year-triple (201012, 201315), as well as between 200002 to 200507.           The

second set of controls complements the 200506 MSA characteristics already included in

the main specication with the changes in these characteristics between 2000 and 200506:

the share of the population that is female, black, Hispanic, Asian, married, migrated in the

last year, is a high school drop out, has exactly a high school diploma, has some college,

has exactly a bachelor's degree, is enrolled in school, is less than age 18, is age 1929, is



                                               57
age 3039, is age 4049, is age 5064, the overall employment-to-population ratio, and the

average weekly wage of full-time workers. These changes are calculated using the ACS and

2000 Census, and we include a dummy to capture cases in which MSAs are not identiable

in the ACS or CPS.

   As shown in column 2, the inclusion of all of these local labor market controls does not

have a substantive impact on the estimates, which are either reduced by between one-tenth

and one-fth (education and experience) or are essentially changed or even slightly larger

(cognitive and computer). We have also explored including only subsets of these additional

controls (these estimates are not shown in the tables). When we include just the education-

specic unemployment rates, employment-population ratios, and their changes, the estimates

are generally reduced by between one-tenth and one-fth, and sometimes slightly more in

the earlier years of the sample. However, they remain signicant in both magnitude and a

statistical sense. When we include only education-specic quit rates and their changes, the

estimates increase modestly from baseline. A possible explanation for this pattern is that

we nd that quit rates of less-educated workers rebound more quickly than that of more-

educated workers. Replacement hiring would then shift toward lower skilled workers, absent

these controls. Finally, when we include only changes in MSA characteristics (in addition

to the levels included in baseline), the estimates fall by about one-fth for education and

experience and about one-tenth for cognitive; they do not change for computer. In no case,

therefore, does the general picture of our baseline estimates change.



Occupation controls
As noted in the text, results are robust to the inclusion of occupation xed eects and

occupation-specic time trends to allow for the possibility that some occupations may be

both upskilling at a faster rate and disproportionately located in harder-hit MSAs. These

controls also help adjust for possible changes in the sample due to shifting occupational mix

in the BG data. Column 3 shows that we obtain very similar results even when including

occupation-specic controls.



Weights
Our baseline within-occupation upskilling regressions in table 2 weight cells by the product

of the occupation's ad share in the MSA-year and the size of the MSA labor force in 2006.

This procedure can reduce measurement error and attenuation bias by putting more weight

on cells that have more ads while mitigating against the possible endogeneity of using the

number of ads themselves as weights. However, if there are heterogeneous impacts of the

shock on upskilling tied to the size of the MSA or occupation share, we may be identifying a

local average treatment eect that may not hold across all cells. Column 4 of the robustness

tables thus provides estimates when we instead allow equal weight across occupation-MSA-




                                             58
years, limiting the sample to the        99%   of ads that are in cells with at least 15 ads.             We

obtain qualitatively similar results that are generally still statistically signicant, although,

consistent with the possibility of attenuation bias, reduced in magnitude in some cases. This

pattern also holds for the overall MSA-year level regressions, as in gure 2, and when we

instead weight to match the occupation-MSA employment stock distribution in the OES or

the national occupation ow (new employment) distribution in the CPS (not shown).



Ads with missing rm name
Our baseline results focus on the 60% of ads that contain rm name, as this sample allows

us to distinguish among rm-level mechanisms for upskilling.                 One might be concerned,

though, that ads with rm names have dierentially changing skill requirements relative to

ads without rm names, perhaps due to rm size, prestige, or use of a third-party recruiting

rm. Column 5 shows the robustness of our results to using the full sample of ads, including

those with missing rm names.          Results on the expanded sample are quite similar for all
                        59
dependent variables.



Alternative Bartik employment shocks
Our preferred measure of the local labor demand shock, used for our baseline estimates, is

the change in projected annual employment growth between 2006 and 2009 (equation (2)).

Columns 68 of the tables provide results using three variants of the Bartik employment

shock. Rather than using xed peak and trough years for all MSAs, Column 6 instead allows

for MSA-specic peak and trough dates, using the calendar month with the largest 12-month

employment growth between 2005 and 2007 as the peak date, and the calendar month with

the smallest 12-month employment growth from 2008 onwards as the trough date. Column

7 uses the change in projected employment levels between 2006 and 2009, rather than the
                                               60
change in projected employment growth.              Column 8 uses the change between the average

projected one-month employment growth in 2006 and the average in 2009, rather than the

change in annual employment growth between the two years. The results are not especially

sensitive to using MSA-specic cycle timing (column 6) or short-run projected changes in

employment growth (column 8). Using projected changes in employment levels as the shock

measure (column 7) reduces the magnitude of the point estimates by about one-half, but

they are still statistically signicant and of meaningful magnitude.

  59 We also nd no systematic relationship between the change in the share of ads with a missing rm and
our key explanatory variables. See column 1 of appendix table A1.
  60 We believe the latter approach better captures the suddenness of the shift in conditions between 2006
and 2009 as they pertain to ow employment, but the literature has sometimes used the levels approach
(Bartik 1991). In practice, they are highly correlated, with an employment-weighted correlation of   r = 0.86.




                                                    59
Industry Controls
In order to explore heterogeneity within and across industries, we disaggregate our data by

industry (2-digit NAICS). Columns labeled 1 in table B5 estimate changes in skill require-
                                                                                                      61
ments within industry-occupation cells as a function of the MSA employment shock.                          We

nd that these estimates are very similar to the results presented in gure 2 and table 2.

Firms in harder-hit MSAs dierentially increase skill requirements in job postings, and this

eect holds true within industry-occupation cells.

    The second column of table B5 adds industry xed eects and industry-specic linear

time trends, and our estimates are essentially unchanged.                These controls are particularly

important given our identication: the interaction of national changes in employment growth

by three-digit NAICS industry and MSA-level industry composition. Suppose that the in-

dustries driving negative employment shocks are precisely those that experience contem-

poraneous technology shocksand concomitant temporary employment declines during an

adjustment period. In this case our results would not indicate that rms concentrated their

adoption of existing technologies during recessions but rather that the occurrence of the

innovations themselves was concentrated during the recession.                   The fact that our results

obtain even within sector alleviates this concern. Allowing for what essentially amounts to

a quadratic secular change in skill requirements for each sector (given our rst dierences

specication), we still nd quantitatively similar evidence of upskilling.

    We also investigate whether upskilling is more pronounced in sectors producing locally-

consumed goods and services. Unlike the tradable sector, the product demand for which is

largely determined by markets farther away or diused across many areas, rms producing

locally-consumed goods and services are highly sensitive to local demand shocks, and thus

should be more greatly aected by the variation we identify with the Bartik employment

shock.

    To classify sectors, we adopt Jensen and Kleitzer's (2005) measure of the degree to which

production is oshorable, which is based on geographic concentration of employment in

the industry.         Intuitively, if employment for a sector can be geographically concentrated

(e.g., software developers in Silicon Valley), then output for that sector is more likely traded

and need not be consumed locally. From Jensen and Kleitzer (2005), we obtain the share of

employment in each two-digit NAICS sector that can be categorized as least [geographically]

concentrated, which we denote            locals .62
    We then estimate versions of equation (1) at the occupation-sector-MSA-year level that

  61 As before, we weight each cell by the product of the size of the MSA's labor force in 2006 and the cell's
ad share in each MSA-year, where the ad shares here are over industry-occupation groups. We require a
match at the MSA-industry-occupation level between 2007 and at least one later year; this restrictions drops
6% of ads.
  62 Jensen and Kleitzer (2005) measure geographic dispersion across MSAs of employment in detailed in-
dustry categories, and designate the category least concentrated to those industries with a Gini coecient
less than   0.1.   We have also used the measure from Blinder and Krueger (2013), based primarily on workers'
survey responses on location requirements to do their jobs, to similar eect.



                                                       60
include sector xed eects and allow for triple-interactions between the Bartik shock, year

dummies, and            locals .
      Figure B3 plots the estimates tted at the 10th and 90th percentiles of                     locals ;   these

respectively capture the net upskilling eect for traded (dashed maroon line) and non-traded

(solid blue line) sectors.             With the exception of education, we nd that increases in skill

requirements are larger in the non-traded sectors, those in which local demand shocks should

be the most salient for production.



B.3       Firm-Occupation Decomposition

We here explore the extent to which upskilling is driven by shifts in postings from old to

new rms and changes within existing rms.                      By employing a formal decomposition, we

investigate these margins simultaneously with shifts in ads across rms and those across
                   63
occupations.

      Dene   Ct    as the set of rm-MSAs that post ads in both year            t and in 2007.   We hereafter

refer to these as continuing rms, and the set of rm-MSAs that have posts only in 2007 or

only in   t as non-continuing rms.            In our sample, 54% of weighted observations are to contin-
              64
uing rms.          We hope to understand the extent to which substitution across non-continuing

rms versus changes within continuing rms aects overall changes in skill requirements.

      In equation (5), we express the average skill requirement in MSA        m and year t as a
                                                                                         C
               C                                                                     65 Nf mt
function of: pmt , the share of ads in an MSA-year posted in continuing rms;             C , the
                                                                                        Nmt
                                                     C
                                                   Nof mt
distribution of ads across continuing rms in mt ;        , the distribution of ads across occu-
                                                    NfCmt
                                          C
pations for a given continuing rm; skillof mt , the average skill requirement for continuing
                                                             NC
                                                           Nomt
rm f , posting in occupation o, MSA m, and year t;          N C , the distribution of ads across
                                                           Nmt
                                           66       ¯   N C
occupations among non-continuing rms;        andskill  omt , the average skill requirement for
occupation     o,       among all non-continuing rms in         mt   (that is, the average skill requirement

in the occupation-MSA-year among rm-MSAs that posted either only in 2007 or only in

period t ).




                                     X X NfCmt Nof
                                                 C
                                                    mt
                                                                                   X N NC
                                                                                       omt ¯ N C
(5)       skillmt = pC
                     mt                      C    C
                                                       ∗ skill C
                                                               of mt + (1 − p C
                                                                              mt )     NC
                                                                                          skillomt .
                                   f m∈C o
                                           N mt N f mt                             o
                                                                                     N mt
                                          t

  63 Haltiwanger, Hyatt, Kahn and McEntarfer (2017) show that workers matching to jobs in downturns are
more likely to match to low-paying rms than high-paying rms.
  64 Here we dene rm as the group of ads with the same employer name in the same MSA, which allows
us to take advantage of the cross-sectional variation in how MSAs bore the Great Recession. The set           Ct   is
dened separately for each year from 20102015, though naturally there is substantial overlap in the set of
continuing rms across years.
                                      C
  65 By denition, pC ≡      Nmt
                    mt      C +N N C .
                           Nmt   mt
  66 Since, by denition, non-continuing rms cannot be matched across time periods, we aggregate over all
non-continuing rms.




                                                           61
       We then decompose the eect of the Bartik employment shock on the overall change

in skill requirements at the MSA-year level (skillmt     − skillm07 ), into eects attributable to
              C                                                                           NfCmt
changes in: pmt , the share of ads in an MSA-year posted in continuing rms;                 C , the
                                                                                          Nmt
                                                         C
                                                       Nof mt
distribution of ads across continuing rms in mt ;            , the distribution of ads across oc-
                                                       NfCmt
                                           C
cupations for a given continuing rm; skillof mt , the average skill requirement for continuing
                                                               NC
                                                             Nomt
rm f , posting in occupation o, MSA m, and year t;            N C , the distribution of ads across
                                                             Nmt
occupations among non-continuing rms; andskill ¯    N C
                                                     omt , the average skill requirement for occu-
pation    o,   among all non-continuing rms in                 mt    (that is, the average skill requirement in the

occupation-MSA-year among rm-MSAs that posted either only in 2007 or only in period

t ).

       In practice, this equation is not exact for two reasons.                           First, continuing rms do not
                                                                                                        C
necessarily post to the same set of occupations in each period (so                                 skillof mt   would not be de-

ned for some occupation-rm-MSA-year combinations but might be dened in, say, 2007).

Second, the set of non-continuing rms does not post to the same set of occupations (so like-

wise     ¯ NC ,
        skill       which is the average skill requirement among all non-continuing rms posting
             omt
in omt, would not be dened for some occupation-MSA-year combinations). To get around

these issues, we simply aggregate up from the occupation-rm-MSA-year level to either the

occupation-MSA-year level or the MSA-year level, the point where we get a match.

       The exact denition is shown in equation (6).



                                                                                              1
                                                                                           CO N CO       1
                                                                                 1        Nof
                                             pC     c                       CO
                                                           P      P                           mt f mt
                                              mt ∗ π1                  skillof mt ∗       NfCO
                                                                                               1    CO
                                                                                                   Nmt
                                                                                                         1
                                                          f m∈Ct o∈CO1                       mt
                                                                       CO 2
                                   + pC    c
                                                  P       ¯ CO2 ∗ Nomt                            ¯ CO3 )
                                                                              + (1 − π1c − π2c )skill
(6)        skillmt =                  mt (π2             skillomt    N CO
                                                                          1                           mt
                                                 o∈CO2                  mt
                                                                               N CO   1
                                                               ¯ N CO1 ∗      Nomt                       ¯ N CO2 )
                               + (1 − pC     nc
                                                                                          + (1 − π1nc )skill
                                                      P
                                       mt )(π1               skill omt         N CO 1
                                                                              Nmt                            mt
                                                   o∈N CO1


       In the top two lines, we divide the set of ads to continuing rms into three groups:

occupations that are posted in a given rm-MSA in both t and in 2007 (the set                                             CO1 ),
occupations that are not posted in a given rm-MSA in both periods but are posted among
                                         2
other continuing rms in both periods (CO ), and occupations that are posted in one period
                                                  3
by continuing rms but not in the other period (CO ).                                     The ad shares for these three
         c
groups (π1 ,     π2c ,   and   1 − π1c − π2c ,   respectively) sum to one within the set of ads to continuing
               67
rms (Ct ).         Averaging across 20102015 in our data, 54% of weighted observations are to
                                                                   1
continuing rm-MSAs, of which 71% are to continuing occupations (CO ), 28% are to non-
                                                                                 2
continuing occupations that can still be matched to any other continuing rms (CO ) and
                                                                              3
only 0.8% are to occupations that cannot be matched to any continuing rms (CO ).
                                                             1
       The rst component, for continuing rm-occupations (CO ) is straightforward and is

  67 These weights vary by MSA-year, but subscripts are suppressed for clarity.




                                                                 62
                                                                                CO1
dened by the within                 of m       average skill requirement (skillof mt ), the share of ads in this
                                                          CO    1
                                                         Nof
occupation,          o,   for the given         fm   (
                                                             mt
                                                                1   ), and the share of all ads in                        CO1   that are by rm     f,
                                                         NfCO
                                                            mt
        1
    NfCO
       mt
( CO 1
       ). The second components yields the average skill requirement among occupations by
 Nmt
continuing rms that do not post for the same occupation in both periods. The idea is that

we would like to compare the rm-occupation-specic requirement across years. However, in

some cases continuing rms post in a new occupation in t, so the comparison is not available.

Instead, we simply x occupations and aggregate over rms. We can then ask whether skill

requirements are more strenuous for continuing rms that enter into the occupation, relative
                                                           68        ¯ CO2
to those that exited the occupation.                                skillomt      is the average skill requirement in occupation

o   among rm-MSAs that posted some ads in both periods, but posted in occupation                                                             o   only
                                           CO   2
                                          Nomt
in the given period, and                   CO   1   is the ad share for the given occupation among all ads in the
                                          Nmt
       2
set (CO ). Finally, the third component,                                   ¯ CO3 ,
                                                                         skill                is the average skill requirement in the
                                                                               mt
MSA-year for ads posted by continuing rms in occupations that belong to neither                                                            CO1   nor

CO2         (that is, an occupation where continuing rms either post only in 2007 or only in                                                     t).
      In the third line of equation (6), we divide the set of ads to non-continuing rms into two

groups: occupations that are posted in the MSA in both                                                t   and in 2007 (the set          N CO1 )   and
                                          2                    nc
those that are not (N CO                      ), with weights π1 and                   1 − π1nc , respectively. Skill requirements for
the former are a function of the within-occupation average skill requirement among all ads

posted by non-continuing rms in                                                                  ¯ N CO1 ) and the
                                                         mt in occupations that can be matched (skill omt
                                                                                   N CO   1
                                                                                  Nomt
share of ads that are posted to occupation                               o,   (    N CO 1
                                                                                              ). The latter component is the average
                                                                                  Nmt
skill requirement among ads posted to non-continuing rms in                                                 mt in occupations that cannot
              ¯
be matched (skill
                             N CO2
                                     ).       Of the 46% of weighted observations that are to non-continuing
                  mt
rms in our data, 97.5% of observations belong to the former (matched) group.

      To decompose the change in skill requirements for a given MSA,                                                      m, from 2007 to a given
year    t (skillmt − skillm07 )               into these components we generate counterfactual dierences that

allow one component to change from its level in 2007 to its level in                                                         t,   holding all other
                                                                                   69
components xed at the level in either period.                                           We can regress this counterfactual skill

change on the Bartik employment shock and the other controls in equation (1) to understand

how much of the total responsiveness is attributed to a response in the within rm-MSA skill

requirement.

    68 We could instead x rms and aggregate over occupations.                                       This allows us to ask whether the new
occupations the rm enters into have dierent skill requirements than the occupations the rm left. However
this yields far fewer matches, since it requires the rm-MSA to have at least one occupation it posted in 2007
but not      t   and at least one occupation it posted in t but not 2007.                             Many rm-MSAs either cease posting in
some occupations after 2007 or begin posting to new occupations in                                        t, but not both.        Instead, aggregating
over rms and xing occupations requires that any continuing rm-MSA ceases posting in the occupation
after 2007 and any continuing rm-MSA begins posting in the occupation in                                            t.
                                                                                               CO 1   CO    1
    69 For example,       pC    c
                                    P       CO
                                               P         CO         1              1          Nof mt Nf mt
                           mt (π1     (skillof mt − skillof m07 ) ∗ N CO1 N CO1 is the change in skill requirements
                        f m∈Ct o∈CO 1                                f mt  mt

between 2007 and t, attributed to just changes in the within occupation-rm-MSA skill requirements among
continuing rms, holding constant all other components at their levels in                                       t.


                                                                          63
    A decomposition begins with         skillm07   and generates a counterfactual skill change distri-

bution that allows only one of the components to vary. That component is then xed at its

value at time    t and a second counterfactual skill change distribution is generated by allowing
a second component to vary, keeping all components but the rst two xed at their 2007

level. This process continues until all components are at their time         t   values. We can regress

each counterfactual change on the same variables in equation (1), and the coecients on

shock ∗ I t   will sum to the coecient on the full change reported earlier.

    Naturally the order of the decomposition aects the relative importance of each compo-

nent. For     p components in the decomposition, we have p! possible orders.        To reduce the state

space, we combine many of the variables in equation (6) into a smaller set of components

since they turn out to be empirically irrelevant.

    We reduce the space to six components, resulting in 720 possible permutations.                   We

estimate each decomposition and summarize results in appendix table B6. Here we report

the average fraction attributable to a given component, across all decompositions, as well as

the standard deviation. The components are: (1) the share of ads among continuing rms,

pC
 mt ;   (2) the distribution of ads across continuing rms that post in the same occupation in
                   CO 1
                  Nof mt
both periods,         1    ; (3) the within-rm-occupation skill requirement for continuing rms,
                  NfCO
                     mt
                                                                                       1
                                                                               CO
                                                                              Nof       CO 2    N CO 1
       CO1                                                                        mt Nomt     Nomt
skillof   mt ; (4) the distribution of ads across occupations, which combines N CO1 , N CO2 , N N CO1 ,
                                                                               f mt    mt      mt
π1c , π2c , and π1nc ; (5) the skill requirement among continuing rms posting to occupations
they had not previously posted in, which combines
                                                                  CO2
                                                             skillomt          ¯CO3
                                                                       and skillmt ; and (6)    the skill

requirement among non-continuing rms, which                          ¯ N CO1 and skill
                                                          combines skill            ¯ N CO2 .
                                                                         omt           mt
    To summarize results from the table, we report the fraction of the overall impact of shock

in the given year attributed to each component in gure B4. To make the graph easier to

read, we combine some components together, focusing on the (empirically) most important.

    The lightest bar shows the fraction of the overall upskilling eect in each year attributable
                                                                                       C
to changes in the distribution of rms, combining the share of ads to continuing rms pmt
                                                      C
                                                    Nf mt
with the rm distribution among continuing rms       C .  This combines columns 1 and
                                                     Nmt
2 of table B6.  The next lightest bar shows the fraction attributable to changes in the
                                                                                   C
                                                                                 Nof mt
occupation distribution, combining the occupation distribution among continuing ( C )
                                                                                  Nf mt
                             NC
                            Nomt
and non-continuing (         N C ) rms.   Across all dependent variables, we nd that changes in
                            Nmt
these rm and occupation distributions account for very little of the upskilling eects.

    Instead, the vast majority of the upskilling eect is split across the two darker bars.

The darkest bar shows the fraction attributable to changes in skill requirements of non-
                                         ¯ N C ). It compares, for each occupation, the skill
continuing rms for a given occupation (skillomt
requirements for rms that posted only in the later period (20102015) to the requirements

for rms that stopped posting after 2007. The adjacent, next-darkest bars show the fraction

attributable to the change in skill requirements between 2007 and t among continuing rm-




                                                     64
                                                             70
MSAs. This combines columns 3 and 5 of table B6.                  Across dependent variables and years,

each of these two components contributes to roughly half of the upskilling eect.




  70 That is, this component includes both the change in skill requirements within rm-occupation-MSAs
for rms that posted in a given   occupation   in both periods, and changes in skill requirements driven by
continuing rm-MSAs that post for dierent occupations.      Empirically, we nd that both are important;
the former is more important for education and experience requirements, while the two are roughly equally
important for cognitive and computer requirements.



                                                     65
Figure B1: Impact of MSA-Specic Employment Shock on Education Requirements

                                                                     (a) Education Requirements


                                                           High School Requirement                                    College Requirement
                             .01 .02 .03 .04




                                                                                                   .04
                                                                                                   .02
                                                                                                   0
                             0
            Coefficient




                                                    2007      2009   2011   2013       2015                   2007     2009       2011          2013          2015


                                                            > College Requirement                              Years Schooling, Cond'l on Any
                             -.01-.005 0 .005 .01




                                                                                                   .1
                                                                                                   .05
                                                                                                   0
                                                                                                   -.1 -.05




                                                    2007      2009   2011   2013       2015                   2007     2009       2011          2013          2015

                                                                                           Year
                          Dependent variables are the occupation-MSA change in the share of ads requiring exactly a high school diploma (top left), college degree
                          (top right), more than a college degree (bottom left), or the average years required conditional on any (bottom right). We regress the
                          occupation-MSA change in BG skill requirements from 2007 on an exhaustive set of MSA employment shock-by-year interactions,
                          controlling for year fixed effects and MSA characteristics (see equation 1). Graph plots the coefficients on Bartik shock*year and 95% CIs.




                                                                     (b) Experience Requirements


                                                           Up to 2 Years Experience                                  3 to 5 Years Experience
                                                                                                   .03
                             .01 .02 .03 .04




                                                                                                   .02
                                                                                                   .01
                                                                                                   0
                             0
            Coefficient




                                                    2007      2009   2011   2013       2015                   2007     2009       2011          2013          2015


                                                            > 5 Years Experience                               Years Experience, Cond'l on Any
                             .005 .01 .015




                                                                                                   .1
                                                                                                   0
                                                                                                   -.1
                                                                                                   -.2
                             -.005 0




                                                                                                   -.3




                                                    2007      2009   2011   2013       2015                   2007     2009       2011          2013          2015

                                                                                           Year
                          See sub-figure (a). Dependent variables are the occupation-MSA change in the share of ads requiring up to 2 years experience (top left),
                          3 to 5 years (top right), more than 5 years (bottom left), or the average years required conditional on any (bottom right).




                                                                                         66
                                     Figure B2: Change in Requirement by Occupation Education



                                            High School Requirement                                                 College Requirement

                 .06




                                                                                        .06
                 .04




                                                                                        .04
Coefficient
                 .02




                                                                                        .02
                 0




                                                                                        0
                                     10        12       14      16          18                              10       12      14      16          18

                                                              Average Education in Quantile
              Blue solid = 2007-2010 change, Maroon dash = 2007-2015.
              We estimate separate within-occupation upskilling regressions for each ventile of the average years of schooling in the occupation (ACS
              2005-06 average). Dependent variables are the change in the probability of specifying a high school diploma (left) or a college degree
              (right). We plot the coefficients on the Bartik*2010 and Bartik*2015 year interactions for each ventile and smooth with local linear regression.
              Regressions also control for year fixed effects and MSA characteristics.




                                                    Figure B3: Upskilling by Sector Tradability



                                             Education Requirement                                                 Experience Requirement
                 0 .02 .04 .06 .08




                                                                                        0 .02 .04 .06 .08
Coefficient




                                     2006    2008     2010   2012    2014        2016                       2006    2008   2010   2012    2014        2016


                                          Cognitive Skill Requirement                                            Computer Skill Requirement
                                                                                        .03
                 .01 .02 .03




                                                                                        .02
                                                                                        .01
                 0




                                                                                        0




                                     2006    2008     2010   2012    2014        2016                       2006    2008   2010   2012    2014        2016

                                                                                   Year
              Blue line = local products, Maroon dashed line = traded products
              We regress the industry-MSA change in BG skill requirements from 2007 on an exhaustive set of MSA employment shock-by-year
              interactions, and triple interactions between the shock, year, and offshorability. We also control for year fixed effects and MSA
              characteristics. Graph plots the coefficients on the triple interactions. The offshorability measure is the 90-10 differential
              in the Jensen-Kletzer geographic employment concentration index.




                                                                                  67
Figure B4: Decomposing Upskilling Into Within and Across Firm Components



                                                        Education Requirement                                                    Experience Requirement
  Share Attributed to Each Component




                                                                                                                    1
                                          1
                                          .5




                                                                                                                    .5
                                          0




                                                                                                                    0




                                                  2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015                                             2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015


                                                    Cognitive Skill Requirement                                              Computer Skill Requirement
                                                                                                                    1.5
                                          1
                                          .8




                                                                                                                    1
                                          .6




                                                                                                                    .5
                                          .4




                                                                                                                    0
                                          .2




                                                                                                                    -.5
                                          0




                                                  2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015                                             2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015

                                                                                                           Year
                                       Darkest = old-new firms within occ, dark = within continuing firms, light = occ dist, lightest = firm dist

                                       We decompose the impact of the MSA-specific Bartik employment shock on the change in skill requirements from 2007 in each year.
                                       We then plot the share attributed to each component, averaged across all possible decomposition orders.




                                                                                                           68
                                 Table B1: Robustness Checks: Education Requirement



Dependent Variable:                                                                      Education Requirement

                                         (1)               (2)               (3)               (4)               (5)                (6)               (7)               (8)

                                    0.0526***         0.0528***         0.0516***         0.0333***         0.0429***          0.0521***         0.0317***         0.0465***
Shock*2010
                                    (0.0135)          (0.0148)          (0.0128)          (0.0126)          (0.0126)           (0.0132)          (0.0118)          (0.0130)

                                    0.0475***         0.0477***         0.0462***          0.0316**         0.0359***          0.0483***         0.0278**          0.0423***
Shock*2011
                                    (0.0131)          (0.0144)          (0.0126)           (0.0122)         (0.0119)           (0.0126)          (0.0112)          (0.0124)

                                     0.0233*            0.0251*           0.0226*           0.0177            0.0212*          0.0241**          0.00731           0.0243**
Shock*2012
                                    (0.0128)           (0.0145)          (0.0124)          (0.0114)          (0.0121)          (0.0120)          (0.0115)          (0.0121)

                                    0.0400***         0.0423***         0.0406***         0.0274***         0.0343***          0.0403***          0.0215*          0.0359***
Shock*2013
                                    (0.0120)          (0.0131)          (0.0114)          (0.0101)          (0.0120)           (0.0116)          (0.0110)          (0.0116)

                                    0.0429***         0.0424***         0.0440***          0.0280**          0.0320**          0.0427***          0.0218*          0.0374***
Shock*2014
                                    (0.0143)          (0.0140)          (0.0136)           (0.0112)          (0.0144)          (0.0136)          (0.0131)          (0.0141)

                                    0.0488***         0.0483***         0.0532***          0.0200**          0.0327**          0.0483***         0.0291**          0.0413***
Shock*2015
                                    (0.0143)          (0.0149)          (0.0141)           (0.0101)          (0.0142)          (0.0140)          (0.0122)          (0.0135)

# Occ-MSA-Year Cells                 193,086           193,086           193,086           139,172           222,058            193,086           193,086           193,086

R-Squared                              0.044             0.072             0.373             0.010             0.072             0.045              0.042             0.044

Labor Market Controls                                       X

Occ FE and time trends                                                        X

Unweighted                                                                                      X

Includes Missing Firms                                                                                            X

Bartik w MSA-specific Peaks/Troughs                                                                                                  X

Bartik in levels                                                                                                                                       X

1 month employment change Bartik                                                                                                                                         X
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
Notes: Column 1 replicates estimates reported in table 2 of the text. The dependent variable is the occupation-MSA change in the indicated BG skill variable from 2007. All
regressions control for year fixed effects and MSA characteristics from the ACS. Column 2 includes the change in the MSA characteristics from 2000 to 2005/6, as well as MSA-level
education-specific employment, unemployment, and quit rates in 2005-07, the change in these variables from 2005-07 to the current year, and the change in these variables from
2000-02 to 2005-07. Column 3 includes occupation fixed effects and occupation-specific linear time trends. Column 4 presents unweighted regressions (each occupation-MSA cell
gets the same weight) and restricts to cells with at least 15 ads. Column 5 includes all ads, not restricting to those with non-missing firms. Column 6 defines the MSA employment
shock using MSA-specific peak and trough years, rather than imposing 2006 and 2009, respectively, for all MSAs. Column 7 defines the MSA employment shock as the projected
change in log employment from 2006 to 2009, rather than the projected change in employment growth). Column 8 defines the employment shock as the one-month change in
employment growth, rather than year-over-year change. All shock variables are divided by the 90-10 differential in the variable across all MSAs.




                                                                                      69
                                  Table B2: Robustness Checks: Experience Requirement


Dependent Variable:                                                         Experience Requirement

                                             (1)       (2)         (3)             (4)         (5)         (6)         (7)         (8)

                                       0.0490***    0.0453***   0.0486***       0.0295***   0.0442***   0.0495***   0.0263**    0.0435***
Shock*2010
                                       (0.0134)     (0.0138)    (0.0130)        (0.0102)    (0.0138)    (0.0130)    (0.0115)    (0.0131)

                                       0.0443***    0.0406***   0.0435***       0.0245**    0.0340***   0.0459***   0.0237**    0.0406***
Shock*2011
                                       (0.0134)     (0.0142)    (0.0133)        (0.0106)    (0.0129)    (0.0129)    (0.0114)    (0.0129)

                                         0.0253*     0.0257*     0.0244*         0.0139      0.0199     0.0266**    0.00502     0.0275**
Shock*2012
                                        (0.0136)    (0.0148)    (0.0134)        (0.0105)    (0.0136)    (0.0129)    (0.0119)    (0.0129)

                                       0.0363***    0.0370***   0.0356***     0.0172*       0.0312**    0.0366***    0.0174     0.0345***
Shock*2013
                                       (0.0122)     (0.0131)    (0.0121)     (0.00881)      (0.0124)    (0.0118)    (0.0108)    (0.0119)

                                       0.0436***    0.0418***   0.0434***     0.0206**      0.0303**    0.0431***    0.0223*    0.0404***
Shock*2014
                                       (0.0140)     (0.0137)    (0.0137)     (0.00963)      (0.0139)    (0.0133)    (0.0126)    (0.0140)

                                       0.0468***    0.0450***   0.0480***     0.0150*       0.0328**    0.0463***   0.0326***   0.0431***
Shock*2015
                                       (0.0142)     (0.0152)    (0.0139)     (0.00866)      (0.0147)    (0.0137)    (0.0124)    (0.0140)

# Cells                                 193,086     193,086     193,086         139,172     222,058     193,086     193,086     193,086

R-Squared                                   0.069    0.102       0.354           0.011       0.102       0.069       0.066       0.068

Labor Market Controls                                  X

Occ FE and time trends                                             X

Unweighted                                                                         X

Includes Missing Firms                                                                         X

Bartik w MSA-specific Peaks/Troughs                                                                        X

Bartik in levels                                                                                                       X

1 month employment change Bartik                                                                                                   X
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
Notes: See table 2 and appendix table B1.




                                                                           70
                                 Table B3: Robustness Checks: Cognitive Skill Requirement


Dependent Variable:                                                       Cognitive Skill Requirement

                                             (1)       (2)         (3)            (4)         (5)         (6)         (7)         (8)

                                       0.0275***    0.0242***   0.0270***       0.0120*     0.0173**   0.0262***    0.0161**   0.0236***
Shock*2010
                                       (0.00726)    (0.00785)   (0.00674)      (0.00655)   (0.00711)   (0.00702)   (0.00641)   (0.00687)

                                       0.0281***    0.0248***   0.0272***      0.0166***   0.0200***   0.0272***    0.0151**   0.0258***
Shock*2011
                                       (0.00731)    (0.00754)   (0.00682)      (0.00600)   (0.00652)   (0.00707)   (0.00635)   (0.00731)

                                       0.0186***     0.0161**   0.0182***       0.0117**    0.0141**   0.0175***     0.0102    0.0177***
Shock*2012
                                       (0.00693)    (0.00764)   (0.00648)      (0.00574)   (0.00596)   (0.00662)   (0.00644)   (0.00660)

                                       0.0253***    0.0229***   0.0248***      0.0163***   0.0165***   0.0242***    0.0136**   0.0221***
Shock*2013
                                       (0.00642)    (0.00687)   (0.00625)      (0.00540)   (0.00564)   (0.00625)   (0.00599)   (0.00622)

                                       0.0265***    0.0242***   0.0268***      0.0154***   0.0174***   0.0251***    0.0154**   0.0245***
Shock*2014
                                       (0.00657)    (0.00678)   (0.00635)      (0.00520)   (0.00630)   (0.00622)   (0.00601)   (0.00655)

                                       0.0300***    0.0278***   0.0320***      0.0171***   0.0243***   0.0284***    0.0156**   0.0260***
Shock*2015
                                       (0.00730)    (0.00766)   (0.00711)      (0.00518)   (0.00777)   (0.00713)   (0.00642)   (0.00733)

# Cells                                 178,176     178,176     178,176        135,878     207,552      178,176    178,176     178,176

R-Squared                                   0.040     0.050       0.287          0.006       0.075       0.040       0.039       0.040

Labor Market Controls                                  X

Occ FE and time trends                                             X

Unweighted                                                                        X

Includes Missing Firms                                                                        X

Bartik w MSA-specific Peaks/Troughs                                                                       X

Bartik in levels                                                                                                      X

1 month employment change Bartik                                                                                                  X
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
Notes: See table 2 and appendix table B1.




                                                                          71
                                 Table B4: Robustness Checks: Computer Skill Requirement


Dependent Variable:                                                       Computer Skill Requirement

                                             (1)       (2)         (3)           (4)        (5)          (6)        (7)         (8)

                                        0.0203**    0.0217***   0.0212***   0.0183***     0.0181**    0.0206**    0.00715     0.0163*
Shock*2010
                                       (0.00859)    (0.00777)   (0.00742)   (0.00605)    (0.00784)   (0.00816)   (0.00753)   (0.00871)

                                       0.0243***    0.0257***   0.0241***   0.0206***    0.0244***   0.0248***    0.0131**   0.0214***
Shock*2011
                                       (0.00716)    (0.00661)   (0.00647)   (0.00617)    (0.00694)   (0.00687)   (0.00641)   (0.00722)

                                        0.0207**    0.0235***   0.0205***   0.0199***    0.0224***   0.0209***     0.0112     0.0196**
Shock*2012
                                       (0.00848)    (0.00817)   (0.00766)   (0.00622)    (0.00740)   (0.00803)   (0.00764)   (0.00844)

                                       0.0252***    0.0283***   0.0250***   0.0250***    0.0260***   0.0252***    0.0114*    0.0225***
Shock*2013
                                       (0.00664)    (0.00587)   (0.00596)   (0.00567)    (0.00649)   (0.00624)   (0.00606)   (0.00702)

                                       0.0227***    0.0246***   0.0233***   0.0234***    0.0188***   0.0224***    0.0118*    0.0205***
Shock*2014
                                       (0.00679)    (0.00653)   (0.00612)   (0.00586)    (0.00709)   (0.00626)   (0.00637)   (0.00713)

                                        0.0134*      0.0153**    0.0155**   0.0224***     0.0134*     0.0136*     0.00582     0.00936
Shock*2015
                                       (0.00807)    (0.00722)   (0.00778)   (0.00497)    (0.00703)   (0.00759)   (0.00780)   (0.00808)

# Cells                                 178,176     178,176     178,176        135,878   207,552       178,176   178,176     178,176

R-Squared                                   0.034     0.049       0.292         0.008      0.055        0.035      0.033       0.034

Labor Market Controls                                  X

Occ FE and time trends                                             X

Unweighted                                                                       X

Includes Missing Firms                                                                      X

Bartik w MSA-specific Peaks/Troughs                                                                      X

Bartik in levels                                                                                                    X

1 month employment change Bartik                                                                                                X
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
Notes: See table 2 and appendix table B1.




                                                                          72
                                       Table B5: Within-Industry-Occupation Eects



  Dependent                       Education                             Experience                            Cognitive Skill                        Computer Skill
   Variable:                    (1)               (2)                (1)                 (2)                 (1)                 (2)                 (1)                 (2)

                          0.0514***          0.0493***           0.0489***           0.0477***          0.0248***           0.0257***           0.0194**            0.0164*
Shock*2010
                          (0.0146)           (0.0144)            (0.0152)            (0.0148)           (0.00838)           (0.00811)          (0.00928)           (0.00859)

                          0.0468***         0.0454***           0.0466***            0.0457***          0.0258***           0.0263***          0.0234***           0.0200***
Shock*2011
                          (0.0142)          (0.0142)            (0.0150)             (0.0150)           (0.00810)           (0.00809)          (0.00797)           (0.00758)

                           0.0214             0.0199             0.0274*             0.0259*             0.0163**            0.0170**           0.0213**            0.0180*
Shock*2012
                          (0.0141)           (0.0140)            (0.0152)            (0.0151)           (0.00777)           (0.00775)          (0.00992)           (0.00939)

                          0.0400***         0.0411***           0.0372***            0.0377***          0.0230***           0.0231***          0.0247***           0.0218***
Shock*2013
                          (0.0135)          (0.0134)            (0.0138)             (0.0138)           (0.00702)           (0.00704)          (0.00791)           (0.00757)

                          0.0434***         0.0442***           0.0466***            0.0467***          0.0249***           0.0249***          0.0231***           0.0204***
Shock*2014
                          (0.0157)          (0.0154)            (0.0156)             (0.0154)           (0.00739)           (0.00739)          (0.00821)           (0.00784)

                          0.0505***         0.0559***           0.0500***            0.0552***          0.0280***           0.0293***           0.0129              0.0129
Shock*2015
                          (0.0157)          (0.0162)            (0.0156)             (0.0158)           (0.00816)           (0.00820)          (0.00948)           (0.00921)

Industry FE
                                                   X                                      X                                       X                                       X
and trends
*** p<0.1, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
Notes: See table 2. Regressions are estimated at the MSA-occupation (4-digit SOC)-industry (2-digit NAICS) year level. The dependent variable is the MSA-occupation-industry level
annual change in skill requirements from 2007. All regressions control for year fixed effects and MSA characteristics from the ACS. Observations are weighted by the size of the MSA
labor force in 2006 multiplied by the cell's ad share in the MSA-year. Standard errors are clustered at the MSA level.




                                                                                73
                                     Table B6: Decomposing Upskilling Within and Across Firms and Occupations


       Share of coeff                                   Education Requirements                                                            Experience Requirements
        attributed to:                 (1)           (2)     (3)      (4)     (5)                           (6)           (1)           (2)      (3)    (4)     (5)                            (6)
     Shock*2010                       0.070         0.055        0.415          0.042         0.075       0.343         -0.007         0.055        0.460         0.072         0.124         0.296
                                    (0.152)       (0.010)       (0.086)       (0.040)       (0.024)      (0.159)       (0.129)       (0.097)       (0.152)       (0.051)       (0.046)       (0.130)
     Shock*2011                       0.046         0.046        0.471          0.062         0.052       0.323         -0.037         0.043        0.465         0.116         0.140         0.273
                                    (0.154)       (0.008)       (0.122)       (0.042)       (0.036)      (0.136)       (0.138)       (0.046)       (0.134)       (0.063)       (0.049)       (0.122)
     Shock*2012                      -0.031        -0.020        0.613          0.045        -0.069       0.462         -0.091         0.008        0.553         0.188         0.018         0.324
                                    (0.342)       (0.040)       (0.320)       (0.133)       (0.067)      (0.273)       (0.253)       (0.105)       (0.307)       (0.093)       (0.066)       (0.196)
     Shock*2013                       0.041        -0.014        0.503         -0.008         0.085       0.394         -0.017        -0.083        0.508         0.150         0.099         0.343
                                    (0.142)       (0.029)       (0.090)       (0.074)       (0.066)      (0.129)       (0.146)       (0.064)       (0.137)       (0.107)       (0.075)       (0.120)
     Shock*2014                       0.085        -0.026        0.367          0.007         0.107       0.460          0.003        -0.072        0.436         0.106         0.090         0.438
                                    (0.169)       (0.031)       (0.056)       (0.061)       (0.051)      (0.186)       (0.175)       (0.064)       (0.119)       (0.064)       (0.048)       (0.176)
     Shock*2015                       0.192        -0.069        0.319         -0.115         0.195       0.479          0.063        -0.146        0.419         0.012         0.196         0.457
                                    (0.174)       (0.023)       (0.031)       (0.040)       (0.044)      (0.179)       (0.168)       (0.144)       (0.172)       (0.066)       (0.056)       (0.169)




74
       Share of coeff                                 Cognitive Skill Requirements                                                      Computer Skill Requirements
        attributed to:                 (1)           (2)      (3)       (4)     (5)                         (6)           (1)           (2)    (3)       (4)    (5)                            (6)
     Shock*2010                       0.025         0.151        0.388         0.102          0.082       0.252         -0.184          0.039       0.550         -0.070        0.196         0.469
                                    (0.117)       (0.032)       (0.087)       (0.069)       (0.067)      (0.106)       (0.190)        (0.062)      (0.117)       (0.165)       (0.153)       (0.185)
     Shock*2011                       0.037         0.106        0.429         0.099          0.067       0.262         -0.039          0.088       0.371          0.090        0.137         0.353
                                    (0.144)       (0.043)       (0.155)       (0.068)       (0.049)      (0.123)       (0.174)        (0.069)      (0.110)       (0.110)       (0.087)       (0.172)
     Shock*2012                      -0.010         0.120        0.267         0.303         -0.023       0.343         -0.008          0.040       0.283          0.254        0.073         0.358
                                    (0.222)       (0.128)       (0.238)       (0.074)       (0.038)      (0.192)       (0.210)       ((0.073)      (0.135)       (0.147)       (0.102)       (0.205)
     Shock*2013                       0.069        -0.005        0.376         0.162          0.098       0.300         -0.032         -0.061       0.224          0.225        0.177         0.468
                                    (0.150)       (0.114)       (0.165)       (0.132)       (0.089)      (0.115)       (0.230)        (0.041)      (0.059)       (0.214)       (0.139)       (0.195)
     Shock*2014                       0.212         0.042        0.216         0.100          0.089       0.340          0.056         -0.052       0.194          0.091        0.217         0.494
                                    (0.156)       (0.130)       (0.128)       (0.071)       (0.045)      (0.141)       (0.206)        (0.047)      (0.047)       (0.184)       (0.154)       (0.200)
     Shock*2015                       0.177         0.076        0.244         0.057          0.099       0.347          0.075         -0.325       0.201          0.037        0.429         0.584
                                    (0.127)       (0.042)       (0.053)       (0.060)       (0.016)      (0.122)       (0.265)        (0.084)      (0.135)       (0.255)       (0.182)       (0.133)
     Notes: The table gives the share of the coefficient listed in the left column attributed to a change in the component labeled in the top row, averaged across 720 decomposition orders and the
     standard deviation across all orders in parentheses. Components are: (1) share of ads to continuing firm-MSAs, (2) firm distribution among continuing firms, (3) within firm-occupation-MSA
     skill requirement, (4) the distribution of ads across occupations, (5) the within-occupation skill requirement among continuing firms in non-continuing occupations, (6 ) within-occupation skill
     requirement among non-continuing firms.
C   Tables Corresponding to Figures in the Text




                           75
                                                               Table C1: MSA-Level Outcomes and the Employment Shock


                                       Emp              Unemp                Epop             Epop High                               Burning-Glass Skills:                                                              Employment Shares:
                                                                                                                                                                                                   PCs (HH)
     Dep Var:                         Growth             Rate               College            School             Education          Experience            Cognitive          Computer                                Routine-Cog            Routine-Man
                                       (1)                 (2)                  (3)                (4)               (5)                (6)                  (7)                (8)                     (9)                (10)                   (11)
                                    0.00698           -0.00509*              0.0216             0.00757                                                                                               0.525             -0.00806               0.000161
     Shock*2000
                                  (0.00470)           (0.00285)            (0.0132)            (0.0110)                                                                                              (0.370)           (0.00798)               (0.0114)
                                  -0.000397           -0.000366              0.0161             0.00340                                                                                                                 -0.00605               -0.00314
     Shock*2001
                                  (0.00599)           (0.00219)            (0.0119)            (0.0100)                                                                                                                (0.00477)               (0.0104)
                                   -0.00202            0.000992            -0.00504            -0.00131                                                                                               0.469              -0.0108              -0.000681
     Shock*2002
                                  (0.00776)           (0.00320)            (0.0113)            (0.0106)                                                                                              (0.367)           (0.00718)               (0.0118)
                                    0.00252             0.00101             0.00371             0.00375                                                                                                                 -0.00578               -0.00501
     Shock*2003
                                  (0.00664)           (0.00297)            (0.0104)            (0.0101)                                                                                                                (0.00577)               (0.0104)
                                    0.0121*            0.000207            -0.00414             0.00507                                                                                               0.458            -0.00545*               0.000119
     Shock*2004
                                  (0.00631)           (0.00189)           (0.00928)           (0.00972)                                                                                              (0.367)           (0.00330)               (0.0112)
                                   0.0177***           0.000221            -0.00882             0.0131*                                                                                                                 -0.00486              -0.000883
     Shock*2005
                                  (0.00554)           (0.00166)           (0.00853)           (0.00678)                                                                                                                (0.00343)              (0.00342)
                                   0.0154***           -0.00112           -0.000365            0.0103**                                                                                                                 -0.00274               0.000531
     Shock*2006
                                  (0.00416)           (0.00127)           (0.00620)           (0.00507)                                                                                                                (0.00258)              (0.00358)
                                  -0.0172***          0.00597***           -0.0144**           -0.00846                                                                                             1.318***            -0.00139               -0.00521
     Shock*2008
                                  (0.00233)           (0.00162)           (0.00681)           (0.00670)                                                                                             (0.451)            (0.00252)              (0.00329)




76
                                  -0.0383***           0.0226***          -0.0345***            -0.0114                                                                                                                  0.00309              -0.0158***
     Shock*2009
                                  (0.00355)           (0.00320)           (0.00867)           (0.00770)                                                                                                                (0.00367)              (0.00334)
                                  -0.00904**           0.0202***          -0.0332***            -0.0120            0.0540***           0.0503***           0.0280***             0.0171              1.800**            0.00451               -0.0206***
     Shock*2010
                                  (0.00439)           (0.00318)            (0.0110)           (0.00740)            (0.0133)            (0.0136)            (0.00815)            (0.0137)             (0.877)           (0.00416)              (0.00375)
                                    0.00488            0.0140***           -0.0235**           -0.0153*            0.0474***           0.0463***           0.0293***           0.0264***                                0.00640*              -0.0210***
     Shock*2011
                                  (0.00355)           (0.00359)            (0.0114)           (0.00849)            (0.0129)            (0.0131)            (0.00746)           (0.00812)                               (0.00336)              (0.00423)
                                   0.0108***            0.00350             -0.0265*           -0.00473             0.0210             0.0265**             0.0186**            0.0267**             1.316**            0.00580*              -0.0183***
     Shock*2012
                                  (0.00327)           (0.00429)            (0.0137)           (0.00905)            (0.0130)            (0.0133)            (0.00732)            (0.0108)             (0.647)           (0.00319)              (0.00425)
                                   0.0120***           0.000300              -0.0169           -0.00140            0.0364***           0.0360***           0.0253***           0.0281***                               0.00607**              -0.0175***
     Shock*2013
                                  (0.00354)           (0.00307)            (0.0141)            (0.0100)            (0.0117)            (0.0121)            (0.00662)           (0.00792)                               (0.00291)              (0.00440)
                                   0.0121***           -0.00102            -0.00861            -0.00485            0.0386***           0.0417***           0.0277***           0.0234***              1.010            0.00745**              -0.0139***
     Shock*2014
                                  (0.00385)           (0.00237)            (0.0115)            (0.0109)            (0.0144)            (0.0142)            (0.00695)           (0.00794)             (1.063)           (0.00293)              (0.00467)
                                  0.00953**            -0.00234              -0.0129           -0.00757            0.0416***           0.0433***           0.0319***             0.0136*                               0.0110***               -0.0110**
     Shock*2015
                                  (0.00430)           (0.00223)            (0.0110)            (0.0111)            (0.0141)            (0.0144)            (0.00754)           (0.00817)                               (0.00359)              (0.00473)
     # MSA-Year Cells                5,714               5,715                2,833              2,833               2,286               2,286               2,286                2,286               2,667               4,530                  4,530
     R-Squared                       0.535               0.764                0.394              0.336               0.207               0.291               0.337                0.319               0.050               0.257                  0.500
     *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
     Notes: Columns 1-4 correspond to figure 1, columns 5-8 to figure 2, column 9 to figure 4, and columns 10-11 to the top right panel of figure 7. See equation 1. The dependent variable is the MSA-level annual change in the indicated variable from 2007
     (2006 in column 9) -- there are at most 381 distinct MSAs. All regressions control for year fixed effects (columns 5-11 also controls for MSA characteristics). Observations are weighted by the size of the MSA labor force in 2006 and standard errors are
     clustered at the MSA level. Shock is the change in projected year-over-year employment growth in the MSA from 2006 to 2009, divided by the 90-10 differential in the variable across all MSAs. Employment growth and unemployment rates (columns 1
     and 2) obtained directly from BLS. Epops (columns 3 and 4) are author calculations based on the CPS -- there are fewer MSAs available in the CPS. Columns 1-4 estimate changes in local labor market variables from 2007 for all other years from 2000-
     2015. Skill requirements (columns 5-8) from BG are restricted to 2010-2015. PCs per average pre-recession employment (column 9) is obtained from Harte Hanks; these regressions include only even years. Routine-cognitive and -manual employment
     shares (columns 10 and 11, respectively) are obtained from OES, and are available in all years. Routine-cognitive (manual) occupations are those in the top quartile of the routine-cognitive (manual) index of Acemoglu and Autor.
                                      Table C2: Dierential Upskilling by 90-10 Change in Firm Capital Investments


                                                                                PCs (HH)                                                                          Capital Holdings (Compustat)
     Dependent Variable:                    Education               Experience                Cognitive               Computer                 Education               Experience                Cognitive               Computer
                                               (1)                     (2)                      (3)                     (4)                       (1)                     (2)                      (3)                     (4)
                                            0.00697***              0.00398***                0.00155*                0.00606***              0.00246***               0.00232***                0.000672               0.00286***
     Capital*Shock*2010
                                            (0.00124)               (0.00118)                (0.000914)               (0.00107)               (0.000402)               (0.000311)               (0.000519)              (0.000256)
                                            0.00567***                0.00246*                 0.00116                0.00527***              0.00265***               0.00309***                0.00113*               0.00265***
     Capital*Shock*2011
                                            (0.00122)                (0.00140)                (0.00100)               (0.00119)               (0.000577)               (0.000422)               (0.000577)              (0.000374)
                                            0.00598***              0.00352***                 0.00121                0.00565***              0.00254***               0.00316***                0.00132**              0.00233***
     Capital*Shock*2012
                                            (0.00100)               (0.00103)                 (0.00105)               (0.00119)               (0.000552)               (0.000428)               (0.000539)              (0.000352)
                                            0.00956***              0.00710***                 0.00223*               0.00509***              0.00335***               0.00366***               0.00152***              0.00283***
     Capital*Shock*2013
                                            (0.00155)               (0.00145)                 (0.00123)               (0.00104)               (0.000314)               (0.000323)               (0.000497)              (0.000297)
                                            0.0101***               0.00718***               0.00552***               0.00761***              0.00312***               0.00340***                0.00145**              0.00290***
     Capital*Shock*2014
                                            (0.00149)               (0.00162)                (0.00167)                (0.00112)               (0.000652)               (0.000665)               (0.000611)              (0.000441)
                                            0.0108***                0.00390**               0.00424***               0.00541***              0.00216***               0.00271***                0.00110*               0.00270***
     Capital*Shock*2015
                                            (0.00141)                (0.00164)               (0.00161)                (0.00129)               (0.000588)               (0.000554)               (0.000640)              (0.000318)
                                              0.0234                   0.0180                  0.00867                  0.0140                   0.0129                  -0.00132                0.00467                  0.00356




77
     Shock*2010
                                             (0.0182)                 (0.0166)                (0.00842)                (0.0101)                 (0.0196)                 (0.0169)                (0.0103)                 (0.0110)
                                              0.0295*                  0.0308*                 0.00815                 0.0202**                  0.0316*                  0.0206                 0.00982                 0.0252***
     Shock*2011
                                             (0.0169)                 (0.0170)                (0.00880)               (0.00954)                 (0.0184)                 (0.0186)                (0.0102)                (0.00898)
                                              0.0106                  0.00895                  0.00202                  0.0213*                  0.0117                  0.00343                  0.00364                 0.0235**
     Shock*2012
                                             (0.0181)                 (0.0188)                (0.00915)                (0.0112)                 (0.0221)                 (0.0200)                (0.00997)                (0.0111)
                                              0.0191                   0.0129                  -0.00402                 0.0169                   0.0315                   0.0192                  -0.00422                0.0213**
     Shock*2013
                                             (0.0173)                 (0.0184)                (0.00862)                (0.0110)                 (0.0212)                 (0.0226)                (0.00887)               (0.00961)
                                              0.0271                   0.0319                  -0.00345                0.0182*                   0.0388                   0.0410*                0.000217                  0.0142
     Shock*2014
                                             (0.0197)                 (0.0194)                (0.00977)               (0.00997)                 (0.0238)                 (0.0235)                (0.0114)                 (0.0107)
                                              0.0259                   0.0220                   0.0112                  0.0133                   0.0290                   0.0382*                0.00726                   0.0148
     Shock*2015
                                             (0.0185)                 (0.0175)                 (0.0102)                (0.0107)                 (0.0225)                 (0.0203)                (0.0118)                 (0.0122)
     # Firm-MSA-Year Cells                    492,291                 492,291                  445,856                  445,856                  236,783                 236,783                  218,254                  218,254
     R-Squared                                 0.019                   0.019                    0.009                    0.010                    0.029                   0.035                    0.015                    0.023
     *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
     Notes: Columns 1-4 correspond to figure 5a and columns 5-8 correspond to figure 5b. The dependent variable is the firm-MSA-level annual change in the indicated BG skill requirement from 2007. All regressions control for year fixed
     effects and MSA characteristics. Observations are weighted by the size of the MSA labor force in 2006 times the firm's ad share within the MSA-year and standard errors are clustered at the MSA level. Shock is the change in
     projected year-over-year employment growth in the MSA from 2006 to 2009, divided by the 90-10 differential in the variable across all MSAs. Capital variable is the firm-level average change PCs per employee from 2002-2006 to
     2010-2014 (columns 1-4) from Harte Hanks or the firm-level average rate of change of capital holdings (property plant and equipment) over the same years (columns 5-8) from Compustat. Capital variables have been normed to be
     mean 0 so the main shock-year variables fit the effect for the average firm. Figures 5a and 5b fit capital-shock-year interactions to the 90-10 firm differential -- therefore coefficients are multiplied by 0.97 (columns 1-4) or 2.27
     (columns 5-8).
                                                              Table C3: Dierential Upskilling for Routine Occupations


                                                                          Routine-Cognitive                                                                                     Routine-Manual
     Dependent Variable:                     Education               Experience                Cognitive                Computer                 Education               Experience                Cognitive                Computer
                                                (1)                     (2)                      (3)                      (4)                       (1)                     (2)                      (3)                      (4)
                                             0.00496***              0.00368***               0.00532***                0.0157***                0.00835***               0.00311**               -0.00580***               -0.0152***
     Routine*Shock*2010
                                             (0.00182)               (0.000657)               (0.000611)               (0.000683)                (0.00146)                (0.00138)                (0.00109)               (0.000951)
                                             0.00721***              0.00467***               0.00838***                0.0139***                0.00382***               -0.000845               -0.00817***               -0.0124***
     Routine*Shock*2011
                                             (0.00122)               (0.000685)               (0.000634)               (0.000883)                (0.00126)               (0.000993)                (0.00106)                (0.00102)
                                             0.00940***              0.00275***               0.00792***                0.0100***                 0.00177                -0.00264***               -0.0112***               -0.0145***
     Routine*Shock*2012
                                             (0.00106)               (0.000772)               (0.000551)               (0.000906)                (0.00121)                (0.00101)                (0.00104)               (0.000999)
                                             0.0122***               0.00781***               0.00820***                0.0106***               -0.00191**               -0.00367***               -0.0118***               -0.0117***
     Routine*Shock*2013
                                            (0.000874)               (0.000741)               (0.000481)               (0.000715)               (0.000903)               (0.000883)                (0.00103)                (0.00106)
                                             0.0130***               0.00972***                0.0101***                0.0100***                -0.00262**               -0.00159                 -0.0117***               -0.0109***
     Routine*Shock*2014
                                             (0.00119)               (0.000788)               (0.000472)               (0.000707)                (0.00101)               (0.000983)               (0.000960)                (0.00106)
                                             0.00940***                0.00102                0.00777***               0.00825***                -0.00250**              -0.00231***              -0.00843***               -0.0123***
     Routine*Shock*2015
                                             (0.00147)               (0.000731)               (0.000699)               (0.000933)                (0.00113)               (0.000887)                (0.00111)                (0.00104)




78
                                              0.0514***                0.0481***               0.0263***                 0.0167**                0.0516***                0.0486***                0.0280***                 0.0218**
     Shock*2010
                                              (0.0136)                 (0.0134)                (0.00717)                (0.00799)                (0.0135)                 (0.0134)                 (0.00728)                (0.00858)
                                              0.0457***                0.0431***               0.0260***                0.0207***                0.0470***                0.0444***                0.0289***                0.0256***
     Shock*2011
                                              (0.0130)                 (0.0133)                (0.00716)                (0.00692)                (0.0131)                 (0.0134)                 (0.00735)                (0.00719)
                                               0.0204                   0.0245*                 0.0162**                 0.0176**                  0.0230*                  0.0257*                0.0202***                0.0228***
     Shock*2012
                                              (0.0127)                 (0.0135)                (0.00681)                (0.00825)                 (0.0128)                 (0.0135)                (0.00697)                (0.00851)
                                              0.0364***                0.0340***               0.0229***                0.0220***                0.0403***                0.0368***                0.0270***                0.0268***
     Shock*2013
                                              (0.0120)                 (0.0122)                (0.00637)                (0.00645)                (0.0120)                 (0.0122)                 (0.00642)                (0.00666)
                                              0.0393***                0.0409***               0.0237***                0.0199***                0.0433***                0.0438***                0.0281***                0.0242***
     Shock*2014
                                              (0.0143)                 (0.0140)                (0.00650)                (0.00662)                (0.0144)                 (0.0140)                 (0.00660)                (0.00680)
                                              0.0464***                0.0465***               0.0281***                  0.0113                 0.0492***                0.0471***                0.0312***                 0.0151*
     Shock*2015
                                              (0.0143)                 (0.0142)                (0.00722)                (0.00798)                (0.0144)                 (0.0142)                 (0.00733)                (0.00810)
     # Firm-MSA-Year Cells                     193,086                  193,086                  178,176                  178,176                  193,086                  193,086                  178,176                  178,176
     R-Squared                                  0.057                    0.073                    0.054                    0.064                    0.045                    0.069                    0.045                    0.043
     *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
     Notes: Figure 6 plots the routine-shock-year interactions. The dependent variable is the occupation-MSA-level annual change in the indicated BG skill requirement from 2007. All regressions control for year fixed effects and MSA
     characteristics. Observations are weighted by the size of the MSA labor force in 2006 times the occupation's ad share within the MSA-year and standard errors are clustered at the MSA level. Shock is the change in projected year-
     over-year employment growth in the MSA from 2006 to 2009, divided by the 90-10 differential in the variable across all MSAs. "Routine" interactions in the left (right) panel are for routine-cognitive (routine-manual) occupations. These
     variables are an indicator for whether the occupation is in the top quartile of the routine-cognitive or routine-manual index of Acemoglu and Autor (2011).
Table C4: Dierential Employment and Wage Eects for Routine Occupations


                                                            Routine-Cognitive                                    Routine-Manual
                                                      Involuntary              Log(Median                Involuntary              Log(Median
                Dependent Variable:
                                                      Separations                Wages)                  Separations                Wages)
                                                          (1)                      (2)                       (1)                      (2)
                                                       -0.000161                 0.00166**               -0.00135***                0.0137***
                Routine*Shock*2000
                                                      (0.000238)                (0.000741)               (0.000502)                (0.000980)
                                                       0.000465*                0.00256***                0.000866                  0.0126***
                Routine*Shock*2001
                                                      (0.000262)                (0.000682)               (0.000579)                (0.000963)
                                                      0.00147***                 0.00207**                0.00162**                 0.0101***
                Routine*Shock*2002
                                                      (0.000314)                (0.000824)               (0.000675)                 (0.00112)
                                                      0.00124***                 0.00138**               0.00232***                0.00826***
                Routine*Shock*2003
                                                      (0.000291)                (0.000671)               (0.000587)                 (0.00119)
                                                      0.00110***                0.00289***                 0.000660                0.00423***
                Routine*Shock*2004
                                                      (0.000293)                (0.000580)               (0.000412)                 (0.00105)
                                                      0.000555***               0.00332***                -5.04e-06                0.00322***
                Routine*Shock*2005
                                                      (0.000205)                (0.000494)               (0.000458)                (0.000539)
                                                       -4.54e-06                0.00113***                -0.000419                 0.000535
                Routine*Shock*2006
                                                      (0.000189)                (0.000237)               (0.000335)                (0.000427)
                                                      0.000638***                0.000156                0.00394***                 0.000512
                Routine*Shock*2008
                                                      (0.000227)                (0.000259)               (0.000422)                (0.000328)
                                                      0.00295***                0.00136***                0.0155***                0.00239***
                Routine*Shock*2009
                                                      (0.000423)                (0.000246)               (0.000739)                (0.000569)
                                                      0.00306***                 0.000301                 0.0138***                 0.000659
                Routine*Shock*2010
                                                      (0.000432)                (0.000418)               (0.000672)                (0.000631)
                                                       0.00341***                0.00107*                 0.00957***                0.000347
                Routine*Shock*2011
                                                       (0.000409)               (0.000558)                (0.000653)               (0.000690)
                                                       0.00249***               0.00231***                0.00662***                9.11e-05
                Routine*Shock*2012
                                                       (0.000332)               (0.000542)                (0.000625)               (0.000657)
                                                       0.00182***               0.00375***                0.00382***                -0.000514
                Routine*Shock*2013
                                                       (0.000307)               (0.000566)                (0.000655)               (0.000733)
                                                       0.00140***               0.00480***                0.00158***                -0.000455
                Routine*Shock*2014
                                                       (0.000248)               (0.000553)                (0.000548)               (0.000894)
                                                         0.000242               0.00507***                  -3.94e-05                1.04e-05
                Routine*Shock*2015
                                                       (0.000244)               (0.000659)                (0.000429)               (0.000841)
                                                        -0.000694                 -0.00118                 -0.000130                 -0.00743
                Shock*2000
                                                        (0.00223)                 (0.0133)                 (0.00225)                 (0.0134)
                                                         0.000453                 -0.00110                  0.000517                 -0.00632
                Shock*2001
                                                        (0.00258)                 (0.0101)                 (0.00254)                 (0.0101)
                                                        -0.000182                -8.73e-05                 -6.77e-05                 -0.00426
                Shock*2002
                                                        (0.00250)                (0.00855)                 (0.00244)                (0.00840)
                                                         0.000735                0.000687                   0.000634                 -0.00255
                Shock*2003
                                                        (0.00277)                (0.00912)                 (0.00274)                (0.00885)
                                                          0.00101                 -0.00601                   0.00132                 -0.00703
                Shock*2004
                                                        (0.00201)                (0.00894)                 (0.00204)                (0.00882)
                                                        -0.000844                  0.00363                 -0.000463                  0.00314
                Shock*2005
                                                        (0.00189)                (0.00498)                 (0.00191)                (0.00504)
                                                         -0.00128                 -0.00137                 -0.000899                 -0.00105
                Shock*2006
                                                        (0.00182)                (0.00416)                 (0.00186)                (0.00423)
                                                        0.00366**               -0.00757**                   0.00302               -0.00746**
                Shock*2008
                                                        (0.00184)                (0.00329)                 (0.00184)                (0.00335)
                                                        0.0112***                 -0.00505                0.00829***                 -0.00536
                Shock*2009
                                                        (0.00220)                (0.00428)                 (0.00226)                (0.00438)
                                                       0.00933***                 -0.00651                0.00689***                 -0.00637
                Shock*2010
                                                       (0.00241)                 (0.00516)                (0.00244)                 (0.00521)
                                                         0.00364*                 -0.00901                  0.00239                  -0.00852
                Shock*2011
                                                        (0.00219)                (0.00581)                 (0.00221)                (0.00582)
                                                        -0.000811                -0.0140**                  -0.00152                -0.0130**
                Shock*2012
                                                        (0.00252)                (0.00578)                 (0.00251)                (0.00575)
                                                         -0.00295                -0.0138**                  -0.00322                -0.0122**
                Shock*2013
                                                        (0.00255)                (0.00620)                 (0.00250)                (0.00618)
                                                         -0.00293                -0.0144**                  -0.00276                 -0.0125*
                Shock*2014
                                                        (0.00183)                (0.00680)                 (0.00182)                (0.00690)
                                                         -0.00137                 -0.00763                  -0.00106                 -0.00581
                Shock*2015
                                                        (0.00184)                (0.00756)                 (0.00184)                (0.00777)
               # Occ-MSA-Year Cells                      226,191                   376,897                  226,191                  376,897
                R-Squared                                 0.029                     0.607                    0.049                    0.610
               *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
               Notes: Figure 7 (top left and bottom right panels) plots the routine-shock-year interactions. The dependent variable is the occupation-
               MSA-level annual change in the indicated variable from 2007. All regressions control for year fixed effects and MSA characteristics.
               Observations are weighted by the size of the MSA labor force in 2006 times the occupation's ad share within the MSA-year and
               standard errors are clustered at the MSA level. Shock is the change in projected year-over-year employment growth in the MSA from
               2006 to 2009, divided by the 90-10 differential in the variable across all MSAs. "Routine" interactions in the left (right) panel are for
               routine-cognitive (routine-manual) occupations. These variables are an indicator for whether the occupation is in the top quartile of the
               routine-cognitive or routine-manual index of Acemoglu and Autor. Involuntary separations are based on author calculations from the
               CPS. Log median wage is obtained from OES.




                                                                                79
