NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

EVALUATING ECONOMY-WIDE BENEFIT COST ANALYSES
V. Kerry Smith
Min Qiang Zhao
Working Paper 22769
http://www.nber.org/papers/w22769

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2016

Thanks are due Berthold Herrendorf and Christos Makridis constructive suggestions and
comments on the research design. Neither is responsible for any errors associated with the
research. Thanks are also due to Shauna Mortensen for preparing multiple drafts of this paper. An
early version of this research was presented by the first author at the Conference of the Danish
Environmental Economics Council 2015. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and
do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2016 by V. Kerry Smith and Min Qiang Zhao. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Evaluating Economy-Wide Benefit Cost Analyses
V. Kerry Smith and Min Qiang Zhao
NBER Working Paper No. 22769
October 2016
JEL No. D58,D61,H41
ABSTRACT
This paper examines a new strategy for evaluating whether the size of a new environmental
regulation requires that benefit cost analyses consider general equilibrium effects. Size in the
context refers to both the magnitude and distribution of cost increases across sectors and the
benefits attributed to the rules. Rogerson’s [2008] static, general equilibrium model describing
how tax policy affects time allocations between market and non-market activities is extended to
include air pollution as a non-separable element in the representative household’s preferences.
The paper makes three contributions to the literature. First, the calibrated parameters of the model
are used to evaluate how the introduction of air quality, as a non-separable, external influence on
the household’s non-market activities, affects the conventional explanation for the labor market
transition in developed economies. Second, all current CGE assessments of conventional
environmental policies in the U.S. and Europe ignore the feedback effects of policies for
emissions and behavior. This analysis demonstrates their importance by using an amended
version of the Rogerson model to compare calibrations with and without these feedback effects.
Finally, a calibrated model is used to gauge the plausibility of the benefit estimates from EPA’s
partial equilibrium (PE) assessment of the recent Clean Power Plan. This analysis finds the upper
limit of the PE estimates for the annual ancillary benefits of the plan (due to its effects on
conventional air pollutants) is implausibly large.

V. Kerry Smith
Department of Economics
W.P. Carey School of Business
P.O. Box 879801
Arizona State University
Tempe, AZ 85287-9801
and NBER
kerry.smith@asu.edu
Min Qiang Zhao
Room A201, Economics Building
Wang Yanan Institute for Studies in Economics
Xiamen University
Xiamen 361005
Fujian, P.R.China
kent_zhao@xmu.edu.cn

Evaluating Economy-Wide Benefit Cost Analyses
V. Kerry Smith and Min Qiang Zhao

I. Introduction
Benefit cost analysis was never intended to be used for evaluating policies large enough
to have impacts at an economy wide basis. There have been a number of efforts to gauge the
general equilibrium effects of large policies in settings roughly consistent with benefit cost
assessments1. The Hazilla-Kopp [1990] analysis of the social costs of environmental regulations,
for example, found the relationship between social and engineering costs changed with
increasing regulation. Their comparison, based on 1981 estimates, found engineering costs were
fifty percent larger than social costs, while in 1990 the relationship reversed with engineering
costs sixty percent less than the social costs. They did not consider the beneficial effects of the
policies involved.
One of the most dramatic recent illustrations of the importance of the details associated
with introducing the beneficial effects of environmental policy can be found in EPA’s Second
Prospective study [2011] of the net benefits of the 1990 Clean Air Act Amendments (CAAA).
This analysis compared the benefit estimates derived using their conventional partial equilibrium
(PE) approach with those computed using a large scale CGE model (EMPAX CGE, see ICF Inc.
[2010]) adapted to reflect the “with” and “without” CAAA policies. The annual net benefit
estimates in 2010 based on PE methods were 109 times larger than the CGE benefit measures.

1

Kokoski and Smith [1987] and Hazilla and Kopp [1990] were the first to our knowledge to use computable general
equilibrium (CGE) models to assess the importance of general equilibrium effects for benefit cost analyses.

1

The former were estimated to be 1.2 trillion dollars, about 8.0% of the estimates for 2010 GDP.2
Little was done to attempt to explain the sources for the differences. To some degree, this is
understandable. The EMPAX CGE model is a complex, multi-sector model. There are five
energy sectors, agriculture, mining (excluding coal, crude oil or natural gas), construction,
nineteen manufacturing sectors, and eight service sectors. There are four representative
households classified by income class within each of five regions. Preferences are represented as
nested CES functions. Production is also specified as nested CES functions (see ICF Inc. [2010]
for details). This model has many moving parts, all contributing to its general equilibrium (GE)
outcomes. EPA’s analysis of the 1990 CAAA introduces the effects of the amendments as
differences in the labor endowment for the “with” rules (i.e. labor available because of the
“avoided” deaths in expected value terms) compared to the “without” case along with the
difference in medical expenditures in the two situations. Identifying one or more sources for the
differences in relationship to the assumptions of EPA’s PE analysis would be exceptionally
difficult.3
Emissions of air pollutants are not part of the EMPAX model. As a result there are no
feedback effects of policy. In a model specified to include these feedbacks, air pollution would
be recognized as affecting the economic activities of households and firms. Their responses, in
turn, changes the goods and services consumed, time allocations between work and leisure, and
as a result pollution emissions. Non-market outcomes are then a part of the general equilibrium

2

These estimates are for 2010 as reported in Table 8.8 They are in 2006 dollars. The PE benefits are $1.3 trillion.
Because the CGE estimates include both the increases in labor endowment and reductions in medical expenditures
contributed to the policy plus the estimated compliance costs, only the net benefits are comparable.
3
The PE and CGE analysis are discussed as adopting alternative approaches to defining benefits with the CGE
based on a human capital approach. It used the additions to the time endowment due to avoided mortality and
awarded such days, as well as reduced medical expenditures.
EPA’s assessment [2015a, pp 17-19] of the potential limitations also noted that mortality and morbidity effects for
individuals outside the labor force were excluded.

2

and the full story under these conditions is likely to be more nuanced.4 None of the analyses of
existing policies whether in the U.S. or Europe allows one to evaluate if feedback effects account
for these types of differences in benefit measures using PE versus GE perspectives.5
We outline a new strategy for evaluating whether the size of a new rule requires that
benefit cost analyses consider general equilibrium effects by adapting Rogerson’s [2008] model
to include air pollution. His model focuses on how macro policy affects time allocations between
market and non-market activities. As a result, it is well suited to our needs. Using the calibration
practices common in macro-economics, we make three contributions to this literature. First, we
use the calibrated parameters to evaluate how the introduction of air quality, as a non-separable,
external influence on the household’s non-market activities affects the conventional explanation
for the labor market transition in developed economies.6 This approach allows us to also assess
the impact of the “importance” we assign the environmental services. We find it does not
overturn the strong substitution between market goods and a composite of market and household
services. Second, we compare calibrations with and without feedback effects. Our results imply
that the use of soft links (or omitting feedbacks) is nearly equivalent to ignoring the role of
environmental services in the household’s preferences. When the calibrated parameters from the
model with air quality, ignoring feedbacks, are used in Rogerson’s original specification that
omits environment, the predictions of time allocations are generally better than those derived
using the calibrated parameters derived with feedbacks. This conclusion is reversed when we use
4

See Carbone and Smith [2008] for discussion of the implications of non-separable air quality for the calibration of
traditional CGE models and for the measurement of the excess burden of taxes.
5
Based on private correspondence with John Riley of the MIT Emissions Prediction and Policy Analysis Model
(EPPA) and Bert Saveyn and Michael Holland for GEM-E3 for Europe, these other CGE models do not include
emissions and diffusion of pollution within the respective models. The effects of pollution are computed outside
these models and components of each model adjusted. As a result, there are not feedbacks and the associated joint
determination of outcome for the general equilibrium solutions. See Matus et al. [2008] for discussion of EPPA and
Vrontisi et al. [2006] for the GEM-E3 model.
6
The effect is characterized as external because air pollution affects the representative agents’ tradeoffs for market
goods and services as well as time allocations inside and outside the market but it is not a choice variable.

3

these calibrations in the expanded model with all the parameters, including those for
environmental quality. In this case the calibration with feedbacks is clearly preferred. Finally, we
demonstrate how our calibrated model can be used to gauge the plausibility of the benefit
estimates from new PE policy assessments. To illustrate this new role, we use a stylized version
of EPA’s recent Clean Power Plan and find the upper limit of the PE estimates for annual
ancillary benefits of the plan (due to its effects on conventional air pollutants) would be judged
as implausibly large using our preferred calibrated model.
Section II outlines the motivation for our proposed approach for evaluating PE benefit
cost analyses. Section III summarizes the main components of Rogerson’s model and our
additions to it. Section IV presents the calibration results and describes how our calibration helps
to isolate what should be measured as part of taking account of non-market environmental
services. Section V describes the effects of “soft links” versus a full feedback structure. Section
VI summarizes how we analyze the Clean Power Plan, and the last section discusses why our
proposed strategy is important to other proposed reforms to the design of regulations.
II. Context
In April 2015 the World Health Organization reported that conventional air pollutants
were “costing” Europeans $1.6 trillion U.S. dollars (in 2010).7 If the assessment is limited to
those households in the EU, the estimate amounts to about 8% of the EU’s GDP. As noted at the
outset, the 1990 Clean Air Act Amendments were estimated to “save” U.S. households about
$1.3 trillion dollars in gross benefits annually, nearly 9% of U.S. GDP (in 2010).8 More recently,
EPA’s Clean Power Plan intended to reduce CO2 in response to concerns about climate change,

7

The WHO Regional Office for Europe, OECD [2015] prepared the analysis.
Our earlier comparison used net benefits (PE benefits less costs) because this was what would be comparable to the
CGE estimates.

8

4

was found to be “worth doing” because of the ancillary benefits alone! The gains attributed to
reductions in conventional pollutants would be between $14 and 34 billion a year (in 2011
dollars) when mandates are fully met (in 2030).9 The newest EPA proposal—a more stringent
standard for ozone of 70 ppb (EPA [2015c]) is proposed to yield annual benefits of $2.9 to 5.9
billion dollars (in 2025). Sixty to seventy percent of these are co-benefits due to induced
reductions in PM2.5 from the controls required to reduce ozone. The estimated magnitude for
benefits or co-benefits in each of these cases is not the result of double counting. These EPA
assessments are careful to document exactly what is assumed about the other rules in computing
the baselines for measuring the additional gains associated with each new rule.
All these assessments use a common method for measuring the benefits from the
specified reductions in one or more air pollutants. It is a damage function approach. A statistical
model is used to relate a change in a health endpoint in response to a change in the air pollution
metric hypothesized to be responsible for the effect. When the endpoint is a change in mortality
risk experienced by a spatially delineated sub-population, the expected cases of premature death
are aggregated to estimate the national effect. The benefits of the improvement are then
estimated using the value of a statistical life (VSL) as a summary measure for the tradeoff that a
set of representative individuals would make to reduce risks enough to avoid one death in
expected value terms.
Households and firms adjust to new rules, especially if they are significant. Analysts in
EPA and the EU are increasingly recognizing that size of the benefits attributed to a new

9

These estimates are from the final RIA (U.S. Environmental Protection Agency [2015b]). They are for the rate
based approach assuming a 3% discount rate for the co-benefits and a 3% of the social costs of CO2. They are taken
from Table ES-7 in the Executive Summary of the report. They are computed as the difference between the total
benefits and the climate benefits only.

5

regulation matters for the plausibility of the PE approach10. However, the general equilibrium
models being used to consider multi-market effects completely leave out the inter-connections
between firms and households’ decisions and the generation of emissions. Instead a “soft link” is
used. Estimates of health effects are computed separately with pre-specified assumptions about
emissions and air quality using the conditions attributed to the cases for the policy and without it.
The health expenditure changes and impacts on available labor endowment are introduced as
“savings” in the “with policy” scenarios. Behavioral responses to improved quality that might
alter the mix of consumption and leisure decisions are omitted because they are assumed to be
“second order” effects.
One might ask: what is the threshold for a first order effect? This question has not been
answered. The assessments often cite the Mayeres and Van Regemorter [2008] study as
supporting the conclusion that feedbacks are of second order importance. However, these
authors’ analysis used a model that must yield this conclusion because it assumes there is a
perfect substitution between private goods associated with health care and the labor endowment
effects due to improved air quality.11 While this issue might seem to be a matter for academic
debates, questions about the plausibility of a partial equilibrium framework grow in importance
as the size of the proposed policy impacts increases in relation to the economy experiencing the
new rules. Moreover, the GE models used to support the plausibility of the PE methodology for
large, policy-induced, changes in pollution all ignore feedbacks.12

10

In the United States, the Environmental Protection Agency’s Science Advisory Board convened a panel of
economists and scientists to assist the agency in improving its capability to assess economy-wide impact from the
benefits and costs of its regulatory proposals. A key focus of the panel is on the technical merits and challenges in
using economy wide models to analyze air regulations. See the summary in Wolverton [2015] for more details on
the charge to the panel.
11
This result was established in Espinosa [1996]. See Espinosa and Smith [1995] for a summary and Carbone and
Smith [2008] for a more general assessment of the effects of non-separability.
12
See Vrontisi et al. [2016] as another recent example.

6

III. Rogerson’s Model Augmented with Air Quality
Rogerson’s [2008] static GE framework offers a model of time allocation for households
in an aggregate economy. These allocations are described as a sequence of static choices where
productivity and income tax rates vary but preferences are held constant. This approach directs
primary attention to the roles of income and substitution effects in determining how time is
allocated between market work, home production, and leisure. As a result, it focuses on what
these effects imply for economy wide responses to differences in taxes or other policies across
otherwise comparable economics.
The representative household’s preferences are described using a variation on the BrownHeien [1972] S-branch utility function. Rogerson’s version specifies the top level as CobbDouglas in consumption and leisure. Consumption is composed of one branch with market goods
including a subsistence level of the produced commodities and a branch for services using a CES
function that is composed of market and home produced services.13 Labor income is taxed at a
proportional rate. These tax revenues finance a lump-sum transfer to the representative
household. To assure our extension is as transparent as possible, we use the same notation as in
Rogerson for the elements in the model that don’t change. (Appendix A summarizes all the
elements in the model.)
Here we focus on the components where we introduce changes to allow for the effects of
environmental services, empirically represented in our calibration and application by air quality.
Equation (1) is the consumption branch of the preference function with the CES sub-function for
services including those purchased in the market and those that are home produced.
13

A common reason for using the Stone-Geary specification with a subsistence level of consumption is to assure
non-unitary income elasticities. However, with quasi fixed goods, the nested CES becomes non-homothetic so this
formulation would not be necessary when air quality is introduced (see Carbone and Smith [2008]). We maintain
this format for the goods branch to allow comparison of the calibrated parameters with Rogerson’s results.

7

(1)
Where
= consumption
= market goods
= subsistence consumption of market goods
= market services
= household produced services
Market goods and services as well as home production are the result of fixed coefficient
technologies based on labor allocated to each activity (

designating the labor time with

for each sector), as in equation (2).
(2)
The labor productivities (the

,S

,

’s) change over time, each at a different exogenous rate. The

wage is normalized to unity so the equilibrium prices for market goods are given in equation (3).
(3)
Leisure (

,

) is the residual from time allocated to market activity (for producing

home production ( ). Total time is normalized to unity. Leisure (

and

) and

is defined in equation (4).14

(4)
Our extension maintains the focus on the representative household’s time allocation because
environmental services are likely to be experienced through differences in how time is used. We

14

Rogerson does not define

since it is implied by other allocations and the normalization used for total time.

8

represent environmental services with the ambient concentration of particulate matter.15 To
include air quality we add a further nest to the service component of equation (1), replacing
with a CES function of

and .

equation (1) (designated by
that includes

designates air quality. So the term for

in the service nest of

in the original Rogerson model) is replaced by a function

as well as a measure for ambient air quality, .
(5)

is treated as quasi-fixed in the first order conditions describing the agent’s choice of
Thus, the level of

influences the MRS for market and household produced services as well as

that for all other choices. The feedback effect is portrayed simply as in equation (6).
(6)
The parameter

reflects both the emissions produced as a result of the selected amount of ,

and the atmospheric diffusion process for these emissions. Thus environmental services are
assumed to be the inverse of the ambient concentration of pollution.
The actual air diffusion models used for policy are very complex. They represent the
chemical and atmospheric processes that capture the effects of mixing of contaminants and the
diffusion over space. For significant environmental rules the models and assumptions used in
matching them to proposed rules are a key focus of the policy evaluation. In the Second
Prospective analysis, for example, the air quality modeling was the central focus of a full chapter
in the report (Chapter 4) and had implications for all the key components of the benefit

15

We measure all air pollutants as PM10 equivalents – PM is most important air pollutant in PE health assessments.
The form used to measure it has changed as the health risk assessment research has focused attention on smaller
particles. PM2.5, the measure for the ambient concentration of particles 2.5 microns or smaller, is now the measure
that is the primary focus for health impacts.

9

analysis.16 Our model has no spatial detail. To include feedback effects between economic
activity and environmental quality we embed all the assumptions about emissions and diffusion
in a single parameter. Our focus here is on the economic responses to exogenous (to the agent)
changes in air quality. Equally important, we do not include an abatement sector so policy
scenarios are introduced thru changes in . This simplicity allows the analysis to focus on how
income and substitution effects determine the importance of differences in the GE effects for
large policies. Behavioral responses to different forms of regulations could be included as part of
the choice of abatement methods. This strategy complicates the responses portrayed in the model
and is left for future research.
The CGE models used for policy in the U.S. and Europe have so-called soft links between
the economic process and emissions. This formulation implies the link between

and

that

allows preference related tradeoffs to change with policy is not captured by these models. This
point is worth further elaboration because the strategy Rogerson used to calibrate his model
selects the model’s parameters to match the moments that describe the first order conditions for
an optimal time allocation both between leisure and work and among market and non-market
activities in two years (1950 and 2003 in his case). These conditions necessarily coordinate with
selection of goods and services, given exogenous labor productivity and tax rates in each of these
two years. In our application we will set the values for
then select

in the first of these years (1950) and

based on conditions in 2005 (our second year for calibration).

endogenously in 2005 recognizing the feedback effects between

and

is determined

as well as its impact

on other tradeoffs.

16

A detailed appendix by Douglas et al. [2008] documented the extensive modeling required.

10

IV. Calibration with Non-Separable Air Quality
Our objective is to offer a new approach for evaluating the plausibility of partial
equilibrium benefit cost assessments. This process also allows the parameter calibration to be
used as one yardstick. One aspect of that calibration arises in the assumptions made about the
importance assigned to air quality thru the size of the moment associated with non-market
tradeoffs. The importance of this moment can be gauged by considering how it affects the other
economic parameters where we have experience to judge the values implied by each calibration.
We follow Rogerson’s calibration assumptions as much as possible. Table 1 summarizes his
estimates for the aggregate time allocation along with the updates to these estimates from
Duernecker and Herrendorf [2015] for 2005. We selected 2005 because it is a closer match to
some of the sources for measures of air quality and precedes the Great Recession. We follow
Rogerson and match the moments describing decisions about market versus household services,
goods versus services, and goods versus leisure in two years 1950 and 2005.
Our model evaluation proceeds in steps. First, we check our logic by demonstrating our
calibration reproduces his original parameter estimates. Then, we assess the effects of using 2005
instead of 2003 as well as using separate estimates for

, rather than attempting to calibrate a

value for this household productivity parameter. By using updated estimates for

(from

Duernecker and Herrendorf) we avoid the need to calibrate this parameter and can concentrate on
those associated with the environmental sub-function.
We begin using these moments for 1950 and 2003. We adopt Rogerson’s assumptions
about average growth rates in productivity for the goods and service sectors (

= 2.48 and

=

1.44 respectively), along with his central estimate for the parameter describing the elasticity of
substitution between home produced and market services. This implies that the parameter for the

11

substitution , will be .45. These moments do not include the effects of

17.

In his model

is

used in place of the sub-function in equation (5). His calibrated values are in the first column of
Table 2 and our replication is in the second column. Next, we use Duernecker and Herrendorf’s
(DH) estimate for the growth rate in productivity in the home production (

= 0.07) and replace

2003 with 2005.18 The results for this calibration are given in the third column of the table.
By using the DH estimate for

(and treating

as a technical parameter that we set

based on existing data for 2005) we can calibrate the parameters associated with the new
“environmental” sub-function by adding one more moment. This equation conveys the
information about the importance of air quality to the household. Equation (7) describes the
moment in “generic” terms. To simplify the description we don’t repeat the full expression for
the MRS involving

(7)

in (7) below19.

= Aggregate Value of Reducing PM10 equivalent of (

) relative to

pre-tax wage compensation
This equation provides one possible measure of the monetary tradeoff a household would make
for a (

) change in air quality relative to their pretax wage income. We use the marginal

rate of substitution (MRS) to estimate a constant tradeoff for a marginal change in air quality that
is applied to the specified non-marginal increment in air quality. This formulation is adopted

17

They correspond to Rogerson’s equations (4), (5), and (6) are also given in our appendix as (5), (6) and (7).
Rogerson’s calibration implies a negative productivity for home production, as reported in our Table 2 and his
Table 2.
19
Other specifications comparable to those used in Carbone and Smith [2008] would yield a different set of implicit
restrictions that govern calibration.
18

12

because it is closer to the form of most empirical benefit measures than a Hicksian willingness to
pay for a discrete change in air quality.20
The normalizations in Rogerson’s model imply that estimates for most of the market
related variables are introduced in relative terms. These normalizations are routine in economic
models for marketed goods and services. The literature on price and quantity indexes for these
goods is well established. Beginning with Irving Fisher’s criteria for consistent price indexes (see
Allen [1975]), one finds a documented logic for linking applied theory and empirical practice.
The same is not true for the practices used in non-market valuation.21 As a result, the definition
in equation (7) plays two roles. First, it is needed to complete the calibration of the parameters of
preferences associated with environmental quality, . Second, it assures a consistent relationship
between the estimates of monetary tradeoffs for air quality from the literature and their
representation in our amended version of Rogerson’s model. That is, the empirical estimates for
monetary tradeoffs for reductions in PM10 (i.e. the right side of equation (7)) are usually
estimated for a small change and are treated as constants. By contrast, the MRS on the left side
of equation (7) is evaluated at a set of values for the variables which each preference
specification implies will contribute to that tradeoff. The model is best interpreted as determining
relative values.
As a rule, calibration of a macro model is expected to provide an exact match of each
moment. It reflects a single solution to a consistent set of equations that define how the
conditions describing the economic process interact in establishing the equilibrium. This moment
20

Nothing in our proposed method precludes the use of EV or CV measures of Hicksian surplus in framing this
moment. They would require estimates for these Hicksian benefit measures that are usually not available.
21
For market goods a key condition in defining consistent price and quantity indexes in the Fisher factor reversal
test (i.e. aggregate price and quantity indexes must be consistent and yield same total expenditures for the sum of the
disaggregated elements contained in the aggregate). In non-market valuation, there are different strategies for
measuring the monetary tradeoffs. They imply different conceptual measures. To compare them and use them
consistently, they must first be linked to a single description that describes their relationship to the tradeoff applied
by individual preferences. See Smith et al. [2002].

13

is different. It uses the shadow value of
change in

to estimate an approximate benefit for a discrete

as a share of income. There is nothing in the economic process that requires this

condition to hold exactly. It is one measure that could be used to gauge the economic importance
of air quality changes and we are requiring the model’s implications for its importance to be
consistent with measures from the literature. This distinction is important to interpreting the “fit”
of our moments for all the variables determined by the model. Prescott’s [2016] recent overview
of the development of macro models for the real business cycle emphasizes how a unified theory
allowing the construction of national income statistics that can be matched to existing data
contributed to the progress. No doubt this symmetry in the definitions for actual statistics and
their modeled counterparts helps to assure better correspondence in the calibration of these
models. There is no natural correspondence for the non-market services environmental services.
They are not part of national income accounts. As a result the match between the moments and
market and non-market variables will now be imperfect. We use these disparities to help in
signaling the importance of the assumptions about how environmental services are introduced
into the model22.
There are data limitations that affect our calibration of the nonmarket sector. The
moment is used for 2005 and not 1950. We do not have reliable measures for the MRS for 1950.
Equally important, the information needed to measure

for 1950 is limited. Since this parameter

reflects both atmospheric conditions and policy, we used information on emissions and ambient
quality in 2005 to construct our measure for . Air quality is measured by the inverse of national
22

Recently Millner and McDermott [2016] have highlighted the failure to evaluate models used for integrated
economic assessments of climate policy. The role of a model’s description of the climate system in relation to the
process determining economic growth is important to its ability to reproduce historical records. They illustrate this
point with Nordhaus’[2014] DICE model over the period 1870 to 2010. While Rogerson’s model is only static, we
are proposing that the comparison of the fit associated with different calibrations as well as these types predictions
become a part of assessing models that attempt to link non-market services to market based economic activity.
Thanks are due Pietro Perreto for raising this issue in the context of the integrated assessment models and economic
growth models.

14

average value for PM10 in 1950 and 2005. Over this period both the measure used to
characterize the ambient concentration of particulates and the statistic EPA uses to summarize
concentrations over time and location have changed. The adjustments we used to develop a
consistent set of measures for PM10 are summarized in Table 3.
Two different values for the non-market share of wage income are considered. The first is
based on measures for the average annual concentration of PM10 in 1950 and 2005, along with
estimates from a meta- analysis of hedonic property model estimates (Smith and Huang [1995]).
We selected the average of the past estimates in 2005 dollars as the largest plausible value based
on the hedonic property value research. This estimate is about fifty percent larger than Chay and
Greenstone’s [2005]. The ambient concentration of particulate matter declined over this period
by 77.2 percent. This approach implies that the monetary value of this change in particulates
would be about 5.4 percent of total wage compensation in 2005.23 The second measure is larger
and is based on estimates adapted from the Second Prospective analysis. This analysis compares
“current” conditions with the 1990 Clean Air Act Amendments relative to a counterfactual that is
intended to represent the ambient conditions “without” regulations. Using the annual benefits for
2010 (measured in 2006 dollars) as a fraction of wage compensation in 2007 (the closest year
with comparable measures for wage compensation from the GGDC data base), the benefits
would be 17.5 percent of total wage compensation.24 These benefits are due to all the changes in
criteria air pollutants the analysis attributes to the Clean Air Act. Nonetheless, reductions in
particulates account for the majority reductions in mortality risk and thus most of the benefits.

23

Using the Chay and Greenstone estimate would reduce the share to about 3.7 percent.
This estimate may seem too much of a back of the envelope assessment. It is intended as an upper bound. If we
were to use the EPA estimate for benefits in 2000, this amounts to 749 billion (in 2006 dollars). Relative to 2000
wage compensation (also measured in 2006 dollars) it would be 14.7 percent. We selected the larger estimate as an
upper bound.
24

15

1.2 of the 1.3 trillion dollars in benefits for 2010 are due to reductions in mortality risk for adults
30 and older as a result of the reductions in particulate matter.
The EPA report provides very detailed maps documenting the spatial impact of the
emission changes for ambient air quality conditions. Our analysis requires two numbers
summarizing the ambient conditions for the U.S. as a whole. These measures are intended to
describe levels of particulate matter for the “with” and “without” conditions. We use the
population weighted average of the changes in PM10 for New York, Chicago, Los Angeles, and
Pittsburgh to approximate the reduction.25 This estimate implies a 55.3 percent reduction in
PM10 based on comparing the “with” CAAA to without estimates. Thus, the EPA health effects
approach to valuing air quality attributes a larger monetary value to a smaller proportionate
improvement in air quality than with the first calibration.
One way to compare this estimate with the lower share is to compute the implied
household marginal willingness to pay for particulate matter. To develop this measure we use the
same number of households as was assumed for the lower estimate for the -share (i.e.128.5
million) along with the approximate estimate for the change in PM10 (29.3 g/m3 ) we attributed
to the with/without comparison for the Clean Air Act Amendments in 2010. These estimates
imply a marginal willingness to pay 10 times larger than the average we developed for the
hedonic ($356 per g/m3 versus $34.60 per g/m3 in 2005 dollars). Clearly this estimate does not
reflect the detailed components of the PE analysis any more than the use of the mean marginal
willingness to pay adequately captures the diversity in hedonic property value estimates. What
they do illustrate is the importance of an intermediate step in linking spatially delineated benefit
measures to an economy wide CGE model. The answer for resolving this disparity is partially
25

These estimates are reported in terms of PM2.5. We used a simple conversion PM2.5 = 0.55 x PM10 to
approximate the implied change in PM10.

16

addressed by considering an index number question. That is, how should we aggregate spatially
delineated air pollution measures?26 One approach would use the logic of price and quantity
index numbers and the Fisher factor reversal condition. Given an aggregate estimate of the
benefits provided by a program can be developed using spatially delineated damage measures,
then with a single, aggregate index of MWTP for that pollutant we can derive an index for the
change in pollution (i.e.

pollution =damages/MWTP).

Columns (4) and (5) in Table 2 provide the parameters implied by each of these
calibrations. In both cases,

is set to the value implied by the value PM10 in 1950 (see Table 3)

for the 1950 moments. For the 2005 moments
PM10 and the value of

for 2005.27

is set to 93.5, the value implied by matching the

is determined by the feedback link with G as part of the

calibration of the 2005 moments.
Table 4 provides a gauge for the model’s fit using each of the two values for the air
quality shares of income. In each case the model defines the moment to match the value share
defined as the value of

implied by the equilibrium

compared to a value for PM10 that was

either 77.2% or 55.3% larger. Equally important, the feedback loop between

and

was “shut

off” for the three moments in 1950. As expected, the calibration does not yield perfect matches
to the data. The largest discrepancies between data and model arise for the allocation to market
services. As the size of the non-market share grows, the model does worse in matching the
implied PM10 in 2005 and better in matching the monetary value share for changes in
compared to income (defined in equation (7)).

26

See Smith [2012] for a discussion of the challenges in developing a time series for aggregate measures of air and
water quality for the U.S.
27
That is, we used the value of implied by the data for calibrating the time allocation to and the labor
productivity implied for . See Table 3.

17

The last two columns in Table 2 permit a comparison of how including air quality affects
the calibrated parameters describing our amendment to Rogerson’s model. Using our amended
specification and the added moment with a relatively small value share for the

moment

changes the allocation parameter for goods versus the service composite and on the elasticity
between goods and the service composite. The share of goods is over five
times what Rogerson’s model implied and is insensitive (in relative terms) to the size of the
value share associated to . The share of consumption remains relatively stable, as does the
share parameters for services considering market purchased versus home production when the
value share for

is small.

The elasticity between goods and the composite of services is sensitive to the presence of
non-separable

and to the size of share attributed to these services. In interpreting these findings

it is important to recognize that pollution is not spatially delineated, so the small share also
implies a smaller marginal value (MRS) for . The calibration reconciles these moments with
the time allocations and the pre-specified substitution between market and home production by
forcing the elasticity between goods and composite services to be nearly zero. As the share for
increases, and there is an increase in the marginal value of , then the parameter calibration
changes. First, the share of services (markets versus home production) declines reflecting the fact
that the composite of home production and air quality is more valuable at the margin to the
household and the elasticity increases tenfold.
The subsistence parameter also switches from a negative value with low share for
positive value for the larger share. The negative value for

to a

implies, all else equal, a higher

marginal value for an increment to the market good. There are offsetting changes in the values of
other parameters that make a full assessment of the implications of this dimension of the
18

calibration infeasible. The value for

drops by nearly twenty percent as the share for

increases and the parameter determining the elasticity increases tenfold. Both would contribute
to any judgment on marginal values for increments to market goods compared to the composite
of market and augmented non-market services.
We can use Brown and Heien’s derivation of the Slutsky terms for intra-group pairs of
goods to suggest that the share selected for

does not alter the substitution relationship between

market goods and the composite of market and home produced services. A judgment about a
positive or negative sign for the cross price effect of services on the demand for market goods is
determined by the sign of

.28 An increases in the value share for

increases the

from .018 to .163 but it is never greater than one. As a result, goods and services remain
substitutes for the representative household.
Another strategy for evaluating the effects of changes in the sets of parameters for
different calibrations considers them within the original Rogerson’s model. That is, we use the
calibrated values for the parameters and “predict” the implied allocation of time between
producing market goods, market services, and household production omitting . This task is
repeated for each of the sets of parameter values associated with the two value shares attributed
to . Table 5 provides these results.
The first columns provide the track record for the original Rogerson model. As expected,
the Rogerson model exactly matches the allocation in 2003. Introducing air quality without
recognizing its role in augmenting household services leads to under allocation of time to
produced services compared to the 2003 allocations and over-allocations to goods and household
produced services. The errors increase with the larger value share for , reflecting the larger
28

Brown and Heien’s equations are not numbered. The relationship for the Slutsky cross price effect is given on
page 742. The Cobb Douglas top nest implies an overall elasticity of unity.

19

value for the elasticity between market goods and composite services. The time allocated to
leisure declines somewhat, as is expected by the relative stability of

for the two value shares.

V. The Effects of Feedbacks
All the current CGE models in the U.S. and Europe leave out the feedbacks associated
with air quality affecting household behavior. Recognizing these links in a general equilibrium
model will necessarily imply that the final level of air quality is an endogenous outcome of the
general equilibrium. Table 6 compares the calibrations of the amended Rogerson model with and
without these feedbacks for each of the two value shares for . One difference in the calibration
stands out in the no feedback case. The elasticity for household produced services and air quality
varies by a factor of 100 as the -share changes. With feedbacks it is between 2.1 and 2.5,
without it varies from 0.05 to 5.5 depending on the size of the -share used in calibration. The
other parameters vary, generally in directions that are the opposite of the effects observed in the
feedback specifications. That is, for the calibrations of the models with feedbacks, increases in
the -share tend to reduce a parameter, the opposite effect is observed in the no feedbacks case.
For example

and

decrease with increases in the -share with the feedback model and

increase with no feedbacks. This change implies increasing the share of goods relative to leisure.
The elasticity between market goods and the services composite moves in the same direction and
remains smaller when the -share increases in the no feedback case.
We use the same strategy to evaluate the composite of parameter changes. Table 7 uses
them to predict time allocations in the original Rogerson specification of the model. The errors
are generally smaller for both of the values for the -share. This is not especially surprising
because the parameters for the original Rogerson model do not include air quality and the “no
feedback” calibration leaves out the link between market decisions and non-market responses.
20

Table 8 evaluates the no feedback model in relation to the data used to calibrate it. A
comparison of these results with the earlier ones in Table 4 clearly favors the calibration
incorporating feedbacks. The fit between the model and the data is worse in this no feedback
case. This result is especially pronounced when the -share is larger. The poor predictions for
in 1950 and 2005 with the larger -share are especially notable. As expected from the
definition of , the fit on the -share improves a bit as the -share increases but displays
comparable performance to the feedback model. That is, the predicted share for

has the largest

error for calibrations using with the smallest share in setting the parameters and the error
declines as the share increases.
What can be concluded from this comparison? First, soft linkages or no feedbacks do
influence the characterization of the market economy. They do not affect our conclusions about
substitution versus complementarity of market goods and composite services. When evaluated
with the original Rogerson framework, one might easily conclude that the soft linkage has a
“small edge” in terms of the errors in predicting time allocations.29 However, when we consider
how well the model as specified with non-separable

fits the data, the conclusion would favor

using the specification with feedbacks. Second, the size of the -share is very important to these
conclusions. If we evaluate the fit based on matching -shares alone, then
-shares implying a larger MRS for

favors the specification with

feedbacks included.
VI. Gauging the General Equilibrium Effects of Large Rules

29

This is generally comparable to the conclusion of Mayeres and Van Regemorter [2008] in assessing feedback
effects in the GEM-E3 model. However, their specification assumed health expenditures were a perfect substitute
for declines in air quality. Our approach allows for more general substitution that is endogenous to our calibration.

21

One of the reasons we proposed developing a simple model for GE analysis was to allow
a transparent standard to gauge the plausibility of PE benefit cost analysis for new rules with
economy-wide effects. This section illustrates how such a process might proceed using a stylized
example. We strip away many important technical details of EPA’s recent Clean Power Plan and
use our model to consider whether the PE estimates for ancillary benefits attributed to
the new rules would be judged as “plausible.” Our analysis is an example. It should not be
treated as a full scale assessment. In a serious assessment, both the structure of a simple general
equilibrium model and the information from the regulatory impact analysis would need to be
designed to match the key elements in the rule under study from the outset. Our goal is to
demonstrate that it could be done and therefore could offer a separate basis for judging the
plausibility of current PE practices with large new rules. This strategy is an alternative to
developing large scale detailed models that seek to represent all aspects of the U.S. economy that
might be impacted by different regulations. Instead our proposal is to consider small, nimble
models can be designed and used for strategic assessments of whether a new rule is large enough
to warrant, economy wide analysis due to its GE effects.
In August 2015, EPA released the final Regulatory Impact Analysis (see U.S.
Environmental Protection Agency [2015b]) for the Clean Power Plan. The analysis assumes that
the compliance period begins seven years after this final rule is issued (in 2022). By 2030, the
analysis estimates that there would be about an 18.5 percent reduction in CO2 emissions from the
estimated emissions without the plan. A variety of options are provided to states. The EPA
analysis estimates the best system of emission reductions (BSER) as performance rates for fossil
fueled electric generating units as well as for natural gas combined cycle units. Based on each
state’s power plants in 2012, a separate goal was developed for each state measured as a mass

22

(tons of CO2 derived translating performance rates with each state’s mix of allowed electric
generating capacity to a total level of CO2 emissions reduced) or a rate (a weighted average of
emission performance rates in terms of pounds of CO2 emission per net megawatt hours of
electricity generated). Model rules are offered that allow for trading systems or technology based
standards as part of the implementation process.
This array of information must be distilled to yield two specific adjustments to our
model. We need the implied reduction in the ancillary pollution in a form that matches our
model. This task means SO2, NOx and PM2.5 must be expressed as PM10 equivalents. In addition
we need a simple estimate for the compliance cost of the rule. Our simplification dramatically
reduces the complexity in the full details of the rule. With full information on the underlying
details it would be possible to construct alternative aggregate indexes for the cost increase and
for the spatially delineated change in air pollution. The final RIA documentation does not
provide the intermediate detail that would be required for each of these tasks30. The absence of
this detail is not crucial to our objectives because the goal is to demonstrate that a comparison
could be undertaken. At the close of this section we return to the issue of whether this
requirement to simplify undermines the logic for using simple GE models to judge more
complex PE assessments.
When full compliance is reached, the RIA analysis estimates the analyzed cost increase to
be 2.5 to 4 percent (see Tables 3.8 and 3.9 in U.S. Environmental Protection Agency [2015b]).
Our focus is on the ancillary health benefits. The discussion in the RIA primarily considers
reductions in SO2 and NOx. Reductions in particulate matter had to be computed outside the
Integrated Planning Model used to estimate these other emission reductions. This difference is
30

Of course, if the goal of a small scale assessment of GE effects was part of the design of the policy analysis for
each RIA, then these data could be retained for constructing these indexes.

23

important for two reasons. First, most of the health benefits arise from particulate matter. The
regulation’s effects on PM2.5 are primarily indirect in that atmospheric concentrations of SO2
and NOx contribute to the formation PM2.5. The RIA develops these measures using Ben MAPCE (Benefits Mapping and Analysis Program-Community Edition, see Abt Associates [2012]).
The analysis used a benefit-per-ton emission reduction to develop the health benefits. This
shorthand reduces the detailed atmospheric modeling underlying a full assessment to unit values
per ton of emissions of PM2.5 or its precursors SO2 and NOx. While the specific analysis in the
RIA was done on a disaggregate level, only the overall estimates for ancillary benefits are
provided. There is no information on the implied values for the estimated reductions in PM2.5
concentrations due to reduced levels of SO2 and NOx in the atmosphere31.
Two sets of computations underlie our measures for the reduction in PM10. When the
annual benefits due to health effects in 2030 are converted to 2005 dollars, they range from 12.1
to 29.4 billion dollars. First, using a weighted average of the Fann, Fulcher and Hubbell [2009]
measures for the values of a ton reduction in SO2 and NOx from electric generating units due to
the effects of each pollutant on the implied reductions in PM2.5, we can recover an estimate for
the “equivalent” reduction in PM10. That is, this reduction in PM10 would yield the same
benefits as that associated with reductions in SO2 and NOx contributing to reduced particulate
matter. Table 9 summarizes the elements for the inputs to our analysis of the Clean Power Plan
(CPP). We selected the 4% cost increase and the middle estimate (2.15%) for the reduction in

31

Our model is based on PM10 not PM2.5. An approximate link between PM2.5 and PM10 is used to adjust the
results PM2.5 = .55 PM10. The distributions for PM10, measures of extreme values of PM10 and the distributions
for PM2.5 change in different ways with each rule. This approximation does not adequately reflect these changes. It
does reflect that any change in the modeling strategies used to gauge economy wide effects will impose new data
needs. The current PE analysts for large rules develop this type of information for important sub-regions. When
small GE models are used in these types of sensitive analyses it would be possible to identify the associated data
needs at an early stage in the RIA development process.

24

PM10 to characterize the effects of the plan as if full compliance occurred in a single year–our
last year 2005.
Our preferred calibration of the extended Rogerson model (i.e. the one with -share of
.0536) is used for the analysis of the GE effects. This calibration was selected because the lower
-share is consistent with the empirical literature that has attempted to measure air quality
benefits relative to income. The first of these studies by Sieg et al. [2004] found annual benefits
for air pollution reduction ranging from 6 to 21 percent that were 1 to 2 percent of household
income. Our low -share is for a larger improvement, more than 3.5 times the upper end of this
range. Assuming proportionate increases in the incremental value attributed to reduced air
pollution (approximately constant marginal willingness to pay) these estimates would imply
values for a -share comparable to our estimate. Tra’s [2010] more recent analysis with a
different specification for a sorting model also applied to Southern California, considered larger
changes in ozone—25 to nearly 40%. He found annual benefits in the range of 2 to 3 percent of
income. Using the same scaling we would select the low -share. Finally, Freeman’s [1982]
classic analysis of the benefits of air quality improvements arrived at best estimates for air
pollution related benefits associated with a 20% reduction in the major criteria pollutants
amounted to about 1.1 percent of national income in 1978. Applying the same simple
extrapolation to his results we would have estimates for a -share about 4.2 percent. Thus, the
literature and the relative magnitude of the estimated benefits due to the effects of the Clean
Power Plan on the criteria pollutants would suggest selecting a model that assigns a more modest
role to air pollution.
Our strategy requires that the model is first solved for baseline conditions that define
With this baseline, the change to productivity parameter for

.

(reflecting the cost increase) as
25

well as the change to

representing how regulations impact the “system” defining

introduced into the model. The GE solution implies a new value of

are

which need not correspond

to the 2.15% reduction in PM10 we attributed to the plan. Taken together, the

and

and the

MRS evaluated at the new equilibrium allow computation of an implied -share for the policy MRS times (

) relative to wage compensation. Comparing this implied value for this ratio

to the share using the PE benefit measure provides our gauge of the effects of GE responses for
PE benefit estimates. Table 10 summarizes the results from this process.
The last row of the Table 10 compares the PE and GE benefit measures. We do not
include costs in the PE estimates used for the comparison in Table 10. The PE benefit measures
are compared in 2005 dollars. The range corresponds to the range in the RIA for the high and
low values of ancillary benefits as documented in Table 9. This comparison implies that the low
PE benefit measure is less than what our model would imply for GE net benefits of the plan and
the high end of the range for the PE benefits is too large—about twice what our model implies
for the GE case. Several qualifications to these results are important. Our model includes the
beneficial effects associated with reductions in conventional air pollutants and the estimated
compliance costs. Thus the costs affect the ultimate GE allocations of time to market goods,
market services and home production. Substitution effects in response to relative prices changes
as well as the effect of the air quality change on home produced services imply we do not realize
the technically prescribed reduction in PM10. In effect, augmented home services alter the
service/goods mix enough that realized emissions reduction does not match the change implied
by the change in .
The potential importance of the selected

share for the model’s results does not, in our

view, reduce the potential for using simpler GE models to gauge the importance of economy
26

wide effects. Instead it identifies a need for change in the way we construct benefit measures. We
do not have accumulated experience to use in interpreting what the -share should be. Our
earlier discussion explaining why we favored the smaller share assembled a “patchwork” of
recent research together with an early assessment of the benefits from reducing all air pollutants
to develop some intuition. The importance of the -share to judgments about what are small or
large interventions with GE effects suggests a need to reorient research in non-market valuation
so it is possible to measure benefits from environmental improvements in a way that gauges their
magnitude in relation to household income or consumption expenditures.
VII. Implications
Shortly after the inauguration in President Obama’s first term, the Tobin Project released
a volume entitled New Perspectives on Regulation. Greenstone’s chapter in this volume called
for reform in regulatory design and evaluation. Measuring benefits or costs for regulations, in his
view, requires as much controlled testing as is feasible.32 His system would involve a
restructuring of statutes governing regulations so they can be evaluated. This is a tall order. In
the meantime we need strategies to allow the assessment of the benefit measures to “discipline
the discretion” in ex ante policy evaluation.
Current policy analysts charged with evaluating large scale environmental policies have
recognized the importance of taking account of economy-wide effects in the development of
benefit cost analyses. However, they have opted for using models that recognize the complex
interactions of environmental contaminants in the atmosphere and then using soft links of the
results from these models to equally large and complex economic models of market transactions.

32

See Greenstone [2009] p. 112.as well as his concluding discussion with specific proposals (pp123-124)

27

As a result, we cannot evaluate the importance of the interactions of nature and the economy for
the relevance of the information in these benefit cost assessments.
We have demonstrated that this can lead to important misrepresentations of a simple
economy, and we suggest as an alternative that these assessments take a page from modern
macro-economic analyses of policy. Frame simple but strategic models that focus on the issue
relevant to the policy assessment. Acknowledge they are not comprehensive but are instead
designed to gauge the plausibility of policy analyses. Our example outlined how this task could
be undertaken for environmental policy, with a stylized example of the Clean Power Plan. This
approach is consistent with the logic advocated by Harberger [1964] in the context of excess
burden33. General equilibrium or economy wide effects spread across markets based on the cross
price or substitution effects that reflect non-separabilities in preferences.34
Our discussion and examples here have focused on air pollution policy but the same
issues can arise with water pollution policies. In this case regulations also affect spatially
delineated facilities and their aggregate effects must be “added up” in some way to account for
the economy wide implications. As was the case with air quality modeling, analysis of the effects
of these policies on water quality must be spatially delineated to take account of the features of
emissions in different watersheds. Economy wide assessments require that we recognize the need
to aggregate both the compliance costs imposed on key sectors and the realized impacts on
environmental quality. Models need to reflect both the cost and the benefit effects of rules. Nonseparability in preferences is central to the strategies used to measure the tradeoffs people would
make to improve environmental quality. It should also be an integral part in any description of

33
34

See Goulder and Williams for a modern update and extension to Harberger’s analysis
Non-separability in production functions would also arise in a more general model.

28

how consumers would respond to the price and environmental quality effects of large scale
changes in environmental policy.

29

Table 1: Allocation of Labor Hours in U.S.ᵃ

Market Goods

Market Services

Home Production

1950

.115

.135

.250

2003

.058

.194

.213

2005

.070

.232

.204

ͣᵃ Total hours are normalized to sum to unity. The figures for 1950 and 2003 are
from Rogerson [2008] Table 1 and for 2005 from Duernecker and Herrendorf
[2015] Table 7, with the allocation of market work between goods and services
determined to correspond to the same proportions as Rogerson.

30

Table 2: Calibration of Base Rogerson Model and Extension with Air Pollution

Parameters

Rogerson

Our

(2008)

Replication

0.07

0.07

0.46

Share of consumption
Share of home

2005 &

Feedback
(1)

(2)

0.1

0.498

0.414

0.46

0.47

0.403

0.267

0.5

0.5

0.5

0.556

0.586







0.619

0.338

Elasticity of substitution market goods vs. services

0.44

0.48

0.5

0.018

0.163

Elasticity of substitution - home production

1.82

1.82

1.82

1.82

1.82







2.47

2.11

0.035

0.039

0.032

-0.024

0.015

Goods

2.48

2.48

2.48

2.48

2.48

Services

1.44

1.44

1.44

1.44

1.44

Household

-0.20

-0.216

0.07

0.07

0.07







0.0536

0.1747

Share of goods
(market vs. services)
Share of services
(markets vs. home production)

σ_GF

-ϵ

home vs. nature

Elasticity for effect of air quality
Subsistence market goods
Productivity

Q-share

31

Table 3: Values and Sources for the Construction of Q Share Measures for Calibration

A. Analysis for
Low Q-share

Variable
PM10

Value
110.5 µg/m³

Year
1950

PM10

25.2 µg/m³

2005

Proportionate Change

0.772

MRS

$34.60

2005

Average from Smith and Huang [1995] adjusted to convert to PM10

93.5

2005

Ambient concentration of PM10 in 2005 divided by value of G, which is
product productivity parameter AG and HG (=.2693).

µ
Share of Aggregate
Wage Compensation

B. Analysis for
High Q-share

Source
Matus et al. [2008]. Source -- David Mintz in personal communication in
2003. Derived from average of second max of PM10. Applies 0.415 to
average of second maximum. See U.S. EPA [1996]

0.0536

Wage compensation comes from the Labor Compensation (Compensation of
Employees) series from the Groningen Growth and Development Centre
Databases. We used the EU KLEMS Database, accessed through
http://ggdc.webhosting.rug.nl/ggdc/SimpleAggregates.mvc/IndustrySelect

PM10

23.64 µg/m³

With Clean
Air Act

U.S. Environmental Protection Agency [2011] Box 4-1. Population weighted
average of PM2.5 for New York, Pittsburgh, Chicago, Los Angeles, scaled by
(1/0.55)

PM10

52.94 µg/m³

Without
Clean Air Act

U.S. Environmental Protection Agency [2011] Box 4-1. Population weighted
average of PM2.5 for New York, Pittsburgh, Chicago, Los Angeles, scaled by
(1/0.55)

2006 dollars
for 2010

U.S. Environmental Protection Agency [2011] Table 7.5

Proportionate Change
Aggregate Benefits
Share of Aggregate
Wage Compensation

0.553
$1.3 trillion
0.175

Wage compensation comes from the Labor Compensation (Compensation of
Employees) series from the Groningen Growth and Development Centre
Databases. We used the EU KLEMS Database, accessed through
http://ggdc.webhosting.rug.nl/ggdc/SimpleAggregates.mvc/IndustrySelect

32

Table 4: Comparison of Data and Model Estimates with Low and High Q-Shares

Q value share = .0536

Q value share = .1747

Data

Model

Data

Model

0.1150

0.1149

0.1150

0.1154

0.1350

0.1629

0.1350

0.1670

0.2500

0.2314

0.2500

0.2526

0.0700

0.0597

0.0700

0.0610

0.2320

0.2103

0.2320

0.2040

0.2040
25.2000

0.2081
24.4926

0.2040
25.2000

0.2061
21.9428

.0536

.1073

.1747

.1695

1950

2005

PM10
Q value share

33

Table 5: Performance of Model with Feedbacks in Original Rogerson Specification ᵃ

Rogerson -2003
Data

Model

.1940

.1940

.0580

.2130

.0580

.2130

Q share = .0536

Q share = .1747

.1642

.0748

(0.85)

(0.39)

.0732

.0988

(1.26)

(1.70)

.2780

.3900

(1.30)
(1.83)
ᵃ The numbers in parentheses below the third and fourth columns are the ratio
of predicted allocation of time to market services, market goods, and home
production for the models with air quality relative to the corresponding value
from the Rogerson model.

34

Table 6: Calibration With and Without Feedbacks for Low and High Q-Shares

Parameters

Feedback

No Feedback

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

0.498

0.414

0.411

0.455

0.403

0.267

0.491

0.523

Share of consumption

0.556

0.586

0.578

0.389

Share of home

0.619

0.338

0.998

0.502

Elasticity of substitution market goods vs. services

0.018

0.163

0.019

0.098

Elasticity of substitution - home production

1.82

1.82

1.82

1.82

Elasticity for effect of air quality

2.47

2.11

5.55

0.046

-0.024

0.015

-0.081

0.026

Goods

2.48

2.48

2.48

2.48

Services

1.44

1.44

1.44

1.44

Household

0.07

0.07

0.07

0.07

0.0536

0.1747

0.0536

0.1747

Share of goods
(market vs. services)
Share of services
(markets vs. home production)

σ_GF

-ϵ

home vs. nature

Subsistence market goods
Productivity

Q-share

35

Table 7: Performance of the Model Without Feedback in Original Rogerson Specificationᵃ

Rogerson

No Feedback

Model

Q share = .0536

Q share = .1747

.1940

.2394

.1609

(1.23)

(0.87)

.0679

.0712

(1.17)

(1.23)

.2122

.1135

(0.99)

(0.53)

.0580

.2130

ᵃ The numbers in parentheses below the values in the second and third columns are
the ratio of the predicted allocation of time to market services (HS), market goods
(HG), and home production (HN) for the models calibrated with air quality moments
without feedbacks relative to the corresponding values predicted from the original
Rogerson model.

36

Table 8: Comparison of the “No Feedback” Model’s Fit with Low and High Q-Shares

Q value share = .0536

Q value share = .1747

Data

Model

Data

Model

.1150

.1163

.1150

.1141

.1350

.1591

.1350

.2148

.2500

.2734

.2500

.0098

.0700

.0723

.0700

.0708

.2320

.2142

.2320

.1414

.2040

.2165

.2040

.1277

25.2000

25.2210

25.2000

25.2210

.0536

.0001

.1747

.1319

1950

2005

PM10
Q value share

37

Table 9: Selected Components of EPA RIA’s Analysis of Clean Power Plan

Measure and Source

Estimate

Cost Estimates (2011 dollars, billions)
Baseline Costs (Table 3.9, U.S. EPA [2015])

$ 201.3

Annualize Compliance Costs
Rate Based

$ 8.4

Mass Based

$ 5.1

Ancillary Health Benefits (2011 dollars, billions, Table 4.3i, U.S. EPA [2015])
Rate Based (3% discount rate)

$ 14 to $ 34

Mass Based (3% discount rate)

$ 12 to $ 28

Benefit per Ton Precursor SO₂ and Noₓ (Fann et al. [2009], Figure 4)
Electric Generating Units (3% discount rate)
EGU SO₂ (2006 dollars)

$ 82,000

EGU Noₓ (2006 dollars)

$ 15,000

Weighted Average ᵃ

$ 50,510

Estimate for Equivalent Reduction in PM10 (percent)
Rate Based

2.15 to 5.22

Mass Based

1.84 to 4.30

ᵃ The per ton estimates are weighted by estimated reductions in SO₂ and Noₓ for the rate
based plan in 2030. See Table ES.2 in EPA [2015].

38

Table 10: Estimated GE Bounds for EPA’s PE Benefits for Clean Power Plan

Calibrated Model
Q-share = .0536
Cost Increase (%)
Change in PM10 Emission (%)

4.0
-2.2

Computed Change in GE PM10 (%)

-1.55

GE Q-share of Clean Power Plan

.0021

Ratio of PE Benefits to Benefits for Estimated GE

0.82 to 1.99

39

References
Abt Associates, Inc. 2012. “BenMAP User’s Manual Appendices,” prepared for U.S. Research
Triangle Park, NC: U. S. Environmental Protection Agency, Office of Air Quality
Planning and Standards
Allen, R.G.D., 1975. Index Numbers in Theory and Practice (Chicago: Aldine Publishing
Company).
Brown, Murray and Dale Heien, 1972. “The S-Branch Utility Tree: A Generalization of the
Linear Expenditure System.” Econometrica, 40 (4): 737-747.
Carbone, Jared C. and V. Kerry Smith, 2008. “Evaluating Policy Interventions with Equilibrium
Externalities.” Journal of Public Economics, 92 (5-6): 1254-1274.
Carbone, Jared C. and V. Kerry Smith, 2013. “Valuing Nature in a General Equilibrium.”
Journal of Environmental Economics and Management, 66 (1): 72-89.
Chay, Kenneth Y. and Michael Greestone, 2005. “Does Air Quality Matter? Evidence from the
Housing Market.” Journal of Political Economy, 113 (2): 376-424.
Chung, Jae Wan, 1994. Utility and Production Functions: Theory and Applications (Cambridge:
Blackwell Publishers).
Douglas, Sharon G, Jay L. Haney, A. Belle Hudischewskyj, Thomas C. Myers, Y. Wei, 2008.
“Second Prospective Analysis of Air Quality in the U.S.: Air Quality Modeling.”
Draft Report, Prepared for Office of Policy Analysis and Review, U.S. Environmental
Protections Agency.
Duernecker, Georg and Berthold Herrendorf, 2015. “On the Allocation of Time: A Quantitative
Analysis of the U.S. and France.” Unpublished paper, Arizona State University, April.
Espinosa, Juan Andres, 1996. “Consistent General Equilibrium Measurement of the Net
Benefits for Improving Environmental Quality: A Computable General Equilibrium
40

Analysis of the European Community.” PhD Dissertation, North Carolina State
University.
Espinosa, Juan Andres and V. Kerry Smith, 1995. "Measuring the Environmental Consequences
of Trade Policy: A Non-Market CGE Analysis." American Journal of Agricultural
Economics, 77(3): 772-777.
Fann, Neal, Charles M. Fulcher and Bryan J. Hubbell, 2009. “The Influence of Location, Source
and Emission Type in Estimate of the Human Health Benefits of Reducing a Ton of Air
Pollution.” Air Quality and Atmospheric Health, 2 (3): 169-176.
Freeman, A. Myrick, III, 1982. Air and Water Pollution Control: A Benefit-Cost Assessment
(New York: John Wiley & Sons).
Goulder, L.H. and R.C. Williams, III, 2003. “The Substantial Bias for Ignoring General
Equilibrium Effects in Estimating Excess Burden and a Practical Solution.” Journal of
Political Economy, 3 (4): 898-927.
Greenstone, Michael, 2009. “Toward a Culture of Persistent Regulatory Experimentation and
Evaluation.” in David Moss and John Cisternino, editors, New Perspective Regulation
(Cambridge, MA: The Tobin Project).
Harberger, A.C., 1964. “The Measurement of Waste.” American Economic Review, Papers and
Proceedings, 54 (3): 58-76.
Hazilla, Michael, and Raymond J. Kopp, 1990. “Social Cost of Environmental Quality
Regulations: A General Equilibrium Analysis.” Journal of Political Economy, 98 (4):
853-873.
ICF Incorporated, April 2010. 812 Economic Analyses Using the EMPAX-CGE Modeling
System, Revised Draft Report. (RTI Project Number 0212224.000.004).

41

Just, Richard E., Darrell L. Hueth, and Andrew Schmitz, 2004. The Welfare Economics of
Public Policy; A Practical Approach to Project and Policy Evaluation (Cheltenham,
U.K: Edward Elgar).
Kokoski, Mary F. and V. Kerry Smith, 1987. “A General Equilibrium Analysis of PartialEquilibrium Welfare Measures: The Case of Climate Change.” American Economic
Review, 77 (3): 331-341
Krutilla, John V., 1961. “Welfare Aspects of Benefit Cost Analysis.” Journal of Political
Economy, 69 (3): 226-235.
Matus, Kira, Trent Yang, Sergey Paltsev, John Reilly, and Kyung-Min Nam, 2008. “Toward
Integrated Assessment of Environmental Change: Air Pollution Health Effects in the
USA.” Climatic Change, 88 (1): 59-92.
Mayeres, Inge and D. Van Regemorter, 2008. “Modeling the Health Related Benefits of
Environmental Policies and Their Feedback Effects: A CGE Analysis for the EU
Countries with GEM-E3.” The Energy Journal, 29 (1): 135-150.
Millner, Antony and Thomas K. J. McDermott, 2016. “Model Confirmation in Climate
Economics.” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences,113 (31):8675-8680.
Nordhaus, William, 2014. “Estimates of the Social Cost of Carbon: Concepts and results from
the DICE-2013R Model and Alternatives.” Journal of the Association of Environmental
and Resource Economists, 1(1/2):273-312.
Prescott, Edward c., 2016. “RBC Methodology and the development of Aggregate economic
Theory.” NBER working paper #22422, July.
Rogerson, Richard, 2008. “Structural Transformation and the Deterioration of European Labor
Market Outcomes.” Journal of Political Economy, 116 (2): 235-259.

42

Sieg, Holger, V. Kerry Smith, H. Spencer Banzhaf, and Randy Walsh, 2004. “Estimating the
General Equilibrium Benefits of Large Changes in Spatially Delineated Public Goods.”
International Economic Review, 45 (4): 1047-1077.
Smith, V. Kerry. 2012. “Reflections – In Search of Crosswalks between Macroeconomics and
Environmental Economics.” Review of Environmental Economics and Policy, 6(2):298317.
Smith, V. Kerry and Ju Chin Huang. 1995. “A Meta-Analysis of Hedonic Property Value
Models.” Journal of Political Economy, 103 (1):209-227.
Smith, V. Kerry, George Van Houtven, and Subhrendu K. Pattanayak. 2002. “Benefit transfer
via Preference Calibration: ‘Prudential Algebra’ for Policy.” Land Economics, 78 (1):
132-152.
Tra, Constant I, 2010. “A Discrete Choice Equilibrium Approach to Valuing Large
Environmental Changes.” Journal of Public Economics, 94 (1-2): 183-196.
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, September 2015a. Economy-Wide Modeling: Benefits of
Air Quality Improvements White Paper. Paper prepared for the U.S. EPA Science
Advisory Board Panel on Economy-Wide Modeling of the Benefits and Costs of
Environmental Regulation, September 22, Washington, DC.
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, August 2015b. Regulatory Impact Analysis for the Clean
Power Plan Final Rule, (EPA-452/R-15-003). Office of Air Quality Planning and
Standards, Research Triangle Park, NC
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, September 2015c, Regulatory Impact Analysis of the
Final revisions to the National Ambient Air Quality Standards for Ground –Level Ozone,

43

(EPA-452/R-15-007) Office of Air Quality Planning and Standards, Research Triangle
Park, NC
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, March 2011. The Benefits and Costs of the Clean Air Act
from 1990 to 2020, Final Report. Office of Air Quality Planning and Standards, Research
Triangle Park, NC
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, March 2008. EMPAX-CGE Model Documentation.
Interim Report, (RTI Project No. 0209897.002.041). Office of Air Quality Planning and
Standards, Research Triangle Park, NC
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, September 2008. Second Prospective Analysis of air
Quality in the U.S.: Air Quality Modeling, Draft Report. Office of Policy Analysis and
Review, Research Triangle Park, N.C.
WHO Regional Office for Europe, OECD 2015. Economic Cost of the Health Impact of Air
Pollution on Europe: Clean Air, Health and Wealth. Copenhagen: WHO Regional Office
for Europe.
Wolverton, Ann, 2015. “Overview of Economy Wide Charge,Working Papers, and Memos”
Presentation to Economy-Wide Panel of U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, Science
Advisory Board, Washington, D.C. July 15.
Vrontisi, Zoi, Jan Abrell, Frederik Neuwahl, Bert Saveyn and Fabian Wagner, 2016. “Economic
Impacts of EU Clean Air Policies Assessed in a CGE Framework.” Environmental
Science and Policy, 55 (1): 54-64.

44

Appendix A.
(1)
= composite consumption
= leisure

(2)
= market goods
= market services
= non-market services or home production

(3)

(4)

F

(emissions)
(ambient concentration)
(implicit quality)
where

45

Budget Constraint

= income tax rate
= transfer of taxes to household
(

, the link between choices of the connection between the

compensation for work time and this transfer is not recognized by consumer)
Time Constraint

So

(leisure)

Allow for labor productivity

(5) Household Services vs. Market Services

(6) Goods vs. Services

(7) Hours Worked in the Goods Sector vs. Leisure

46

(3’) F
= measure of amenity services

47

Appendix B: Logic for Analysis Structure
Resource limitations, both financial and time, prevent EPA from conducting full benefit
cost analyses for proposed rules. As a rule, the typical benefit analysis selects what are described
as “analytical snapshot years” (see U.S. Environmental Protection Agency [2015]). These
selections are intended to describe a year when the rule being evaluated is fully implemented (or
close to it). When they are in a future year other economic variables are projected based on
established economic forecasts. The benefit measures are presented in real terms, usually
selecting a year close to the year the report is issued. Unit benefit measures such as the VSL are
adjusted for income effects with assumed income elasticities based on the literature.
Our analysis follows this basic logic by selecting a candidate year but instead uses a year
(in our case 2005) when consistent measures for the variables Rogerson used in the macro model
are available. This strategy implies our focus is on three features of the environmental variables
contributing to our added moment: the proportionate change in the PM10 (and associated change
in ) implied by the right side of the moment (given in equation 7); the measure of the economic
value for this change relative to wage compensation for a year as close to the year of the benefit
measure; and measures for the value of PM10 for the years when the feedback effect was not
imposed.
The specific form of the moment for (

) adjusted

so that we reproduced the

proportionate change implied by (PM100 – PM10)/ PM100.

48

