                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




     THE CAUSES AND CONSEQUENCES OF INCREASED FEMALE EDUCATION
        AND LABOR FORCE PARTICIPATION IN DEVELOPING COUNTRIES

                                        Rachel Heath
                                     Seema Jayachandran

                                     Working Paper 22766
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w22766


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                          October 2016, Revised August 2017




Prepared for inclusion in the Oxford Handbook on the Economics of Women, ed. Susan L.
Averett, Laura M. Argys and Saul D. Hoffman. (New York: Oxford University Press.
Forthcoming, 2018). We thank Alejandro Favela for excellent research assistance and Pinar
Keskin and Rafael Santos for very helpful comments. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2016 by Rachel Heath and Seema Jayachandran. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
The Causes and Consequences of Increased Female Education and Labor Force Participation
in Developing Countries
Rachel Heath and Seema Jayachandran
NBER Working Paper No. 22766
October 2016, Revised August 2017
JEL No. J16,O15

                                          ABSTRACT

Two important recent trends in most developing countries have are the rise in female labor force
participation and the closing of gender gaps in school enrollment. This article begins by exploring
the causes of the increases in female education, which include greater job availability and policy
interventions that have promoted girls’ education. The article then explores the causes of
increased female employment, which include a sectoral shift from “brawn-based” industries to
services, as well as policies that have increased girls’ education. The article also discusses the
effects of these increases in female education and labor supply, particularly for the well-being of
women.


Rachel Heath
Department of Economics
University of Washington
Box 353330
Seattle, WA 98103
rmheath@uw.edu

Seema Jayachandran
Department of Economics
Northwestern University
2211 Campus Dr
Evanston, IL 60208
and NBER
seema@northwestern.edu
1. Introduction

Two important recent trends in most developing countries are the rise in female labor force
participation and the closing of gender gaps in school enrollment. In this article, we explore
both the causes and the effects that they have had on the lives of women. A central theme that
emerges is the relationship between the two phenomena: as increases in education have
prompted more women to enter the labor force, improved labor market opportunities have also
prompted increases in female education.

We begin by exploring the causes of the increases in female education. In addition to the role of
greater job availability, we also discuss policy interventions that have promoted girls’
education. Recent evidence indicates that providing cash or in-kind benefits to parents who
keep their daughters in school, building schools or improving facilities, and developing
programs to reduce general gender disparities can all lead to increases in girls’ education.

We then turn to the causes of increased female employment. Against the backdrop of the well-
known theory that female labor supply is U-shaped in development (Boserup, 1970; Goldin,
1995; Mammen and Paxson, 2000), we provide evidence both that poor countries are moving
along the U-shaped curve as they develop and that the curve has shifted over time. Low-income
countries are on the downward-sloping portion of the empirically-estimated U-shaped curve,
which would suggest that their female employment rate would be declining as their economies
grow. However, we show that the U-shaped curve has been shifting upward in recent decades:
female labor force participation has increased, conditional on a country’s income. The net effect
of movement along the curve and the shift in the curve is that even the poorest countries in the
world have generally experienced rising female employment. Some of the employment growth
has been generated by a sectoral shift from “brawn” to services, which is occurring earlier in the
development trajectory than predicted by the U-shape. We also argue that policies that have
increased girls’ education have contributed to the upwards shift. Furthermore, we cite evidence
that programs seeking to improve women’s earning potential (such as microfinance or business
skills training) or to reduce the burdens of home production (such as free child care) have had
some success in increasing female labor supply. If these programs are adopted on a large-scale,
they could contribute to a further shift upwards.

In the second half of the article, we document the effects of these increases in education and
labor supply. In addition to increased labor supply, there is considerable evidence that female
education delays fertility and leads to healthier children once a woman has them. There is some
evidence, although it is less extensive, that women with more education marry later and on
better terms, and are healthier themselves.



                                                2
We conclude by discussing the effects of increased labor supply on women. We present
research that shows that job availability increases women’s bargaining power, even if they do
not work themselves. At the same time, holding constant job availability, working itself leads to
even greater increases in women’s bargaining power and children’s health. While these
outcomes both represent improvements in women’s utility and are frequent policy goals, we
also discuss evidence that there may also be concurrent increases in domestic violence or
reductions in women’s leisure time that make the net effect for women’s welfare less clear.

2. Determinants of female education and labor supply

2a. Determinants of increases in education

There is a pronounced male bias in educational attainment at low levels of economic
development, which is absent among richer societies. Figure 1 shows the relationship between
gender gaps in education and development by plotting the female-to-male ratio in secondary
school enrollment rates in countries around the world against GDP per capita. The ratio is
below 1 in most poor countries – meaning that female enrollment is lower than male enrollment
-- but in richer countries there is gender parity or, in fact, female enrollment exceeds male
enrollment.

The pattern seen in the cross-section of countries is also seen over time in most poor countries as
their economies grow: girls’ education increases at a faster rate than boys’, narrowing the
gender gap. Figure 2 plots the trend in secondary school completion rate for females relative to
males among low-income countries in Sub-Saharan Africa and Asia. While education levels for
both genders have been rising over time (not depicted in the figure), the growth is more rapid
for females as indicated by the increasing ratio female-to-male education ratio.

Economic forces affecting female education
There are several potential reasons for the rise in female education and, more specifically, the
faster rise in female than male education. First, if the female employment rate is rising and
education confers benefits in the labor market, then forward-looking families will invest more
in girls’ education over time. Should families in developing countries be anticipating a rising
female employment rate? Female employment could increase with development for many
reasons, as discussed in Jayachandran (2015) and briefly reviewed here. As economic activity
shifts away from “brawn-based” work and toward “brain-based” work, such as in the services
sector, female workers gain a comparative advantage (Pitt, Rosenzweig, and Hassan, 2012).
Reductions in fertility, better control over the timing of fertility, and improvements in maternal
health also increase women’s time in the labor market (Jayachandran and Lleras-Muney, 2009;
Miller, 2010). While there are also some potential channels through which female employment
might instead decrease with development -- as discussed in the next section -- we also show

                                                 3
that the positive channels have dominated negative channels in a majority of countries, so that
female employment has indeed risen in most countries over the past 20 years.

There are also other channels besides female employment that could be driving the rise in girls’
education that accompanies economic development. The opportunity cost of schooling might
fall due to decreases in parents’ fertility and in the time-intensity of home production: girls’
time that they had spent caring for siblings or doing household chores is freed up, enabling
them to stay in school longer.

These explanations do not rest on any societal favoritism toward boys. However, part of the
gender gap in education may very well reflect favoritism. Thus, another potential explanation
for the rising education of girls is that educating children has consumption value for parents,
with girls’ education more of a luxury good than boys’ education; with rising family incomes,
spending on girls begins to catch up to spending on boys. In addition, economic development
might alter preferences and reduce gender-biased attitudes. Stated gender bias tends to be
negatively correlated with economic development, although we do not have causal evidence
that economic development systematically ameliorates gender-biased attitudes (Jayachandran,
2015).

Gender-focused policies affecting female education
In addition to the economic forces that accompany development leading to more female
education, there are many policies directed at increasing female education that have been put in
place in recent decades. One type of policy involves school infrastructure. Building more
schools could be a girl-friendly policy if parents are more sensitive to travel distance when
deciding to send girls to schools (Burde and Linden, 2013). Similarly, building toilets in schools
might be more important for girls’ enrollment than boys’ (Adukia, forthcoming). Many
developing countries have eliminated school fees for primary schools, and such a policy might
especially help girls if parents were reluctant to invest money in their education.

Another type of policy to increase girls’ education is conditional cash transfers (CCTs).
Prominent programs such as Oportunidades in Mexico pay families a larger amount to keep
their daughters in school than their sons, under the view that a larger amount is needed to
induce them to educate a daughter than a son, and some CCTs only target girls (Schultz, 2004).
An in-kind CCT in India gives bicycles to girls who remained in secondary school; such a policy
both provides an incentive to remain in school and makes traveling to school faster and safer.
This program increased female secondary school enrollment by 30% in the state of Bihar, and
the authors attribute most of the effect to the reduced travel time and increased safety, rather
than the cash-equivalent incentive effect (Muralidharan and Prakash, 2013) .



                                                     4
In other cases, policies aimed at improving female welfare, though not directly increasing
female education, might have positive spillovers onto education. For example, there is evidence
that the granting of land inheritance rights to women in India increased girls' schooling. This
might have been due to either newly empowered mothers pushing for greater education of their
daughters or a complementarity between land ownership and education, with an increase in
perceived returns to education for girls in anticipation of their future inheritance (Deininger,
Goyal, and Nagarajan, 2013; Roy, 2013). In addition, quotas that increased female representation
in elected positions in India led to more education for girls, presumably by raising girls’ own
aspirations and their parents’ aspirations for them (Beaman et al., 2012). Policies to ban or
discourage early marriage of girls might also increase girls’ schooling by decreasing the
opportunity cost of schooling; Field and Ambrus (2008) present evidence from Bangladesh
consistent with such a channel.

2b. Determinants of increases in labor supply

A well-known theory of female employment and development posits that there is a U-shaped
relationship between female employment and economic development (Boserup, 1970; Goldin,
1995). At early stages of development, women do unpaid work on family farms and in family
businesses. With development, economic activity migrates to factories and firms, and women
tend to withdraw from the labor force. This could be due to both households being less
economically dependent on two incomes and social stigma about women working in these
outside jobs. Working outside the home is also harder to combine with caring for children than
is home-based work, and child-care responsibilities typically lie with women. Then, with higher
levels of development, female employment swings back up again. The increase in female
employment is driven by a sectoral shift toward light manufacturing and services, among other
factors. Women have a comparative advantage in mentally-intensive services (as compared to
physically-intensive agriculture, for example), and service jobs might also be deemed more
socially acceptable than other jobs.

Figure 3 plots the relationship between GDP and the female labor force participation rate across
countries using the most current available data. In addition to the data point for each country,
the figure plots the best-fit quadratic relation. While there is considerable dispersion across
countries, the best-fit relationship is indeed a U-shape.

Under this U-shaped model of female employment and development, depending on whether a
society is on the declining or rising part of the U, economic development could either increase
or decrease female employment. “Developing” or “low-income” countries are, by and large, on
the decreasing part of the curve. This means that among developing countries, the richer ones
tend to have a lower female employment rate. (While the definition of developing countries is


                                                 5
arbitrary, one grouping is the World Bank’s low-income and lower-middle-income countries,
which are those with GDP per capita below about $4000 in 2014 U.S. constant dollars. One
could also classify upper-middle-income countries as developing countries, in which case those
with GDP per capita below about $12,500 are included, which is roughly the bottom of the U).

While Figure 3 examines the relationship in a cross-section, Figure 4 looks for within-country
evidence of the U-shape by plotting changes in women’s employment between 1991 and 2011
versus the country’s GDP in 1991. As countries grow (i.e., as their GDP increases), they should
move rightward along the U. Thus, the U-shape theory predicts that female employment falls
with GDP growth at low GDP, but increases with GDP growth at higher GDP; this prediction
can be seen from the fact that the slope of a U-shape is negative on the left and then turns
positive at the bottom of the U. In line with this prediction, Figure 4 shows that there is on
average more positive growth in female employment among countries with higher GDP in
1991. However, there is no evidence for downward movement along the downward part of the
U: the best-fit line never predicts negative growth in female employment. This mixed evidence
suggests that the U-shape theory captures only part of the recent story with female
employment: Yes, there are forces causing GDP growth to spur female employment more in
richer countries, but there are also forces that have spurred female employment across the
board in recent decades. Speculatively, the global push to increase female education might be
one of these latter forces.

Indeed, there is evidence that in many countries, female labor force participation has been
rising, conditional on income (World Bank, 2012). Figure 5 plots the best-fit U-shape over time,
in 10 years intervals from 1991 to 2011. In panel A, which weights each country equally, the
curve rises across each decade. In contrast, panel B, which weights each country by population,
shows a rise between 1991 and 2001 but little progress after 2001; this pattern is consistent with
female employment stagnating or declining in several populous countries, such as India (Klasen
and Pieters, 2015).

To summarize, female employment levels have been rising in most developing countries, but
how dramatic this trend has been depends on some important nuances of how one defines the
question. First, it matters whether one examines trends unconditionally or conditional on
income: while in poor countries, unconditional increases in female employment have been quite
modest, this trend represents a large boost in female employment relative to a benchmark
where these countries were predicted to have decreasing female employment as they moved
along the downward part of the U. Second, it matters whether one weights by country or by
person: female employment has been steadily rising if one weights each country equally, but
has been stagnant recently when one weights each person equally.



                                                 6
Economic forces affecting female employment
Increases in female education have been an important factor in the increased female labor force
participation, particularly into relatively high-paying jobs. Economists have long noted a
positive correlation between education and female labor force participation in most (although
not all) developing countries (see Psacharopoulos and Tzannatos, 1989 for a summary), and
recent natural experiments confirm that this relationship appears to be causal. Each year of
education induced by the Zimbabwean reform studied by Grepin and Bharadwaj (2015) led to 3
percentage point increase in the probability that the woman works outside the home and lives
in an urban area. Similarly, women induced to get more education by a 1997 law that increased
compulsory schooling in Turkey from five to eight years were more likely to work outside the
home and in jobs that provide social security benefits (Erten and Keskin, forthcoming). While
the Ugandan reform studied by Keats (2014) did not change women’s labor force participation
on the extensive margin, it did increase the likelihood that women had migrated to the capital
city and were working for cash. One interesting channel behind the shift to higher-paying jobs
is increased mobility: education increases the probability of living in an urban area in
Zimbabwe (Grepin and Bharadwaj, 2015) and in Kampala (Uganda’s capital) (Keats 2014).

However, increased education does not universally translate into a higher probability of
working. The increased education among women in Pakistan generated by the presence of a
sex-specific school that Andrabi, Das, and Khwaja (2013) documented did not lead to greater
labor force participation. A similar context of low female labor supply is the Zomba district in
Malawi studied by Baird, McIntosh, and Ozler (2016), where only 6% of women work outside
the home. They show that many girls who had dropped out of school in rural Malawi were
prompted to re-enter school by a cash transfer but were not more likely to be working two years
after the transfers ended. These findings suggest that the presence of jobs that reward education
is a necessary condition for education to result in increased labor force participation.

Intertwined with these increases in female education is the sectoral shift toward services and
light manufacturing that generally accompanies development. Two examples of job growth in
developing countries that has disproportionately increased female employment are back-office
processing in India, as studied by Jensen (2012), and the garment industry in Bangladesh, as
studied by Heath and Mobarak (2015).

Both back-office processing and growth in the garment industries are born of globalization and
trade liberalization. Trade liberalization could affect gender gaps in employment and wages
through many channels, so the net effect is theoretically ambiguous. One channel through
which it could promote gender equality is by increasing competitive pressure on firms and,
thus, driving out “taste-based discrimination” (Becker, 1957). There is some evidence of such an
effect in the United States (Black and Brainerd, 2004). In addition, trade can induce

                                                 7
technological change and lead to sectoral reallocation, which could either widen or narrow
gender gaps. For example, if, with trade openness, a country has a comparative advantage in
female-intensive industries, then trade could help women relative to men. The evidence in
developing countries is mixed. AlAzzawi (2014) finds that, in Egypt, trade liberalization
increased female employment only in initially uncompetitive industries, where industry
competition is measured by the number of firms in the industry relative to the industry’s total
output. Meanwhile, Gaddis and Pieters (2016) find that trade liberalization in Brazil reduces
men’s and women’s employment by the same proportional amount; because men had an
initially higher employment rate, trade thus narrowed the percentage point gap in male-female
employment, but not the male-female employment ratio. There is also evidence that trade
openness can widen the gender wage gap in some settings (Menon and Van der Meulen
Rodgers, 2009). Thus far, no systematic pattern has emerged regarding the impact of trade
liberalization on female labor market outcomes.

Gender-focused policies affecting female employment
In addition, there are many policies and interventions aimed at encouraging female
employment. Many of these have the twin goals of increasing household income, but also
increasing the female share of income and therefore women’s bargaining power in the
household.

One prominent type of policy is microfinance, and especially microcredit, which gives small
loans to poor business owners. While microfinance is not inherently a gendered policy, many
microfinance organizations target female entrepreneurs. There have recently been several high-
quality randomized evaluations of microcredit. Most find some evidence of positive impacts on
the opening of female-owned businesses or revenue generated in female-owned businesses, but
the impacts tend to be quite modest in size (Angelucci, Karlan, and Zinman, 2015; Banerjee et
al., 2015).

Another approach, often bundled with microfinance, is business skills training, which has been
shown to improve women’s business knowledge and success (De Mel, McKenzie, and
Woodruff, 2014; Valdivia, 2015). Field, Jayachandran, and Pande (2010) argue that formal
business training can be especially helpful in socially conservative communities where women
are less free to casually interact with others and learn business tips informally. In addition,
female entrepreneurs often have thinner business networks, so strengthening these peer
interactions can also improve women’s success (Field et al., 2016).

Another type of policy that has been deployed and studied extensively in developed countries
(but is less widespread and studied in developing countries) is child care subsidies that free up
mothers to re-enter the labor force. Most of the work in developing countries is in Latin


                                                  8
America. Barros et al. (2011) find that access to free child-care services in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil,
almost doubled the employment rate of mothers who were not working prior to receiving this
benefit (from 9 to 17 percent). However, the increase in household income (from both this
extensive margin and the intensive margin) was less than the monthly cost of service per child
estimated. One would hypothesize that more generous maternity leave policies would also
increase female employment, but such policies are rarely in place in developing countries and,
in any case, many women work in the informal sector.

Many developing countries have gender-unequal laws and regulations that inhibit female
employment such as restrictions on women working night shifts and barriers to women
initiating legal proceedings. There is cross-country correlational evidence that lifting these
discriminatory laws increases female employment (Gonzales et al., 2015); testing the causal
impact of these laws on female employment would be a valuable area for further research.

3. Consequences of increased female education and labor supply

3a. Consequences of increased female education

The increases in education documented in Figure 2 have had wide-ranging consequences on
women and their children. We first examine the relationship between women’s education and
fertility, children’s health, and children’s education. We then turn to the some limited evidence
that women’s education affects their own health and well-being.

One of the strongest empirical relationships is between education and early fertility: there is
considerable evidence from a wide variety of settings that plausibly exogenous increases in
women’s education delay fertility. The INPRES school-building program in Indonesia
(Breierova and Duflo, 2004), the Universal Primary Education program in Nigeria (Osili and
Long, 2008), the elimination of primary schools fees in Uganda (Keats, 2014), and a school
subsidy in Kenya (Duflo, Dupas, and Kremer, 2015) all increased education and lowered rates
of teen pregnancy. While the variation in these studies is driven by primary education, Ozier
(2015) also finds large decreases in teen pregnancy among women just above the test score
cutoff for secondary school in Kenya.

The extent to which delays in fertility translate into lower lifetime fertility is more limited. In the
Breierova and Duflo (2004) Indonesian sample, the effects of education on a woman’s fertility
had disappeared by age 25. By contrast, Osili and Long (2008) find that an additional year of
schooling induced by the UPE program in Nigeria leads to 0.26 fewer births to a woman by age
25. The long-run evidence comes from Lavy and Zablotsky (2011), who study the effects of the
1963 revocation of a military government that relaxed constraints on schooling for Arab women
in Israel. The reform lead to an average of 1.0 additional years of education for girls age 4 to 8 at

                                                  9
the time of the reform and a corresponding 0.68 fewer children over their lives. Thus, it did not
appear that education merely postponed fertility in their case.

Several potential mechanisms underlie the relationship between education and fertility.
Broadly, education can change women’s desired number of children (through exposure to more
“liberal” ideals or through an increased opportunity cost of time spent out of the labor force), or
allow them to better achieve their desired fertility in environments where women typically end
up with more children than they report wanting. While it typically is difficult to cleanly identify
one particular channel, there is suggestive evidence that both of these channels are relevant.
More educated women report lower desired fertility (Martin 1995, Bongaarts 2010), and the
relationship appears causal when examining exogenous variation in women’s education in
Uganda (Keats, 2014), Sierra Leone (Cannonier and Mocan, 2014), and Arab communities of
Israel (Lavy and Zablotsky, 2011). Lavy and Zablotsky argue that the fact that their
environment has very low female labor force participation suggests that decreases in desired
fertility are not entirely driven by the increased opportunity cost of time spent not working.

Other studies find that better-educated women can come closer to their desired fertility. If
women on average desire fewer children than men (Rasul, 2008; Ashraf, Field, and Lee, 2014;
Doepke and Kindermann, 2016), then increases in bargaining power due to increased education
will lower fertility. Indeed, in the Indonesian context studied by Breierova and Duflo where the
woman’s own education no longer had an effect on fertility by age 25, increases in her
education relative to her husband did still decrease fertility, suggesting a role for household
bargaining. Or even if parents agree on the desired number of children, education still appears
to increase the effectiveness of contraception methods. Rosenzweig and Schultz (1989) argue
that more educated women in the United States are more effective at using complex
contraceptive methods, such as the rhythm method, and the relationship between education
and contraceptive effectiveness (as measured by the probability of becoming pregnant while
using contraception) has persisted in more recent data (Bongaarts 2010).Once these more-
educated women have children, their children are also healthier. Early papers point out that the
positive association between women’s education and children’s health generally statistically
survives controls for husband characteristics and household socioeconomic status (Schultz,
1980; Thomas, Strauss, and Henriques, 1990), but not necessarily controls for community level
factors (Desai and Alva, 1998) or family background (Wolfe and Behrman, 1987). One possible
theory uniting these disparate findings is that the relationship between women’s education and
children’s health depends on the availability of public health infrastructure (Rosenzweig and
Schultz, 1982a; Wolfe and Behrman, 1982; Barrera, 1990).

Subsequent studies have isolated exogenous variation in education to confirm that on average a
causal relationship exists between mother’s education and reductions in child mortality. The

                                                10
relationship appears at many levels of education: primary school in Indonesia (Breierova and
Duflo, 2004), junior high schools in Taiwan (Chou et al., 2010), and secondary schools in
Zimbabwe (Grépin and Bharadwaj, 2015). Using a different identification strategy to separate
intergenerational ability transmission from causal effects of education, Chen and Li (2009)
document a relationship between the adoptive mother’s education and children’s health in
China, which persists after controlling for the income of the adoptive family. They find roughly
constant marginal effects of education, providing further evidence that increases in mother’s
education at all levels improves children’s health.

Several potential mechanisms underlie these health improvements. Glewwe (1999) points out
that educated women in Morocco know more about health, and Thomas, Strauss, and
Henriques (1990) further show that in Brazil this correlation can be entirely explained by access
to information, such as newspapers and television. Agüero and Bharadwaj (2014) use a 1980
reform that relaxed constraints on black Zimbabweans’ access to secondary school to argue that
the relationship is causal: education increases a woman’s knowledge about how HIV is
transmitted. The relationship between mother’s education and the use of health inputs is more
mixed. Grépin and Bharadwaj (2015) find no evidence that the tendency for mother’s education
to reduce infant mortality in Zimbabwe is driven by a greater use of preventative health care
services. Keats (2014), by contrast, finds that more educated women in Uganda are more likely
to immunize their children and finds improvements in child nutrition status but not reductions
in child mortality. Güneş (2015) also finds that Turkish women induced to get more education
by the 1997 compulsory schooling law increased their use of preventative care and smoked less
while pregnant, which led to improved infant health.

There is some, although not considerable, evidence that mother’s education improves children’s
educational outcomes. De Walque (2009) examines the relationship between adoptive parents’
and adopted children’s schooling in Rwanda. While acknowledging the possibility of selection,
de Walque finds that adoptive mothers’ education is strongly related to their children’s
schooling, more so than the biological mother’s. Tsai et al. (2011) use the same Taiwanese
reform as Chou et al. (2011) to show that exogenous increases in either mother’s or father’s
schooling increased by 10 percent the probability that their child attended a top-6 college.
Behrman et al. (1999) and Andrabi et al. (2012) find that the key human capital investment
increased by mother’s education is not necessarily her children’s years of education but rather
the amount and quality of teaching she does at home. Andrabi et al. (2012) instrument mother’s
education in Pakistan with the availability of a girls’ school in her hometown, arguing that the
fact that the presence of a girls’ school does not affect a mother’s education if it was built after
she had passed primary school age. They find that children of mothers with some education




                                                  11
spend 72 more minutes per day in educational activities at home than those whose mothers
have no education and as a result have higher tests scores.

The evidence on the relationship between women’s education and their own health is also more
limited. Bhalhotra and Cochrane (2013) show that exogenous increases in education decrease
maternal mortality in Nigeria and Zimbabwe but not Kenya. De Neve et al. (2015) find that
exogenous increases in secondary schooling decrease HIV risk in Botswana, and they find
particularly large effects for women: an additional year of schooling reduces the cumulative risk
of HIV by 11.6 percentage points. Cannonier and Mocan (2014) further show that education
increases the probability that a woman has been tested for HIV.

Delayed marriage is another potential effect of female education. There is some evidence
pointing to such an effect, although this phenomenon does not appear to be universal. Breierova
and Duflo (2004) find that an additional year of education in Indonesia delays marriage by an
average of 0.38 years. Duflo, Dupas, and Kremer (2015) also find that schooling delays
marriage. By contrast, Keats (2014), Erten and Keskin (forthcoming), and Lavy and Zablotzky
(2011) find no effect of education on marriage timing in Uganda, and among Arab women in
Israel, respectively. The fact that the relationship between education and fertility is more
widespread than the relationship between education and marriage timing is unsurprising,
given that the latter hinges on marriage market responses, such as the extent to which potential
husbands are also treated by the education reform (which would depend on age gaps between
spouses and whether boys were affected by a particular education reform). Relatedly, the
evidence on whether women entering the marriage market with exogenously more education
marry more educated husbands is also mixed: Keats (2014) and Erten and Keskin (2016) find no
effects on husband’s education in Uganda and Turkey, respectively, while Lavy and Zablotzky
(2011) do find evidence of increases in husband’s education among their Israeli Arab sample.

Education can also change a woman’s status within her household. Thomas (1990) points out
that women’s education displays a stronger correlation with daughters’ health than sons’,
consistent with a relationship between women’s education and bargaining power and mothers
favoring daughters more or disfavoring them less than fathers do. Other studies, however, find
a limited role for education in increasing a woman’s bargaining power, as proxied by self-
reported participation in household decisions (Andrabi, Das, and Khwaja, 2012; Keats, 2014).
Erten and Keskin (2015) show that women induced to get more education by the Turkish reform
face greater incidence of psychological violence or financial control, but the same rates of
physical and sexual violence, as women with less education. Given that these women were also
more likely to work outside the home, Erten and Keskin interpret these results in light of an
instrumental violence model where men use coercion to capture women’s wages.



                                                12
Finally, it has been hypothesized that education can increase women’s “liberal” beliefs in realms
such as gender equality. The evidence here is again mixed. Plausibly exogenous increases in
education reduce acceptance of domestic violence in Sierra Leone (Cannonier and Mocan, 2014)
and Kenya (Friedman et al., 2011) but has no effect in Turkey (Erten and Keskin, 2015). Gulesci
and Meyersson (2013) find that the same Turkish reform studied by Erten and Keskin does lead
to lower measured religiosity, such as a lower likelihood of wearing a headscarf. Friedman et al.
(2011) further find that education increased political knowledge and reduced acceptance of
political authority, but did not lead to corresponding increases in perceived efficacy or
participation in community-level political events.

3b. Consequences of increased job availability

The increased job opportunities for women in developing countries caused by sectoral shifts
and trade openness have also had large effects on women’s lives. These work opportunities
increase the opportunity cost of marriage and childbearing, and indeed, we begin by
documenting evidence that job opportunities lead women to delay marriage and fertility. These
job opportunities also presumably increase women’s outside options, and we accordingly
present evidence that women’s bargaining power and investments in children indeed increase.
We then conclude by pointing out some potential negative consequences of job availability in
women’s lives, namely, reduced leisure and increased rates of domestic violence.

Jensen (2012) reports the results of an experiment that sent business process outsourcing (BPO)
recruiters to rural villages in India. After three years of recruiting services, women in treatment
villages between ages 15 and 21 at the baseline were 5 to 6 percentage points less likely to be
married or have had their first child. He also documents evidence that knowledge of these job
opportunities changed aspirations: women also reported greater desire to continue working
after marriage and children.

Heath and Mobarak (2015) show that lower-skilled garment sector jobs in Bangladesh have had
similar effects. They examine marriage and fertility rates in villages in Bangladesh after a
garment factory opened within commuting distance, estimating that the median exposure to the
garment industry in their sample had led to a 28 percent decrease in the probability that an
unmarried girl marries and a 29 percent decrease in the probability of first birth. Sivansankaran
(2014) demonstrates that textile factories in India had similar effects. She finds that plausibly
random increases in employment duration from exposure to a fixed-term contract (versus a
daily contract) lead to later marriage and increases in the likelihood that a girl had a say in
choosing her husband.

Jobs for women have also led to increased investment in girls’ human capital. One potential
mechanism is that jobs raise the return to girls and their human capital. Early evidence for this

                                                 13
hypothesis comes from Rosenzweig and Schultz (1982b), who document that girls’ survival
rates are higher in Indian districts in which expected female labor supply is greater. Jensen
(2012) finds that younger girls (aged 5 to 11) in villages newly aware of business process
outsourcing jobs were better nourished and more likely to be enrolled in school. Heath and
Mobarak (2015) also find that the opening of garment factories led to increases in girls’
education. They argue that garment sector jobs reward basic numeracy and literacy, and point
out that the fact that they find education gains among girls whose mother or older sister never
worked outside the home indeed suggests that these effects are not due solely to income or
time-reallocation effects.

Improved bargaining power is another mechanism linking job opportunities for women to
human capital investments in girls, by allowing a woman to direct resources to goods for which
she has a stronger preference than other household members. A seminal paper by Duflo (2003)
shows that unearned income given to women improves girls’ health, and several subsequent
papers have shown that the same intuition holds for (potential) earned income. Intrahousehold
bargaining models point out that jobs that improve a woman’s outside options increase her
bargaining power, even if she doesn’t take up the job herself. Indeed, Qian (2008) finds that
counties in China that grow tea – which women have a comparative advantage in harvesting
given the fine motor skills required -- displayed greater survival rates of female children after
post-Mao agricultural reforms raised the value of agricultural production. Consistent with an
intrahousehold bargaining model in which mothers have a stronger preference for equalizing
spending on sons and daughters, she also finds that while increasing potential female income
increases education of both genders, increasing potential male income decreases girls’
education. Majlesi (2016) also finds that positive shocks to female labor demand – such as those
from increased access to export markets -- in Mexico increase women’s participation in
household decisions and improve children’s health.

By comparing workers to non-workers in the same labor market, other papers present evidence
that working itself further increases a woman’s bargaining power and children’s health. Atkin
(2009) exploits variation in the number of factory jobs available at the age when women in
Mexico can leave school, showing that this availability predicts whether they are working later
in life. Women induced to work by jobs available at school-leaving age have children that are
one standard deviation taller than other women, and also display greater participation in
household decisions. Such improvements could come because earnings potential increases with
experience, or because working itself increases a woman’s willingness or ability to bargain.
Anderson and Eswaran (2009) argue further that working outside the home (versus inside the
home or on a husband’s farm) can improve a woman’s outside option if it requires some
irreversible investment, such as building a poultry shed in the rural Bangladeshi context they


                                                14
study. They indeed find that women induced to work by rainfall or health shocks are also more
likely to participate in household decisions.

Despite evidence of these positive effects, the net effect of job availability on women’s welfare
remains ambiguous, because relatively less is known about potential negative consequences of
labor supply. One concern is reduced leisure time. Thus, while there is evidence that women’s
labor supply increases men’s (Skoufias, 1993; Newman, 2002) and children’s (Skoufias, 1997)
time in housework, these increases may not compensate for women’s entire increased labor
supply, especially if there are strong social norms that women do most or all of the housework.
Indeed, Skoufias (1993) finds that increased female wages decrease women’s leisure time. By
contrast, Newman (2002) finds that women in an area of Ecuador where the cut flower industry
has expanded do less housework relative to women in an otherwise similar control area, while
men do more housework. Since Newman finds that overall female labor supply is not higher in
flower areas (but women do work in better-paying jobs), she argues that her findings are driven
by women’s increased bargaining power.

Another potential negative consequence of job availability for women is intimate partner
violence. While standard bargaining models predict that an improved outside option allows a
household member to demand better outcomes (such as less violence), certain extensions
predict that when violence is used as a tool in bargaining, a better bargaining position for
women can indeed lead to more violence. Eswaran and Malhotra (2011) formalize such a model,
which predicts that women with low bargaining power face a low risk of violence because the
mere threat of violence allows the husband to get his way. But if women gain power, the
husband does need to use actual violence to get his way. Heath (2014) finds descriptive
evidence in line with this model. The greater prevalence of violence among women who work
outside the home in Bangladesh is entirely driven by women with very low education or a
young age at marriage, whom she argues are exactly the women whose baseline bargaining
power is low, and are thus at increased risk of violence when beginning work in the Eswaran
and Malhotra framework.

Causal evidence on this relationship is relatively limited and has mixed findings (in line with
the theoretically ambiguous relationship in bargaining models). Potential psychological
mechanisms also yield theoretically ambiguous predictions. Psychological backlash – men feel
threatened and lash out when their women gain economic independence – could increase
violence when women begin working (Gelles, 1972), whereas increased total household income
from women’s wage can reduce economic stress, which tends to lead to violence (Ellsberg et al.,
1999; Martin et al., 1999). Krishnan et al. (2010) examine panel data in Bangalore, India and
show that women who begin working between rounds face 80% higher odds of domestic
violence compared to women who did not begin working. Chin (2012) and Luke and Munshi

                                                15
(2012) look at temporary changes to women’s employment induced by weather shocks in India.
While Chin (2012) finds that women induced to work by rainfall shocks that favor female crops
face less violence, Luke and Munshi (2011) find that women on tea plantations face greater
violence when their income increases, arguing that the resulting shift in resources towards the
woman can prompt conflict. Chin proposes “exposure reduction” – the fact that women
working spend less time in proximity with their husbands – as a potential mechanism going in
the opposite direction and argues that the fact that she finds effects among women with
negligible compensation whose husbands don’t work in agriculture is evidence for this channel.

4. Conclusion

We have documented two trends in developing countries over the past thirty years: rising
female education levels and rising female labor force participation. We argue that these trends
are interrelated, with gains in female education contributing to the increases in female labor
force participation. As a result, even though most countries are on the downward-sloping part
of the U-shaped female labor supply curve, the curve has shifted upwards enough that female
labor supply has increased even in a majority of low-income countries. As economic conditions
continue to change in ways that promote female labor supply – both directly, as countries enact
policies to end legal discrimination against female workers or reduce the time cost of home
production and childcare, and indirectly, as reductions in trade costs accelerate the shift away
from brawn-based activities to light manufacturing or services – a fruitful area of future
research will be to document the additional effects of these new policies on female labor supply.

This chapter also discussed the effects of increased education and employment on the lives of
women and their children. There is considerable evidence of outcomes that both benefit women
and achieve policy-relevant goals. In particular, both education and labor force participation
have been shown to delay fertility and lead to healthier children once a woman does have
children. However, effects over the life course (such as completed fertility) or that depend on
general equilibrium adjustments (such as the timing of marriage or partner choice) are less
clearly established and probably context-dependent. A valuable area for future research would
be to characterize the factors that determine the heterogeneity in these relationships. Less is also
known about potential negative consequences of labor supply on women, such as decreased
leisure or increased domestic violence. More research in this area too will ideally help in the
design of policies that allow women and society at large to enjoy the benefits of increased job
opportunities while minimizing the potential costs.




                                                16
References

Adukia, Anjali. “Sanitation and Education.” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics,
forthcoming.

Agüero, Jorge M., and Prashant Bharadwaj. “Do the More Educated Know More about Health?
Evidence from Schooling and HIV Knowledge in Zimbabwe.” Economic Development and
Cultural Change 62, no. 3 (2014): 489–517.

AlAzzawi, Shireen. “Trade Liberalization, Industry Concentration and Female Workers: The
Case of Egypt.” IZA Journal of Labor Policy 3, no. 1 (2014): 1.

Anderson, Siwan, and Mukesh Eswaran. “What Determines Female Autonomy? Evidence from
Bangladesh.” Journal of Development Economics 90, no. 2 (2009): 179–191.

Andrabi, Tahir, Jishnu Das, and Asim I. Khwaja. “What Did You Do All Day? Maternal
Education and Child Outcomes.” Journal of Human Resources 47, no. 4 (2012): 873–912.

Angelucci, Manuela, Dean Karlan, and Jonathan Zinman. “Microcredit Impacts: Evidence from
a Randomized Microcredit Program Placement Experiment by Compartamos Banco.” American
Economic Journal: Applied Economics 7, no. 1 (2015): 151–182.

Ashraf, Nava, Erica Field, and Jean Lee. "Household bargaining and excess fertility: an
experimental study in Zambia." The American Economic Review 104, no. 7 (2014): 2210-2237.

Atkin, David. "Working for the future: Female factory work and child health in mexico."
Unpublished Manuscript, Yale University (2009).

Baird, Sarah, Craig McIntosh, and Berk Ozler. "When the money runs out: do cash transfers
have sustained effects on human capital accumulation?." Mimeo, (2016).

Banerjee, Abhijit, Esther Duflo, Rachel Glennerster, and Cynthia Kinnan. “The Miracle of
Microfinance? Evidence from a Randomized Evaluation.” American Economic Journal: Applied
Economics 7, no. 1 (2015): 22–53.

Barrera, Albino. “The Role of Maternal Schooling and Its Interaction with Public Health
Programs in Child Health Production.” Journal of Development Economics 32, no. 1 (1990): 69–91.

Barros, Ricardo, Pedro Olinto, Trine Lunde, and Mirela Carvalho. “The Impact of Access to Free
Childcare on Women’s Labor Market Outcomes: Evidence from a Randomized Trial in Low-
Income Neighborhoods of Rio de Janeiro.” Paper presented at the World Bank Economists’
Forum, 2011.



                                               17
Beaman, Lori, Esther Duflo, Rohini Pande, and Petia Topalova. “Female Leadership Raises
Aspirations and Educational Attainment for Girls: A Policy Experiment in India.” Science 335,
no. 6068 (2012): 582–586.

Becker, Gary S. The Economics of Discrimination. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1957.

Behrman, Jere R., Andrew D. Foster, Mark R. Rosenweig, and Prem Vashishtha. "Women's
schooling, home teaching, and economic growth." Journal of political Economy 107, no. 4 (1999):
682-714.

Bhalhotra Sonia, and Damian Clarke “Educational Attainment and Maternal Mortality”
Background paper for the UNESCO Education for All Global Monitoring Report 2013/4 (2013).

Black, Sandra E., and Elizabeth Brainerd. “Importing Equality? The Impact of Globalization on
Gender Discrimination.” Industrial & Labor Relations Review 57, no. 4 (2004): 540–559.

Bongaarts, John. “The Causes of Educational Differences in Fertility in Sub-Saharan Africa.”
Vienna Yearbook of Population Research 2010: 31–50.

Boserup, Ester. “Women’s Role in Economic Development.” London: George Allen and
Universe, 1970.

Breierova, Lucia, and Esther Duflo. “The Impact of Education on Fertility and Child Mortality:
Do Fathers Really Matter Less Than Mothers? (No. w10513).” National Bureau of Economic
Research, 2004.

Burde, Dana, and Leigh Linden. “Bringing Education to Afghan Girls: A Randomized
Controlled Trial of Village-Based Schools.” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 5, no. 3
(2013): 27–40.

Cannonier, Colin, and Naci Mocan. "Empowering Women Through Education: Evidence from
Sierra Leone." Mimeo, (2012).

Chen, Yuyu, and Hongbin Li. “Mother’s Education and Child Health: Is There a Nurturing
Effect?” Journal of Health Economics 28, no. 2 (2009): 413–426.

Chin, Yoo-Mi. “Male Backlash, Bargaining, or Exposure Reduction? Women’s Working Status
and Physical Spousal Violence in India.” Journal of Population Economics 25, no. 1 (2012): 175–200.

Chou, Shin-Yi, Jin-Tan Liu, Michael Grossman, and Ted Joyce. “Parental Education and Child
Health: Evidence from a Natural Experiment in Taiwan.” American Economic Journal: Applied
Economics 2, no. 1 (2010): 63.




                                                18
De Mel, Suresh, David McKenzie, and Christopher Woodruff. “Business Training and Female
Enterprise Start-Up, Growth, and Dynamics: Experimental Evidence from Sri Lanka.” Journal of
Development Economics 106, no. 1 (2014): 199–210.

De Neve, Jan-Walter, Günther Fink, S. V. Subramanian, Sikhulile Moyo, and Jacob Bor. "Length
of secondary schooling and risk of HIV infection in Botswana: evidence from a natural
experiment." The Lancet Global Health 3, no. 8 (2015): e470-e477.

De Walque, Damien. “Parental Education and Children’s Schooling Outcomes: Evidence from
Recomposed Families in Rwanda.” Economic Development and Cultural Change 57, no. 4 (2009):
723–746.

Deininger, Klaus, Aparajita Goyal, and Hari Nagarajan. “Women’s Inheritance Rights and
Intergenerational Transmission of Resources in India.” Journal of Human Resources 48, no. 1
(2013): 114–141.

Desai, Sonalde, and Soumya Alva. “Maternal Education and Child Health: Is There a Strong
Causal Relationship?” Demography 35, no. 1 (1998): 71–81.

Doepke, Matthias, and Fabian Kindermann. “Bargaining over Babies: Theory, Evidence, and
Policy Implications.” (No. w22072). National Bureau of Economic Research, 2016.

Duflo, Esther. "Grandmothers and granddaughters: old‐age pensions and intrahousehold
allocation in South Africa." The World Bank Economic Review 17, no. 1 (2003): 1-25.

Duflo, Esther, Pascaline Dupas, and Michael Kremer. “Education, HIV, and Early Fertility:
Experimental Evidence from Kenya.” American Economic Review 105, no. 9 (2015): 2757–2797.

Ellsberg, Mary C., Rodolfo Pena, Andres Herrera, Jerker Liljestrand, and Anna Winkvist. “Wife
Abuse among Women of Childbearing Age in Nicaragua.” American Journal of Public Health 89,
no. 2 (1999): 241–244.

Erten, Bilge, and Pinar Keskin. “For Better or for Worse?: Education and the Prevalence of
Domestic Violence in Turkey.” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, (Forthcoming).

Eswaran, Mukesh, and Nisha Malhotra. “Domestic Violence and Women’s Autonomy in
Developing Countries: Theory and Evidence.” Canadian Journal of Economics/Revue canadienne
d’économique 44, no. 4 (2011): 1222–1263.

Field, Erica, and Attila Ambrus. “Early Marriage, Age of Menarche, and Female Schooling
Attainment in Bangladesh.” Journal of Political Economy 116, no. 5 (2008): 881–930.




                                               19
Field, Erica, Seema Jayachandran, and Rohini Pande. “Do Traditional Institutions Constrain
Female Entrepreneurship? A Field Experiment on Business Training in India.” American
Economic Review Papers and Proceedings 100, no. 2 (2010): 125–129.

Field, Erica, Seema Jayachandran, Rohini Pande, and Natalia Rigol. “Friendship at Work: Can
Peer Effects Catalyze Female Entrepreneurship?” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy 8,
no. 2 (2016): 125–153.

Friedman, Willa, Michael Kremer, Edward Miguel, and Rebecca Thornton. “Education as
Liberation?” (No. w16939). National Bureau of Economic Research, 2011.

Gaddis, Isis, and Janneke Pieters. “The Gendered Labor Market Impacts of Trade Liberalization:
Evidence from Brazil.” Journal of Human Resources (2016).

Gelles, Richard J. “The Violent Home: A Study of Physical Aggression between Husbands and
Wives.” Beverly Hills: Sage Publications. 1972.

Glewwe, Paul. “Why Does Mother’s Schooling Raise Child Health in Developing Countries?
Evidence from Morocco.” Journal of Human Resources 34, no.1, (1999): 124–159.

Goldin, Claudia. “The U-Shaped Female Labor Force Function in Economic Development and
Economic History.” In Women’s Human Capital and Economic Development, edited by T. P.
Schultz.Chicago University of Chicago Press, 1995: 61-90.

Gonzales, Christian, Sonali Jain-Chandra, Kalpana Kochhar, and Monique Newiak. “Fair Play:
More Equal Laws Boost Female Labor Force Participation.” IMF Staff Discussion Note,
December 2015.

Grépin, Karen A., and Prashant Bharadwaj. “Maternal Education and Child Mortality in
Zimbabwe.” Journal of Health Economics 44 (2015): 97–117.

Gulesci, Selim, and Erik Meyersson. “For the Love of the Republic: Education, Religion, and
Empowerment.” Working Paper, 2013.

Güneş, Pınar M. “The Role of Maternal Education in Child Health: Evidence from a
Compulsory Schooling Law.” Economics of Education Review 47 (2015): 1–16.

Heath, Rachel. "Women’s access to labor market opportunities, control of household resources,
and domestic violence: Evidence from Bangladesh." World Development 57 (2014): 32-46.

Heath, Rachel, and Ahmed Mushfiq Mobarak. “Manufacturing Growth and the Lives of
Bangladeshi Women.” Journal of Development Economics 115 (2015): 1–15.




                                              20
Jayachandran, Seema. “The Roots of Gender Inequality in Developing Countries.” Annual
Review of Economics 7 (2015): 63–88.

Jayachandran, Seema, and Adriana Lleras-Muney. “Life Expectancy and Human Capital
Investments: Evidence from Maternal Mortality Declines.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 124,
no. 1 (2009): 349–397.

Jensen, Robert. “Do Labor Market Opportunities Affect Young Women’s Work and Family
Decisions? Experimental Evidence from India.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 127 (no.2) (2012):
753-792.

Keats, Anthony. Women’s schooling, fertility, and child health outcomes: Evidence from
Uganda’s free primary education program. Mimeo (2014).

Klasen, Stephan, and Janneke Pieters. “What Explains the Stagnation of Female Labor Force
Participation in Urban India?” World Bank Economic Review 29, no. 3 (2015): 449–478.

Krishnan, Suneeta, Corinne H. Rocca, Alan E. Hubbard, Kalyani Subbiah, Jeffrey Edmeades,
and Nancy S. Padian. “Do Changes in Spousal Employment Status Lead to Domestic Violence?
Insights from a Prospective Study in Bangalore, India.” Social Science and Medicine 70, no. 1
(2010): 136–143.

Lavy, Victor, and Alexander Zablotsky. “Mother’s Schooling, Fertility, and Children’s
Education: Evidence from a Natural Experiment.” NBER Working Paper No. 16856. National
Bureau of Economic Research, 2011.

Luke, Nancy, and Kaivan Munshi. “Women as Agents of Change: Female Income and Mobility
in India.” Journal of Development Economics 94, no. 1 (2011): 1–17.

Majlesi, Kaveh. “Labor Market Opportunities and Women’s Decision Making Power within
Households.” Journal of Development Economics 119 (2016): 34–47.

Mammen, Kristin, and Christina Paxson. “Women’s Work and Economic Development.” Journal
of Economic Perspectives 14, no. 4 (2000): 141–164.

Martin, Sandra L., Amy O. Tsui, Kuhu Maitra, and Ruth Marinshaw. “Domestic Violence in
Northern India.” American Journal of Epidemiology 150, no. 4 (1999): 417–426.

Martin, Teresa C. “Women’s Education and Fertility: Results from 26 Demographic and Health
Surveys.” Studies in Family Planning, 26, (no. 4) 1995: 187–202.

Menon, Nidhiya, and Yana Van der Meulen Rodgers. “International Trade and the Gender
Wage Gap: New Evidence from India’s Manufacturing Sector.” World Development 37, no. 5
(2009): 965–981.

                                               21
Miller, Grant. “Contraception as Development? New Evidence from Family Planning in
Colombia.” Economic Journal 120, no. 545 (2010): 709–736.

Muralidharan, Karthik, and Nishith Prakash. “Cycling to School: Increasing Secondary School
Enrollment for Girls in India.” Working Paper 19305. National Bureau of Economic Research,
2013.

Newman, Constance. “Gender, Time Use, and Change: The Impact of the Cut Flower Industry
in Ecuador.” World Bank Economic Review 16, no. 3 (2002): 375–395.\

Osili, Una Okonkwo, and Bridget Terry Long. "Does female schooling reduce fertility? Evidence
from Nigeria." Journal of Development Economics 87, no. 1 (2008): 57-75.

Ozier, Owen. "The impact of secondary schooling in Kenya: A regression discontinuity
analysis." Journal of Human Resources (2016).

Pitt, Mark M., Mark R. Rosenzweig, and Mohammad N. Hassan. “Human Capital Investment
and the Gender Division of Labor in a Brawn-Based Economy.” American Economic Review 102,
no. 7 (2012): 3531–3560.

Psacharopoulos, George, and Zafiris Tzannatos. "Female labor force participation: An
international perspective." The World Bank Research Observer 4, no. 2 (1989): 187-201.

Qian, Nancy. "Missing women and the price of tea in China: The effect of sex-specific earnings
on sex imbalance." The Quarterly Journal of Economics 123, no. 3 (2008): 1251-1285.

Rasul, Imran. “Household Bargaining over Fertility: Theory and Evidence from Malaysia.”
Journal of Development Economics 86, no. 2 (2008): 215–241.

Rosenzweig, Mark R., and T. Paul Schultz. “Child Mortality and Fertility in Colombia:
Individual and Community Effects.” Health Policy and Education 2, no. 3 (1982a): 305–348.

Rosenzweig, Mark R., and T. Paul Schultz. “Market Opportunities, Genetic Endowments, and
Intrafamily Resource Distribution: Child Survival in Rural India.” American Economic Review 72,
no. 4 (1982b): 803–815.

Rosenzweig, M. R., and T. Paul Schultz. “Schooling, Information and Nonmarket Productivity:
Contraceptive Use and Its Effectiveness.” International Economic Review 30, no. 2 (1989): 457–477.

Roy, Sanchari. “Empowering Women: Inheritance Rights and Female Education in India.”
Mimeo, Warwick University, 2013.




                                                22
Schultz, T. Paul. “Interpretation of Relations among Mortality, Economics of the Household,
and the Health Environment.” In Socioeconomic Determinants and Consequences of Mortality
Differentials. Geneva: WHO, 1980.

Schultz, T. Paul. “School Subsidies for the Poor: Evaluating the Mexican Progresa Poverty
Program.” Journal of Development Economics 74, no. 1 (2004): 199–250.

Sivasankaran, Anitha. "Essays on gender, intra-household allocation and development." PhD
dissertation, 2014.

Skoufias, Emmanuel. "Labor market opportunities and intrafamily time allocation in rural
households in South Asia." Journal of Development Economics 40, no. 2 (1993): 277-310.

Thomas, Duncan. “Intra-Household Resource Allocation: An Inferential Approach.” Journal of
Human Resources 25, (no. 4) (1990): 635–664.

Thomas, Duncan, John Strauss, and Maria-Helena Henriques. “Child Survival, Height for Age
and Household Characteristics in Brazil.” Journal of Development Economics 33, no. 2 (1990): 197–
234.

Tsai, Wehn-Jyuan, Jin-Tan Liu, Shin-Yi Chou, and Michael Grossman. “Intergeneration Transfer
of Human Capital: Results from a Natural Experiment in Taiwan.” (No. 16876). National Bureau
of Economic Research, 2011.

Valdivia, Martin. “Business Training Plus for Female Entrepreneurship? Short and Medium-
Term Experimental Evidence from Peru.” Journal of Development Economics 113 (2015): 33–51.

Wolfe, Barbara L., and Jere R. Behrman. “Determinants of Child Mortality, Health, and
Nutrition in a Developing Country.” Journal of Development Economics 11, no. 2 (1982): 163–193.

Wolfe, Barbara L., and Jere R. Behrman. “Women’s Schooling and Children’s Health: Are the
Effects Robust with Adult Sibling Control for the Women’s Childhood Background?” Journal of
Health Economics 6, no. 3 (1987): 239–254.

World Bank. World Development Report 2012: Gender Equality and Development.
Washington, DC: World Bank, 2012.




                                               23
Figure 1




Notes: GDP per capita is the purchasing power parity-adjusted value in the year in which
secondary school enrollment data is measured (the latest available); school enrollment data are
from the World Bank’s World Development Indicators. The vertical lines represent the
thresholds between lower and lower-middle-income countries ($4000 in 2014 dollars), and
between lower-middle or upper-middle-income countries (about $12,500). Two possible
definitions of “developing countries” are countries below these thresholds.




                                               24
Figure 2




Notes: Data are from the International Public Use Microdata (IPUMS) database. Countries
included are those classified by the World Bank as low-income or lower-middle-income, with
an IPUMS sample available for 2005 or later. In cases of multiple IPUMS samples meeting the
criterion, the most recent one is used. In aggregating to regions, samples are re-weighted such
that each observed individual within a region is weighted equally.




                                               25
Figure 3




Notes: GDP per capita is the purchasing power parity-adjusted value in 2014; female labor force
participation is for females age 15-64 and is from the World Bank’s World Development
Indicators. The vertical lines represent the thresholds between lower and lower-middle-income
countries ($4000 in 2014 dollars), and between lower-middle or upper-middle-income countries
(about $12,500).




                                              26
Figure 4




Notes: GDP per capita is the purchasing power parity-adjusted value. Female labor force
participation (FLFP) data are from the World Bank’s World Development Indicators. Data for
all years are three-year averages centered on the indicated year.




                                             27
Figure 5

Panel A: Each country weighted equally




Panel B: Weighted by population size




Notes: GDP per capita is the purchasing power parity-adjusted value. Female labor force
participation data are from the World Bank’s World Development Indicators. Data for all years
are three-year averages centered on the indicated year.

                                              28
