                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




         LOCAL GOVERNMENT AND OLD-AGE SUPPORT IN THE NEW DEAL

                                       Daniel K. Fetter

                                     Working Paper 22760
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w22760


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   October 2016
                               Revised February 2017




I thank Price Fishback, Eric Hilt, Lee Lockwood, JohnWallis, Heidi Williams, and seminar
participants at Wellesley for helpful comments, and Emily Moss and Jordan Norris for excellent
research assistance. I also gratefully acknowledge financial support from National Science
Foundation (NSF) Grant Number 1628860. The views expressed herein are those of the author
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2016 by Daniel K. Fetter. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
Local Government and Old-Age Support in the New Deal
Daniel K. Fetter
NBER Working Paper No. 22760
October 2016, Revised February 2017
JEL No. H75,H77,I38,N32,N42

                                         ABSTRACT

A key question in the design of public assistance to the needy is how allocation of responsibility
for funding and decision-making across different levels of government influences the level and
type of assistance provided. The New Deal era was a period in which this allocation changed
significantly in the United States, as provision of public assistance shifted from local
governments to states and the federal government, accompanied by a large increase in
government transfer payments. Focusing on assistance to the elderly and using variation in state
laws governing the division of funding between local and state governments for the Old Age
assistance (OAA) Program, this paper investigates the responsiveness of OAA payments and
recipiency to local government funding shares. Payments per elderly resident were significantly
lower in states with higher local funding shares, driven largely by reductions in recipiency. The
baseline results suggest that had local governments needed to fund half of OAA payments in
1939, on the lower end of local funding shares prior to the New Deal, the share of the elderly
receiving OAA would have been 5 percent rather than 22 percent, and perhaps even lower. More
speculative results suggest that greater local funding led to lower representation of blacks among
OAA recipients relative to their share of the population, particularly in the South.


Daniel K. Fetter
Department of Economics
Wellesley College
106 Central Street
Wellesley, MA 02481
and NBER
dfetter@wellesley.edu
1        Introduction

A key question in the design of public assistance to the needy is how allocation of responsibility

for funding and decision-making across different levels of government influences the level and type

of assistance provided. Theoretical work, such as Brown and Oates (1987), has investigated some

of the efficiency properties of providing assistance at the state or local level, as opposed to the

national level.1 Economists have explored this question empirically in modern contexts such as

the welfare reform of the 1990s, which, Ziliak (2015) suggests, may have contributed to declining

levels of cash assistance after the reform by raising the marginal cost to states of providing cash

assistance.2 This question is particularly topical given recent proposals to convert many assistance

programs into block grants to states (Ryan, 2014). In this paper, I investigate this question in the

context of government assistance to the elderly during the New Deal era.

        A large literature has investigated fiscal federalism in the New Deal (see, e.g., Fishback and

Wallis, 2012). The New Deal marked not only a dramatic increase in governmental transfers to

the elderly, but also a shift from local provision of old-age support to increased federal and state

involvement, as part of the broader shift of government expenditures from the local to national

level (Wallis, 1984, 1991). Prior to 1933, assistance to the needy elderly, and to poor in general,

was almost entirely a local affair in both funding and decision making (Wallis and Oates, 1998).

State governments had gradually begun to take on a greater role in the 1920s, but even in 1934,

when 26 states had passed laws providing for some state role in old-age assistance, in only 6 states

did counties fund less than a quarter of payments. The role of states changed dramatically after the

passage of the Social Security Act, which provided federal matching funds for state old-age support

programs through the Old Age Assistance Program (OAA) and encouraged a shift of responsibility

from local to state governments. By 1939, four years after the passage of the Social Security Act,
    1
    Oates (1999) discusses this literature more broadly.
    2
    Specifically, the 1990s welfare reform shifted welfare from open-ended matching grants for states under Aid to
Family with Dependent Children (AFDC) to block grants under Temporary Assistance to Needy Families (TANF).
Relevant also is the literature on the flypaper effect, the observation that block grants tend to increase expenditure
on their stated purpose more than non-grant income (Inman (2008) provides a relatively recent review). As Moffitt
(1984) emphasizes, here it is important to consider the difference between matching grants, whose effects are not
due to ‘flypaper’ effects, and block grants. Recent work, such as Singhal (2008) and Knight (2002), emphasizes the
importance of political considerations in the analysis of flypaper effects.




                                                          1
all states had passed laws and in more than half of them, the county share of OAA payments was

zero percent.

   The main empirical analysis investigates what role reduced local funding shares played in the

observed increase in the level of old-age support. Facilitating the analysis is the fact that even in

1939, there was considerable variation across states in the degree of local involvement in funding

OAA. The main empirical estimates use this cross-state policy variation to investigate the relation-

ship between statutory local funding shares and the amount of OAA provided in 1939. Because

state policies were correlated with levels of need, and levels of need also influenced the level of relief

provided, the empirical strategy follows Fetter and Lockwood (2016) in focusing on comparisons

across state borders in order to control flexibly for differences in aggregate shocks and popula-

tion characteristics. The estimates indicate an economically and statistically significant negative

relationship between local funding shares and OAA payments per person, driven primarily by a

reduction in the share of the elderly receiving OAA and, to a much lesser extent, by reductions in

payments per OAA recipient. The magnitude of the results is substantial, suggesting that the re-

duction in local funding was an essential part of the growth of government old-age support. Under

the Social Security Act, the national government funded 50 percent of old-age assistance payments

(up to a cap), and the remainder was funded by states or localities. The baseline specification

suggests that had counties been required to fund the other half of old-age assistance payments, the

OAA recipiency rate in 1939 – measured as the share of those 65 and above receiving OAA – would

have been 5 percent, rather than the observed level of 22 percent.

   Several pieces of evidence support the interpretation of these estimates as the causal effect of

local funding shares. Once comparisons are made only across state borders, other observable policy

characteristics do not explain the negative relationship between local funding shares and recipiency

or payments, and if anything conditioning on observable policy variables tends to magnify the

results. Moreover, changes in local funding shares between 1937 and 1939 are associated with

changes in recipiency and payments that are nearly identical to those estimated from the 1939

cross-section.

   Closely related to the shift away from local funding of old-age assistance was a shift in decision-



                                                    2
making from the local level to the state level. I document that the responsiveness of OAA payments

to local funding shares was most pronounced in states in which local governments, rather than

states, had the final say in determining whether to provide assistance to a given case.3 The

greater responsiveness to local funding requirements in states where localities had more influence

on decision-making accords with the interpretation of the main estimates as the effect of local

funding. Moreover, allowing this flexibility is important for understanding the effects of changing

both local funding requirements and the level at which decisions were made. Allowing this flexibility

yields results that suggest that had all decisions been made by local governments that funded 50

percent, the OAA recipiency rate would have been 1 percent rather than 22 percent.

       To the extent that local funding reduced OAA recipiency, a natural extension is to ask how

it influenced the composition of recipients. I focus on one dimension of this question: how local

funding influenced blacks’ receipt of OAA. The basic difficulty in answering this question is that

there is no large source of microdata from this period that directly measures OAA receipt. However,

in a spirit similar to Fetter and Lockwood (2016), I show that the 1940 Census question on receipt

of non-wage income can be used to construct a reasonable proxy for OAA recipiency at the county

level, using the complete-count Census data for 1940 (Ruggles et al., 2015). After validating this

measure, I use it to investigate the relationship between local funding and the representation of

blacks among OAA recipients relative to their share in the population. I find suggestive evidence

that in the country as a whole, local funding was associated with greater underrepresentation of

blacks among OAA recipients relative to their share of the population. While somewhat sensitive to

specification, the evidence is also suggestive that this relationship is significantly larger in the South,

both economically and statistically. These findings, while necessarily speculative given that they

are based not on observation of OAA receipt but rather receipt of any non-wage income, suggest

that the shift away from local funding may have improved access of blacks to old-age support.

       This paper relates most closely to the literature on fiscal federalism in the New Deal: for

example, Wallis (1984), Wallis (1991), and Wallis (2000), in addition to Fishback and Wallis (2012).
   3
    Wallis (1981) provides a model of local relief budgets in his analysis of relief earlier in the New Deal, under the
Federal Emergency Relief Administration, and discusses the importance of accounting for which level of government
actually makes relief decisions.




                                                          3
In large part this literature has focused on explaining the decline of local government expenditures

relative to state and national government expenditures by measuring the responses of state and local

spending to shifts in national spending.4 It has not, however, directly measured the responsiveness

of spending to changes in the marginal cost to local or state governments of providing assistance, in

the spirit of the broader literature on the responsiveness of lower-level governments to changes in

intergovernmental matching grants (e.g., Baicker, 2005). One reason this question has been difficult

to address is that while most New Deal programs required some state or local funding, in many

programs there was no explicit matching formula, or the requirements were enforced unequally

across states (Fishback and Wallis, 2012). OAA offers a case amenable to empirical study, as it

followed a statutory matching formula for the division of funding across each of the three levels

of government. Although some have observed broadly that local funding requirements led to less

assistance (e.g., Costa, 1998, 1999), no work has attempted to quantify the aggregate importance

of these requirements, and the magnitude of the estimates is striking: the shift away from local

provision of support could account for most of the rise in old-age support over the second half of

the 1930s, which itself was the major period of increase before the expansion of Social Security in

the 1950s.

       This paper also contributes to the literatures on the politics of race in the New Deal and the

role of race in support for transfer payments. A significant body of literature has examined the

relationship between race and the public assistance provisions of the Social Security Act in the

New Deal Era, stressing that racial discrimination or the goal of keeping agricultural wages low

was behind the South’s effort to ensure a high degree of state discretion in the administration of

OAA (e.g., Quadagno, 1988; Alston and Ferrie, 1999; Lieberman, 2001). It is also the case that

prior to the New Deal, cities with more blacks had lower relief levels overall and less public relief in

particular (Fox, 2010). Most closely related to the focus of this paper, Quadagno (1988) suggests

that local control of relief contributed to exclusion of blacks from OAA in the South, although she

does not focus on local funding per se.
   4
   Other work documents similar shifts in regulatory functions of government over this period: Knittel (2006), for
example, discusses the shift of electricity regulation away from local governments to state governments. Fishback and
Wallis (2012) note the tendency of regulatory programs during the New Deal to be national programs.




                                                         4
2     Background on OAA

2.1   The federal structure of OAA

Prior to the early 20th century, poor relief in the United States was largely based on the legacy

of the English Poor Laws. Support for the destitute, including the poor elderly, was seen first as

a responsibility of the family, and second as a responsibility of local government (Maxwell, 1946,

p. 114). The first state laws providing for assistance to the elderly were in 1915, and a handful

of other states, largely in the West and Midwest, passed laws during the 1920s; as of 1929, seven

states had old-age assistance laws in effect. These laws were part of a broader spread of state

legislation providing for aid to “special classes” (in addition to the aged, aid to the blind and to

widowed mothers of dependent children) with the goals of avoiding the stigma of traditional poor

relief and increasing administrative efficiency of the programs through greater state involvement

(Geddes, 1937, p. 2-4). As Costa (1998) notes, political pressure for greater state involvement in

old-age support had begun to grow in the 1920s, but became significantly stronger after the onset

of the Great Depression, as older workers became unemployed at particularly high rates and many

private pension plans were discontinued or cut benefits. As a result, many more states passed

old-age assistance laws in the early years of the Depression. Nevertheless, prior to the passage

of the Social Security Act in 1935, most programs for old-age assistance remained small and had

relatively modest state administrative or fiscal involvement. As of 1934, when 28 states had passed

old-age assistance laws, in 19 states counties or towns had to supply at least half of assistance funds

(Cahn, 1934).

    This system of significant local funding was ill-suited to insure against aggregate shocks, since

negative shocks would both reduce revenues and increase the level of need. The inability of locali-

ties to provide sufficient funds to meet the need for relief became apparent early in the Depression.

Although states had begun to provide a greater share of assistance by the early 1930s, state govern-

ments themselves faced severe financial difficulties (Federal Works Agency, 1942, p. 2). The initial

response at the national level to the fiscal problems of states and localities was the creation of

the Federal Emergency Relief Administration (FERA). Between 1933 and 1935, FERA distributed



                                                  5
federal funds to states, which then passed funds on to local governments. These funds were used, in

part, to support assistance to the needy elderly. However, FERA retained significant discretion in

the distribution of federal funds across states, leading to political battles and a compromise in 1935

that created the structure that persisted through the remainder of the New Deal (Wallis, 1991).

Part of this compromise, embodied in the OAA provisions of the Social Security Act, was that the

federal funds for old-age support would be allocated across states according to a strict matching

formula for state OAA programs.

       Specifically, under the Social Security Act, federal matching funds were provided for state OAA

programs, as well as for two other “categorical” relief programs, Aid to Dependent Children (ADC)

and Aid to the Blind (AB), under closed end matching grants. The federal government matched

combined state and local spending up to a specified cap per case. The provisions of the Social

Security Act encouraged a shift from local to state funding and administration of OAA in addition

to providing federal funding. In order to receive federal matching funds, a state OAA program

had to involve some state financial participation and to be administered, or at least overseen,

by a state-level agency (Lansdale et al., 1939, p. 18). It was also significant, as Wallis (1984)

emphasizes, that federal matching funds were transferred to state governments, and not directly to

local governments.

       It is important that by 1939, the division of fiscal responsibility for OAA payments, up to the

federal matching cap, was based on fixed shares for each of the three levels of government. That is,

given a determination that a particular case would receive assistance, the percentage of the payment

to each case provided by each level of government was specified by the state OAA law. Federal

matching funds went to the state, which was responsible for distributing funds to local governments

if the state did not disburse assistance to recipients directly (Gordon and Israeli, 1939).5 For OAA

in the late 1930s, which is the period examined here, up to a cap of $30 per month (roughly $450

in 2010 dollars) the federal funding share was 50 percent and the remaining 50 percent was divided

between the state and local governments. In practice, the breakdown of source of funds for OAA
   5
    Earlier in the 1930s, some states did not have explicit formulas determining the shares of payments paid by states
and localities. As emphasized by Wallis (1981) and Wallis (1984), in cases where this matching was not explicit, the
fact that the federal matching money went to the state weakened incentives for local expenditures.




                                                          6
payments could deviate slightly from the statutory percentages (for example, U.S. Social Security

Board (1940c) reports the realized shares by state for 1938-39). Such deviations could arise, for

example, if payments were made above the federal matching cap, or in cases where states used

special emergency funds to increase their contribution. However, these differences were generally

quite small.

      As a result of the shift towards greater federal and state assumption of relief expenditures, by

1939 the local role in funding relief had diminished considerably. All states had OAA programs in

operation, and 27 states had OAA laws specifying a local funding share of zero percent. Figure 1

documents that in the remaining states, statutory local shares varied from 7.5% to 35%; Kansas

was the only state with a local share above 25%.6 These local funding shares are the key variable of

interest in the analysis below: it is worth noting that given the constant federal share, the analysis

does not hold the state share constant, but rather estimates the effect of changing the allocation of

fiscal responsibility between state and local governments.

      Observers at the time noted that the reasons for different division of fiscal responsibility between

state and local governments varied from state to state (e.g., Lansdale et al., 1939, p. 18). In general,

allocation of fiscal responsibility was made jointly with a decision about allocation of administrative

responsibility, with arguments that exclusive state financing would lead to too much control being

taken out of the hands of local governments (Lansdale et al., 1939, p. 216). But even states with

similar division of administrative responsibility varied in their allocation of fiscal responsibility for

OAA.

      Despite the shift in financial responsibility away from local governments, it was still noted at

the time that in those states requiring local funding, local governments were often unable to make

their required payments for OAA (e.g., Lansdale et al., 1939, pp. 220-1). Gordon and Israeli

(1939) report that in such cases, some state governments would pay the county share out of state

funds, sometimes with provisions for repayment. Other states had special equalization funds that

were meant to address shortfalls in localities’ ability to pay, or used other already-existing means

of addressing fiscal distress of local governments. Provisions of this sort likely smoothed out some
  6
      All details on OAA programs in this section come from U.S. Social Security Board (1940a).




                                                         7
differences across counties. Nevertheless, these equalization funds were sometimes suspended, or

state funds were not provided to pay the county share, and in these cases payments were cut;

Gordon and Israeli (1939) note that local funding remained a constraint on provision of OAA.

   At the same time as funding shifted away from the local level to the federal and state levels,

assistance to the elderly expanded rapidly. Between 1935 and 1940, the number of recipients of

old-age assistance rose from under 400,000 to more than 2 million. By 1940, 22 percent of the

population 65 and above received OAA, and received an average annual payment of $232, about

25 percent of the median wage and salary earnings for 60-64 year old male wage earners in 1939.

   An important element in thinking about the impact of changing local funding of OAA is what

influence local governments had on decisions regarding OAA eligibility and payments. In nearly all

states there was some role for local government: for example, an applicant for relief would submit

an application to a local office, and it was often a local agency that would investigate eligibility

and need and prepare a recommendation on whether aid should be provided, and in what amount

(Lansdale et al., 1939, p. 20). In all states there was also some state supervision. Within these

boundaries, however, there was a fair amount of variation in the influence of local government

that is difficult to measure precisely. The measure of local influence used in the analysis below is

whether the final decision in an OAA case was made by a local official or by a state official. As

illustrated by a comparison of Figure 1 to Figure 2, the latter of which indicates the states where

final decisions were made by local officials, local final decisions often, but did not always, coincide

with local funding of OAA.


2.2   Other features of OAA

States had considerable leeway within the broad requirements set by the Social Security Act for

federal matching grants, and there was a fair amount of variation in the nature of eligibility and

payments under different states’ laws. As of the end of 1939, which is the focus of the analysis,

the common eligibility requirements across states were that a recipient must otherwise have little

income (the amount varied across states) and be above some minimum age threshold (65 in most

states, 70 in a few). Some also required US citizenship or long-term residency, or required that



                                                  8
recipient have no legally responsible relatives able to provide support. All required some period of

residency in the state before claiming OAA.

       Asset tests, such as a dollar value on the amount of property than a recipient could own, were also

common, with a subset of these states excluding from consideration the value of a recipient’s own

home. Although appearing restrictive, these limitations may in fact have been intended to liberalize

eligibility by creating more formal eligibility rules, preventing people from being deemed ineligible

if they had less than the specified amount of property (U.S. Social Security Board, 1940b, p. 157).

Relatedly, some states also included provisions that gave either state or local governments a claim

on the recipient’s property. Anecdotal evidence suggests, as might be expected, that the presence

of such claims reduced take-up among those eligible for OAA, even in states that did not strictly

enforce such claims (Lansdale et al., 1939, pp. 94-96). But as Lansdale et al. (1939) note, claims

on property, like property limitations, may have sometimes been intended to liberalize eligibility;

whereas some relief agencies may have otherwise restricted relief to those without property, these

claims may have allowed elderly owning property that was not easily liquidated, such as a home,

to borrow against its value.

       In most states, OAA resembled an income or consumption floor: a state or local official evaluated

the needs and resources of an applicant, and if the applicant was deemed eligible, the excess of needs

over resources provided the basis for determining the payment. Maximum allowable payments

varied across states, with a range from $15 to $45 per month. A handful of states had no legal

maximum, but appear to have had administrative norms or rules that kept nearly all payments

in line with other states’ legal maxima: in the analysis below, I use the 99th percentile payment

in a state in fiscal year 1938-39 as a measure of maximum payments.7 In those states with legal

maximum payments, these 99th percentile payments were almost always the same as the legal

maxima. Finally, three states specified in addition that the sum of income and OAA payments had

to reach some minimum amount: this essentially set a common dollar value of “needs” across all

people.
   7
    The 99th percentile payment is based on summary tables on the distribution of grants to new recipients by state,
from U.S. Social Security Board (1939b). The distribution of payments is reported in 5-dollar bins, so I identify the
bin containing the 99th percentile payment and use the smaller value of the upper endpoint of the bin or, when it
exists, the state’s legal maximum payment.



                                                         9
3     The effect of local funding on OAA payments and recipiency

3.1   Data and empirical specification

Since local governments played some role in the granting of old-age assistance in nearly all states,

one would expect that when the cost of additional spending was lower for local governments, the

overall level of spending would be higher. Two difficulties arise in an empirical analysis of the

degree to which this was true. First, local funding shares may be correlated with population

characteristics, including the level of need – if, for example, states with worse local labor market

conditions were more likely to shift funding to the state level. Second, local funding shares may be

correlated with other aspects of state OAA policies that may themselves have influenced the level

of OAA relief provided, separately from the local funding share.

    To address the first challenge, the main specifications restrict comparisons to counties on either

side of a state border. The spirit of this approach is to make comparisons of areas that follow

different policies, but that are similar in terms of underlying need or other characteristics that may

lead to greater levels of OAA for a given state policy. This strategy follows Fetter and Lockwood

(2016), who show that across states, OAA generosity in 1939 was correlated with underlying trends

in labor force participation, but that there is no evidence of differential underlying trends in labor

force participation once comparisons are limited to counties on either side of a state border.

    Limiting comparisons to state borders does not address the second challenge, however, which

is that other aspects of OAA policies beyond local funding shares may also change discontinuously

at state borders and may be correlated with local funding shares. To address this second concern,

I test the robustness of my estimates to the inclusion of other observable aspects of state OAA

policies. My findings on the effects of local funding shares are robust to inclusion of additional

policy variables, and in fact are somewhat stronger when these controls are included. Provided

that these additional OAA policy variables are representative of the overall set of both observable

and unobservable features of OAA policy, this result strengthens the case that the results are not

due to unobserved state-level policies.

    It is important to note that to the extent that states that intended to provide lower OAA



                                                 10
payments did so in part by setting high local funding shares, it does not necessarily change the

interpretation of the estimated relationship, which is still the effect of allocating greater fiscal

responsibility to localities. What would be a concern is if states set not only local funding shares,

but instead multiple features of OAA, to reduce OAA payments, and if these other features were

not appropriately controlled for in the regression. Hence assessing robustness to controlling for

other features of OAA is an important part of the identification strategy.

    To address the additional concern that state policies other than OAA-related policies could also

indirectly influence OAA recipiency or payments, I also show that further controls for other aspects

of state policy or political preferences, such as limitations on the ability of state governments to

take on debt, do not substantively affect the results. Finally, I also present estimates from a panel

specification that controls flexibly for any variation in county characteristics or state policy that

was constant over the time period of the panel (from 1937 to 1939). This panel specification yields

nearly identical results.

    The main specifications use county-level data on three measures of payments and recipiency

under OAA programs: total OAA payments per person 65 and above, OAA recipients as a share

of the population 65 and above, and OAA payments per recipient. The number of recipients and

total OAA payments are measured in December 1939, and come from U.S. Social Security Board

(1940d). These measures are normalized using the population 65 and above measured in the 1940

Census.8 A handful of states made some grants jointly to couples and reported the couple as a

single recipient; I adjust for joint recipiency using information from U.S. Social Security Board

(1941) on the share of recipients with joint grants.9

    The estimating equation for the main empirical specifications is


                             ycb = αb + β(Local funding share)c + Λ0 Xc + εcb .                                   (1)
   8
     Three states had an eligibility age of of 70 in 1939. I normalize these using the 65 and above population, and
include a control for having the higher eligibility age.
   9
     In particular, this publication reports the share of new recipients in fiscal year 1939-40 in each state who were
married and the share of these individuals who received a joint grant. I calculate the share who received joint grants
and inflate the number of recipients for each county by the corresponding state’s share receiving joint grants. This
adjustment makes little difference in the main results and does not qualitatively change any results in the paper, but
does affect the magnitude of the results in Section 3.3 that combine 1937 data with the 1939 data.




                                                         11
Because some counties lie on more than one state border, the unit of observation is a county-state

border-pair; c indexes counties and b indexes state border groups (where a border group for a pair

of bordering states comprises all counties that touch the border). Here αb is a fixed effect for each

border group, β is the coefficient of interest, and Xc is a vector of controls for other characteristics

of OAA policy and/or population characteristics.10 The OAA policy controls include the 99th

percentile monthly payment as a measure of maximum payments, as well as a set of indicator

variables for the other aspects of OAA policies described in Section 2.2. Because local funding

shares vary at the state level, standard errors are clustered by state.

    In interpreting the results it is important to note that the estimated relationship is between the

level of OAA provided and the statutory local funding share, rather than a realized local funding

share (although the difference between the two, as noted in Section 2, was generally quite small).

Using the latter could be problematic in that decisions regarding payments could, in principle,

influence the share of payments funded by local governments. However, the statutory local funding

share is not directly influenced by local decisions, avoiding problems of reverse causality.


3.2    Main results

Estimates of equation (1) provide evidence that county funding was a significant limiting factor on

the size of the OAA program. Table 1 reports estimates of equation (1) with the county recipiency

rate as the dependent variable. Column (1) reports a simple regression in the full sample of

counties, with no border-pair fixed effects. This unconditional comparison indicates that a greater

local funding share was associated with a significantly lower recipiency rate. Column (2) limits

the sample to counties on state borders, and column (3) restricts comparisons to counties across

the same state border. The first key result in Table 1 is that the negative relationship in the

unconditional comparison is also present in the comparisons that condition on state border fixed

effects, suggesting that the relationship between local funding shares and county recipiency rates

is not driven by a correlation between population characteristics and county funding shares. The
  10
     In principle, comparisons can be restricted still further by limiting comparisons only to adjacent counties (as
opposed to comparing all counties on either side of a state border). In practice, restricting comparisons to adjacent
counties leads for the most part to very similar but less precisely estimated coefficients. I focus on the state border
comparisons but present selected county-pair results in the appendix.


                                                          12
second key result in Table 1 is that the magnitude of the relationship between local funding shares

and county recipiency rates actually increases when controls for other observable characteristics of

state OAA policy are included in the regression. The estimate in column (4), which I regard as the

preferred specification since it holds other features of state OAA laws constant, indicates that a 10

percentage point greater county funding share is associated with roughly a 4 percentage point lower

recipiency rate, a substantial decrease compared to the overall mean of about 22 percent. Finally,

the specification in column (5) includes as covariates a range of other county-level characteristics

that could either influence the level of need or capacity to provide relief. It is encouraging that the

inclusion of these controls leads to very little change in the key coefficient estimates.11

    Although not the focus of this analysis, the coefficients on the other policies for the most part

have reasonable signs. Higher maximum payments are associated with higher recipiency, likely re-

flecting either higher take-up or greater eligibility under more generous OAA plans. Older eligibility

ages and relatives’ responsibility requirements are negatively related to recipiency. The positive

(conditional) relationship of property limitations with recipiency is consistent with these limita-

tions in fact serving to liberalize eligibility, as described in Section 2.2, but could perhaps reflect

greater formality of eligibility testing in states that are more generous in unobserved ways. In these

specifications there is little evidence that claims on recipients’ property, citizenship requirements,

or minimum amounts for the sum of income and benefits payments influenced recipiency.

    The results in Table 2 suggest that greater local funding was also associated with lower payments

per person, although the coefficients are somewhat less stable across specifications and the implied

magnitudes are small relative to their means. The coefficient in column (4), conditioning on state

border effects and other features of OAA policies, suggests that local funding shares greater by 10

percentage points had, on average, 40-cent lower payments per recipient per month, relative to a

mean of approximately 19 dollars. This could reflect either that local governments chose to lower

recipiency rather than payments when required to fund a greater share of payments, or simply that

they had less influence over payments than they did over recipiency.

    The coefficients on other OAA policies again have reasonable signs. Unsurprisingly, higher
  11
     The regression in column (5) has one fewer observation because one county in the sample is missing information
on the share of households with a radio in 1930.



                                                        13
maximum payments, or the presence of a true income floor, raised payments per recipient. States

with an eligibility age of 70 or citizenship requirements had significantly higher payments, possibly

reflecting different choices in a tradeoff between higher payments and higher recipiency. On the

other hand, property limitations, which were associated with higher recipiency, were also associated

with higher payments. While claims on recipients’ property as a condition of assistance were not

associated with higher recipiency, they were associated with higher payments, likely reflecting a

lower cost of providing assistance when a portion of relief payments could be recovered.

   Taken together, the effects on recipiency and payments per person meant that greater county

funding shares led to significantly smaller OAA programs relative to the size of the elderly pop-

ulation. Table 3 reports estimates of equation (1) using payments per person 65 and above as a

summary measure incorporating both potential margins of adjustment. Across all specifications

that restrict comparisons to state boundaries there is a statistically significant negative relation-

ship. The estimates in column (4), which control for other state policies, imply that 10 percentage

point greater local funding was associated with OAA payments per person lower by about 90 cents,

or about one-fifth of the mean of $4.09.

   Figure 3 displays residual regression plots of OAA recipiency and payments against local funding

share, conditional on the controls in column (4) of Tables 1-3. Encouragingly, these graphs illustrate

that the estimated coefficients in Tables 1-3 reflect differences in OAA payments and recipiency

across the full spectrum of local funding shares, rather than being driven by outlier counties or

simply by a shift between having some local funding and no local funding.

   In the Appendix, I present a range of results to address possible concerns. A first concern is that

making comparisons among all counties on either side of a state border does not adequately control

for the underlying level of need or other important, unobserved characteristics of counties. Table

A1 reports results for all three key outcomes that restrict comparisons only to adjacent counties.

The data are at the county by county-pair level, and the regressions include fixed effects for each

county pair. In these specifications, following Dube, Lester and Reich (2010), standard errors are

clustered by border group (the group of all counties along the same state border) as well as by

state, since the same county will appear in multiple pairs, with pairs overlapping along the state



                                                 14
border. Column (4) shows results comparable to the preferred specifications above, which are less

precise but very similar to those using the full state border for comparison.

       Another possible concern is that the county population characteristics included in column (5) of

the tables above do not adequately represent the level of need. Appendix Table A2 reports results

with additional controls measuring economic conditions and levels of other forms of relief, but which

are available for only a subset of counties and which are potentially endogenous control variables as

they may have been affected by levels of OAA: registered unemployment in 1937 as a share of the

population from Haines (2010), WPA spending per capita from 1935-39 from Fishback, Kantor and

Wallis (2003), and log per capita retail sales in 1939 from Fishback, Horrace and Kantor (2005).

Inclusion of these controls leads to little change in the coefficient on the local funding share.12

       Finally, it is also possible that state policies other than OAA were related to OAA payments or

recipiency rates and that these policies were correlated with local funding shares, but not adequately

controlled for by using other features of OAA programs. One potentially important factor is a

state’s ability to finance relief spending: as Lansdale et al. (1939) note, by the late 1930s OAA

had become a major share of overall state government expenditures in many states. Many states

required either a referendum or a constitutional amendment to incur debt, although some states

were able to circumvent these restrictions. I use the measure of state debt limitations defined by

Gruber and Hungerman (2007), who use this variation as an instrument for New Deal spending;

ultimately it is based on information reported in Shawe (1936). Another potentially important

factor is a state’s political preference towards public assistance, which may not be fully captured

through the observable features of its OAA law. Since some of the early social insurance legislation

was driven by the Progressive movement, as a rough measure of such preferences I use the share of

a state’s vote in the 1924 presidential election that went to the Progressive Party (from Carter et al.

(2006), Series Eb208-259). Finally, I include county-level religious membership in 1936 (normalized

by 1940 population), from Haines (2010), as an additional population control. Results including

these controls are presented in Table A3.13 Again, the estimated relationship between local funding
  12
    Alternatives, such as using changes in unemployment between 1937 and 1940, including FERA or Civil Works
Administration (CWA) spending, or using changes in log retail sales from 1935 to 1939 give very similar results.
 13
    They exclude the District of Columbia, which is not discussed in Shawe (1936).




                                                      15
and OAA recipiency is very similar to that in the preferred specification. Including these additional

controls leads to slightly larger coefficients on payment per recipient, although the magnitude

remains small relative to the mean.

   Returning to the preferred specifications, some simple counterfactuals based on the estimated

coefficients imply that the shift away from local funding of relief was central to the growth of old-age

assistance in the New Deal. In 1934, immediately prior to the introduction of federal matching,

most old-age assistance programs – all but 7 of the 28 in place – required localities to fund at least

25 percent of payments, and all but 9 required localities to fund at least half (Cahn, 1934), with the

remainder funded by state governments. Table 4 uses the estimated coefficients from column (4)

of each of the preceding tables to predict changes in OAA recipiency, payments per recipient, and

payments per person 65 and above if all states in 1939 had shifted to no local funding, 25 percent

local funding, or 50 percent local funding, holding all else constant. A shift to 25 percent local

funding for all states would have led to a reduction in recipiency of roughly 6 percentage points,

off of a base of 22 percent, and a reduction in per-capita OAA payments of $1.34, off of a base of

$4.09. The coefficients suggest that had local funding of 50 percent been required, OAA payments

per person would have been roughly ten percent of its actual size, largely through reductions in

recipiency. It is worth noting that these counterfactuals hold the federal share constant at 50

percent, and hence reflect the effects of shifting the burden of the other half of payments between

local and state governments. It is not obvious how old-age assistance may have developed in the

absence of the federal matching provisions of the Social Security Act (or how state programs would

have developed as they matured). Despite these caveats, the results provide some indication that

the shift away from local funding was quantitatively quite significant.


3.3   Robustness: policy changes from 1937-1939

A potential threat to a causal interpretation of the estimates above is that states with unobserved

policies leading to higher recipiency may also have had lower local funding shares. Although the

fact that the relationship between local funding and OAA recipiency becomes stronger when con-

ditioning on observable policy characteristics weighs against this interpretation, to provide further



                                                  16
support I estimate panel specifications that control flexibly for fixed characteristics of counties.

   In particular, county-level data on OAA payments and recipients is available for December 1937

from U.S. Social Security Board (1938b), and information on state laws as of the same month is

compiled in U.S. Social Security Board (1938a). I construct a two-period panel of counties using

these sources. Observations of four states in 1937 are excluded from the sample: Tennessee did not

report county-level figures in 1937, Virginia had no OAA program in 1937, and Maine had virtually

no program – only 42 recipients total, for a recipiency rate below 0.1 percent. Washington had

an OAA program but no formal rule governing local funding shares. I use the 1940 population

65 and above to calculate recipiency rates and OAA payments per person in 1937, and adjust for

joint recipiency using the share of recipients receiving joint grants in fiscal year 1937-38 U.S. Social

Security Board (1939a). Of the states remaining in the sample, four changed local funding shares

between 1937 and 1939. One of these changes was modest – Oregon reduced the local funding

share from 25 percent to 20 percent – but the others were quite significant, with New Hampshire

reducing the local share from 45 percent to 25 percent, North Dakota from 25 percent to 7.5

percent, and Louisiana from 25 percent to zero percent. The small number of changes makes the

panel specification less natural as a baseline specification, but as we will see the resulting estimates

do provide support for my preferred interpretation of the main estimates.

   Following the spirit of the main specifications, I limit comparisons to state borders and estimate

the following equation:


                      ycbt = αbt + γc + β(Local funding share)ct + Λ0 Xct + εcbt                    (2)


where αbt is a state-border by year fixed effect, γc a county fixed effect, and β is estimated using

within-county variation in local funding shares over time. Table 5 reports estimates of equation

(2). Encouragingly, the coefficients are all very close in magnitude to the corresponding estimates

from Tables 1-3. Focusing on columns (2), (4), and (6), which control for changes in other policies

between 1937 and 1939, the coefficients suggest that a 10 percentage point increase in the local

funding share should lead to a 4.2 percentage point reduction in recipiency (compared to 4.1

percentage points in Table 1), a 47-cent reduction in payments per person (compared to 40 cents

                                                  17
in Table 2), and an 82-cent reduction in payments per person 65 and above (compared to 89 cents

in Table 3). The close similarity between the panel specification and the main, cross-sectional

comparisons support interpretation of the latter as the effect of local funding shares.


3.4   Heterogeneity by level of control

As emphasized in Section 2, in nearly all states both local and state governments had some influence

over decisions in OAA cases, but the division of authority between state and local governments

varied significantly, with local influence and local funding tending to be positively correlated. Al-

though it would be difficult to measure this division exactly, one useful measure of the division of

authority is whether state or local officials made final decisions on individual cases. OAA should

be more sensitive to the locality’s marginal cost of funding additional OAA grants when localities

themselves make final decisions, and OAA may be unusually generous when localities make final

relief decisions without sharing in the cost (as they did in a handful of states). Testing for differ-

ences in the effect of local funding shares by the local government’s degree of control is interesting

in its own right, and to the extent that localities are more sensitive to the local cost of providing

OAA, it also helps to support the interpretation of the main specifications as being a causal effect

of increasing local funding shares.

   The results suggest that recipiency declined with the local funding share even in those states

where state governments made the final relief decisions, but that when localities made the final

decision on a relief case, recipiency and payments were significantly more sensitive to local funding

shares. Table 6 reports specifications that document the relationship between the size of OAA

programs and local funding and decision making, where local funding is interacted with the mutually

exclusive categories of local and state-level final decisions. All specifications include border fixed

effects and columns (2), (4), and (6) control for the other policies included in Tables 1-3.

   Focusing on specifications that control for other state policies, the results suggest that when

localities made final decisions, a 10 percentage-point greater local funding share was associated

with a 5.7 percentage point reduction in recipiency, an 86-cent reduction in payments per person,

and a reduction of $1.34 in payments per elderly person. By comparison, in states where state



                                                 18
governments made final relief decisions, estimated changes in recipiency and payments as a result

of greater local funding are more sensitive to inclusion of other policy controls, but always smaller

than in states where localities made final relief decisions. Specifications that control for other

policies suggest that a 10 percentage point greater local funding share was associated with a 2.3

percentage point reduction in payments, a 13-cent higher average payment (although not statis-

tically significant), and a 36-cent reduction in payments per elderly person. In all specifications,

the coefficient on local funding shares is significantly different in the two types of states at the 10

percent level or lower. Finally, the coefficient on the indicator for final decisions resting at the local

level shows that when localities made final decisions and the local funding share was zero – as was

the case in a handful of states – recipiency and payments were substantially higher.14

         To complement the counterfactuals shown in Table 4, Table 7 shows counterfactuals that allow

for both the level of local funding and the level of decision making to change. This may be the most

relevant set of counterfactuals for understanding the shift away from local funding, since decision

making moved from the local to the state level at the same time as funding did. The results lead

to even stronger conclusions than those shown in Table 4, suggesting that had localities funded 50

percent of relief grants and made final relief decisions, only 1 percent of the elderly would have

received OAA.



4         Effects on composition of relief

4.1        Measuring differences in OAA receipt using the 1940 Census

Having documented evidence that local funding reduced OAA recipiency, a natural extension is

to ask whether specific groups were disproportionately affected by the shift to state funding. A

particularly important dimension of this question is how the shift away from local provision of aid

affected racial disparities in access to old-age support. For example, Alesina and Glaeser (2004)
    14
     A caveat in interpreting these results is that the difference in slopes between the two types of states is not
statistically significant in a panel specification following equation (2), perhaps because it is difficult to pick up this
difference with only a small number of policy changes between 1937 and 1939. Interpreted at face value, the point
estimates from the panel specification suggest that recipiency responded similarly negatively to local funding shares
in both types of states.




                                                           19
document that welfare benefits have been less generous in states with higher minority population

shares, and Luttmer (2001) finds that support for welfare spending falls as the share of local

recipients from one’s own racial group falls. Given these findings, and the possibly greater salience

of the racial composition of local assistance recipients relative to state assistance recipients, it is

possible that the degree to which OAA payments were funded locally may have mattered for the

racial composition of relief recipients.

    A basic difficulty in understanding how policies differentially affected OAA receipt of different

groups is that OAA receipt is unobserved in the 1940 Census, and no comprehensive data are

available at the county level on characteristics of OAA recipients in this period. The Census did,

however, ask whether an individual received more than $50 in non-wage income in 1939. Non-

wage income includes various other forms of income in addition to OAA, but it is possible to

use differences across counties in nonwage income to proxy for differences in OAA receipt.15 In

particular, restricting comparisons to state borders controls flexibly for differences in baseline levels

of receipt of non-wage income that are spatially correlated. Conditioning on comparisons across

state borders, the analysis then tests whether greater local funding shares are associated with

differential over- or underrepresentation of blacks, relative to their share of the population. Note

that if, for example, blacks are underrepresented among OAA recipients relative to their share of

the elderly population but to a similar degree across states, this analysis will not find evidence that

local funding leads to greater underrepresentation.

    As should be expected, county-level measures of non-wage income receipt for individuals 65 and

above are strongly correlated with actual OAA recipiency rates. Using complete-count Census data

from 1940 from Ruggles et al. (2015), Figure 4 plots, for each county, the share of the population

65 and above receiving non-wage income in 1939 against actual recipiency rates in December 1939.

In most counties the share of the population reporting non-wage income is higher than the share

receiving OAA, as would be expected, but the important result in the figure is that higher recipiency
   15
      The instructions to enumerators indicated that non-wage income included, among other things, income from
business profits or professional fees, income from roomers or boarders, cash relief payments, regular contributions
from family members not in the same household, in-kind income, and commodities consumed from the individual’s
own business. In part the approach I take here follows the spirit of Fetter and Lockwood (2016), which documents
that receipt of non-wage income increases discretely at age 65, and more so in states with larger OAA programs.




                                                        20
rates are strongly associated with higher shares of the population reporting non-wage income, and

hence that differences in receipt of non-wage income may provide a reasonable measure of differences

in recipiency rates across counties.

    Table 8 reports regression results formalizing the relationship documented in Figure 4.16 The

first column reports a simple regression of the share of the county population receiving non-wage

income on the county recipiency rate and a constant term. The slope coefficient implies that a one

percentage point greater recipiency rate is associated with a 0.426 percentage point rise in the share

reporting non-wage income. This result continues to hold in the state-border design, as shown in

column (2): here a one percentage point rise in recipiency rates is associated with a share reporting

non-wage income that is greater by 0.354.


4.2    Effects of local funding by race

I apply the non-wage income data constructed and validated in Section 4.1 to investigate the

impact of local funding requirements on the composition of OAA recipients, and in particular

whether these requirements influenced the racial composition of recipients. I examine the share of

non-wage income recipients 65 and above who are black relative to the black share of the population

65 and above, to measure differential over- or underrepresentation of blacks in areas where localities

played a greater role in funding. Similar to the analysis in Section 3, the identifying assumption

is that in the absence of OAA policies that differentially affect representation of blacks among

OAA recipients, the difference between representation of blacks among those who receive non-wage

income and the representation of blacks in the overall population 65 and above would be constant

across state borders. Note that it is not a concern, for example, if whites were more likely than

blacks to own income-producing assets, so long as that relative likelihood was constant across state

borders.

    The summary statistics reported in Table 9 indicate that in the United States as a whole, and

especially in the South, blacks were underrepresented among non-wage income recipients. In the
  16
     In a handful of relatively small counties, information on non-wage income is coded as missing for all individuals
65 and older, explaining the slightly smaller number of observations when non-wage income is used rather than county
recipiency rates.




                                                         21
average county with any blacks 65 and above, 50 percent of blacks had non-wage income; about 59

percent of whites did. In the South, about 45 percent of blacks in the average county, and about 55

percent of whites, had non-wage income. These differences in rates of receipt of non-wage income

translated into differences between the black share of the population receiving non-wage income

and the black share of the total population of about 0.011 in the country as a whole, and 0.025 in

the South.

   The key question I wish to investigate is whether this underrepresentation was differentially

greater in states in which localities funded a greater share of OAA payments. This question is

addressed in Table 10, which reports regressions of the share of non-wage income recipients 65 and

above who are black on the local funding share, controlling for the share of the overall population 65

and above who are black, and restricting comparisons to counties on either side of a state border. In

the country as a whole, a 10 percentage point increase in the local funding share is associated with

a reduction in the share of blacks among non-wage income recipients of 0.17 percentage points. In

the South the reduction is considerably larger, at 0.6 percentage points; in the non-South, there is a

statistically significant but much smaller negative relationship. Controlling for other policies yields

estimates of slightly greater magnitude: the implied effects would be 0.24 percentage points in the

country as a whole, and 0.75 percentage points in the South. Compared to the means reported in

Table 9, the implied effects of local funding appear to be quantitatively significant: a reduction of

0.0075 is 30 percent of the mean “underrepresentation” of blacks among non-wage income recipients

in the South.

   Several caveats should be noted about these results. First, the results for the South are more

sensitive to reasonable alternative specifications than are the main results of the paper (those

for the non-South remain small but statistically significant). Appendix Table A4 reports similar

specifications to those in Table 10, but restricting comparisons to pairs of adjacent counties rather

than allowing comparisons across full state borders. The point estimates are broadly similar but

are somewhat smaller in magnitude: a ten percentage point higher local funding share in the

South is associated with a reduction of 0.4 to 0.5 percentage points in the share of blacks among

non-wage income recipients rather than 0.6 to 0.75, and with controls the coefficient estimate is



                                                  22
not statistically significant at conventional levels. Moreover, controlling for state debt limitations

and political preferences by including the Gruber and Hungerman (2007) measure of state debt

constraints and the 1924 Progressive vote share as controls to the specification reported in column

(5) of Table 10 yields a coefficient for the South of 0.021 (with a standard error of 0.039) rather

than -0.075.

    Finally, the fact that actual receipt of OAA is not observed further complicates the interpretation

of these estimates. At least two issues arise. The first is that given that a significant number of the

elderly received non-wage income other than OAA, the quantitative implications for OAA receipt

are difficult to assess even if these results provide an indication as to the existence and direction

of an effect. The second is that if whites were more likely than blacks to receive sources of non-

wage income other than OAA, in principle any factor that reduces OAA recipiency, even if it does

not change the share of OAA recipients who are black, could reduce the share of non-wage income

recipients who are black. Without observing OAA receipt by race, this concern is difficult to address

directly. Yet the results weigh against such an interpretation, at least in the South. In particular,

maximum payments (as measured by 99th percentile payments) show a significant relationship

with overall recipiency in Table 1, and if the differences in the share of non-wage income recipients

who were black were explained by race-neutral reductions in OAA recipiency, it is likely that lower

maximum payments would also be associated with differential underrepresentation of blacks among

non-wage income recipients. However, in column (5) of Table 10, the maximum OAA payment is

not statistically significant at any conventional level, and its magnitude, relative to the coefficient

on the local funding share, is considerably lower than in the main results.

    Given the data constraints, these results are necessarily speculative. Yet they may suggest

that when counties in the South bore more of the cost of funding relief, blacks were differentially

adversely affected.17 It may be, then, that the shift to state administration of old-age relief was

beneficial to blacks, even in the South.
  17
     It is worth noting that to the extent that local funding did differentially reduce OAA receipt among blacks, these
results have little to say on the mechanism behind this relationship. One possibility is that the relationship is driven
by OAA officials explicitly denying benefits to blacks who applied, but other factors may have been important as well
– for example, potential applicants may have responded to the expectation of discrimination by not applying.




                                                          23
5    Conclusion

A fundamental feature of relief in the New Deal was the shift away from local provision of transfer

payments to state and federal provision. Using variation in the division of OAA funding between

local and state governments, I find that the shift from local to state funding was critical for the

growth of old-age support in the New Deal. The regression estimates suggest that had localities

needed to fund half of old-age payments in 1939 – which was not uncommon as of 1934 – the OAA

recipiency rate would have been 5 percent rather than 22 percent, and perhaps even lower. More

speculatively, given the constraints imposed by data availability, there is some evidence that the

shift away from local provision of relief benefitted blacks, particularly in the South.

    Although not investigated here, it is also possible that the shift from local to state decision-

making reduced scope for corruption in public assistance. While the corruption of local relief

officials was proverbial before the New Deal, Wallis, Fishback and Kantor (2006) point out that by

the end of the 1930s relief was viewed as bureaucratic, but not corrupt. They argue that the federal

government did not gain from local corruption, and hence reduced corruption in the programs in

which it had greater control (such as the Works Progress Administration). But it may be something

of a puzzle that complaints of corruption fell for the assistance programs even though the federal

government had little power over their administration. It may be that, like the federal government,

state government officials also saw little benefit from local corruption, and hence reduced corruption

as they took on a greater role in relief spending. It may also be, as Troesken (2006) argues, that

any type of regime change may disrupt existing relationships and thereby be conducive to reducing

corruption.




                                                 24
References
Alesina, Alberto, and Edward Ludwig Glaeser. 2004. Fighting poverty in the US and Europe:
 A world of difference. Oxford University Press.

Alston, Lee J, and Joseph P Ferrie. 1999. Southern Paternalism and the American Welfare
 State: Economics, Politics, and Institutions in the South, 1865-1965. JSTOR.

Baicker, Katherine. 2005. “Extensive or Intensive Generosity? The Price and Income Effects of
 Federal Grants.” The Review of Economics and Statistics, 87(2): 371–384.

Brown, Charles C., and Wallace E. Oates. 1987. “Assistance to the poor in a federal system.”
 Journal of Public Economics, 32(3): 307–330.

Cahn, Frances. 1934. “Relief to the Needy Aged: A Summary of Assistance Laws in the United
 States and Abroad.” Legislative Problems (Bureau of Public Administration, University of Cali-
 fornia, Berkeley) No. 9.

Carter, Susan B., Scott Sigmund Gartner, Michael R. Haines, Alan L. Olmstead,
 Richard Sutch, Gavin Wright, Price V. Fishback, and Melissa A. Thomasson. 2006.
 Historical Statistics of the United States Millennial Edition Online. New York:Cambridge Uni-
 versity Press.

Costa, Dora L. 1998. The evolution of retirement. National Bureau of Economic Research Books,
 University of Chicago Press.

Costa, Dora L. 1999. “A house of her own: old age assistance and the living arrangements of
 older nonmarried women.” Journal of Public Economics, 72(1): 39–59.

Dube, Arindrajit, T. William Lester, and Michael Reich. 2010. “Minimum Wage Effects
 Across State Borders: Estimates Using Contiguous Counties.” The Review of Economics and
 Statistics, 92(4): 945–964.

Federal Works Agency. 1942. Final Statistical Report of the Federal Emergency Relief Admin-
  istration. USGPO.

Fetter, Daniel, and Lee M. Lockwood. 2016. “Government Old-Age Support and Labor Sup-
  ply: Evidence from the Old Age Assistance Program.” National Bureau of Economic Research,
  Inc NBER Working Papers 22132.

Fishback, Price V., and John J. Wallis. 2012. “What Was New About the New Deal?”
  National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc NBER Working Papers 18271.

Fishback, Price V., Shawn Kantor, and John J. Wallis. 2003. “Can the New Deal’s three Rs
  be rehabilitated? A program-by-program, county-by-county analysis.” Explorations in Economic
  History, 40(3): 278–307.

Fishback, Price V., William C. Horrace, and Shawn Kantor. 2005. “Did New Deal Grant
  Programs Stimulate Local Economies? A Study of Federal Grants and Retail Sales During the
  Great Depression.” The Journal of Economic History, 65(1): 36–71.


                                              25
Fox, Cybelle. 2010. “Three Worlds of Relief: Race, Immigration, and Public and Private Social
  Welfare Spending in American Cities, 19291.” American Journal of Sociology, 116(2): 453–502.

Geddes, Anne E. 1937. Trends in Relief Expenditures, 1910-1935. Washington, D.C.:USGPO.
 Works Progress Administration Research Monograph X.

Gordon, Joel, and Olivia J. Israeli. 1939. “Distribution of Public-Assistance Funds within
 States.” Social Security Bulletin, 2(12).

Gruber, Jonathan, and Daniel M. Hungerman. 2007. “Faith-based charity and crowd-out
 during the great depression.” Journal of Public Economics, 91(5-6): 1043–1069.

Haines, Michael R. 2010. “Historical, Demographic, Economic, and Social Data: The United
 States, 1790-2002.” Ann Arbor, MI: Inter-university Consortium for Political and Social Re-
 search, doi:10.3886/ICPSR02896.

Inman, Robert P. 2008. “The Flypaper Effect.” National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc
  NBER Working Papers 14579.

Knight, Brian. 2002. “Endogenous Federal Grants and Crowd-out of State Government Spending:
 Theory and Evidence from the Federal Highway Aid Program.” American Economic Review,
 92(1): 71–92.

Knittel, Christopher R. 2006. “The Adoption of State Electricity Regulation: The Role of
 Interest Groups.” Journal of Industrial Economics, 54(2): 201–222.

Lansdale, Robert T., Elizabeth Long, Agnes Leisy, and Byron T. Hipple. 1939. The
  Administration of Old Age Assistance. Vol. 6, Committee on Public Administration of the Social
  Science Research Council.

Lieberman, Robert C. 2001. Shifting the color line: Race and the American welfare state. John
  Wiley & Sons.

Luttmer, Erzo F.P. 2001. “Group loyalty and the taste for redistribution.” Journal of Political
 Economy, 109(3): 500–528.

Maxwell, James A. 1946. The Fiscal Impact of Federalism in the United States. Cambridge,
 Massachusetts:Harvard University Press.

Moffitt, Robert A. 1984. “The effects of grants-in-aid on state and local expenditures : The case
 of AFDC.” Journal of Public Economics, 23(3): 279–305.

Oates, Wallace E. 1999. “An Essay on Fiscal Federalism.” Journal of Economic Literature,
 37(3): 1120–1149.

Quadagno, Jill. 1988. The transformation of old age security: Class and politics in the American
 welfare state. University of Chicago Press.

Ruggles, Steven, Katie Genadek, Ronald Goeken, Josiah Grover, and Matthew Sobek.
 2015. “Integrated Public Use Microdata Series: Version 6.0 [Machine-readable database].” Min-
 neapolis: University of Minnesota.

                                               26
Ryan, Paul. 2014. “Expanding Opportunity in America: A Discussion Draft from the House
 Budget Committee.” http://budget.house.gov/uploadedfiles/expanding_opportunity_
 in_america.pdf, accessed October 11, 2016.

Shawe, Earle K. 1936. “An Analysis of the Legal Limitations on the Borrowing Power of the
  State Governments.”

Singhal, Monica. 2008. “Special interest groups and the allocation of public funds.” Journal of
  Public Economics, 92(3-4): 548–564.

Troesken, Werner. 2006. “Regime Change and Corruption. A History of Public Utility Regula-
  tion.” In Corruption and Reform: Lessons from America’s Economic History. 259–282. National
  Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.

U.S. Social Security Board. 1938a. Characteristics of state plans for old-age assistance. USGPO.

U.S. Social Security Board. 1938b. “Tabular Summary of Statistics of Public Assistance Under
 the Social Security Act for the Calendar Year 1937.” Bureau of Research and Statistics Report
 No. 1.

U.S. Social Security Board. 1939a. “Social Data on Recipients of Public Assistance Accepted
 in 1937-1938.” Bureau of Research and Statistics Memorandum No. 34.

U.S. Social Security Board. 1939b. “Social Data on Recipients of Public Assistance Accepted
 in 1938-1939.” Bureau of Research and Statistics Memorandum No. 42.

U.S. Social Security Board. 1940a. Characteristics of state plans for old-age assistance. USGPO.
 Revised October 1, 1939.

U.S. Social Security Board. 1940b. “Social Security Yearbook for the Calendar Year 1939.”

U.S. Social Security Board. 1940c. “Sources of Funds Expended for the Special Types of Public
 Assistance and General Relief in 1938-39.” Social Security Bulletin, 3(1).

U.S. Social Security Board. 1940d. “Trends in Public Assistance, 1933-1939.” Bureau of Re-
 search and Statistics Report No. 8.

U.S. Social Security Board. 1941. “Social Data on Recipients of Public Assistance Accepted in
 1939-1940.” Bureau of Public Assistance Research Memorandum No. 1.

Wallis, John J. 1981. “Work Relief and Unemployment in the 1930’s.” PhD diss. University of
 Washington.

Wallis, John J. 1984. “The Birth of the Old Federalism: Financing the New Deal, 1932-1940.”
 The Journal of Economic History, 44(01): 139–159.

Wallis, John J. 1991. “The Political Economy of New Deal Fiscal Federalism.” Economic Inquiry,
 29(3): 510–24.

Wallis, John J., and Wallace Oates. 1998. “The Impact of the New Deal on American Fed-
 eralism.” In The Defining Moment: The Great Depression and the American Economy in the
 Twentieth Century. NBER Chapters, 155–180. National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.

                                              27
Wallis, John Joseph. 2000. “American Government Finance in the Long Run: 1790 to 1990.”
 Journal of Economic Perspectives, 14(1): 61–82.

Wallis, John J., Price V. Fishback, and Shawn E. Kantor. 2006. “Politics, Relief, and
 Reform. Roosevelt’s Efforts to Control Corruption and Political Manipulation during the New
 Deal.” Corruption and Reform: Lessons from America’s Economic History, 343–372. University
 of Chicago Press.

Ziliak, James P. 2015. “Temporary Assistance for Needy Families.” Economics of Means-Tested
  Transfer Programs in the United States, volume 1. University of Chicago Press.




                                            28
Figures and Tables


                         Figure 1: Statutory local government funding shares




Notes: Figure shows statutory percent of OAA payments funded by local government as of October 1939. Source:
U.S. Social Security Board (1940a).




                                                    29
                       Figure 2: Level of government making final relief decisions




Notes: Figure indicates states in which local governments made final relief decisions as of October 1939. Source: U.S.
Social Security Board (1940a).




                                                         30
                                                                                                   Figure 3: Residual regression plots for main specifications

                                                                                 (a) Recipiency rate                                                                                                                                                          (b) Payments per recipient
                                                                               ga                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  in




                                                                                                                                                                                                                   10
                        .4




                                                    la                sd




                                                                                                                                                                                              Residuals of OAA payments per recipient
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         dc
                                                                                                            co
                                                                                                            co                                                                                                                                                                    ct                                                         az
                                                                       mt                                       sc
 Residuals of OAA recipiency rate




                                                                                       sd                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            in
                                                     ut                               mn               ut                 fl             ut                                                                                                                                                      ny     ohnmco in in
                                                     co                           la                                      fl                             al                                                                                  co                       co      la                  va    ga         in oh                    nc
                                                                   ok                                                                                                                                                                        co                                                                   ny




                                                                                                                                                                                                                           5
                                                              ok sd            fl              mt                                                                                                                                                                    ga                  coil nm
                                                    la
                                                     co la
                                                                                             nc
                                                                                                       utco
                                                                                                                          fl
                                                                                                                         ok wi
                                                                                                                                         ut                                                                                                  co
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             co                id co
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      co
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                pade ct ga nm
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             txmo
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            co    nyinoh oh       wiin
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  oh           va
                                                                                                                                                 mt
                         .2




                                                                   ok     nv                 ne              tx                                                                                                                                                       co
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      va pa                                             ok         pa         wi                     wy
                                                              ok sd            fl              mt tx tn ok                                                                                                                                                  sd ga                                                  in in          oh
                                                              ok
                                                              ok
                                                                   okmtms nv   fl      sd                                 fl    oh tx                        tn                                                                               co la         oksdsd    il ctlapa va sdct
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                pa
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ctpa
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          oh
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         moga
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           mn    aloh   gama
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          nmco
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            coaz
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              cainndok
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ok oh
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ok oh
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   pa
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   pa
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  oh                al               wy            wy
                                                    la
                                                    la      az       scwv ms fl
                                                                          nv   fl       ky mn       ilohtxky fl           fl ut           az mt
                                                                                                                                                wi                                                                                                 wa
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     az     sd   sd  ga      ct va  sd                      co  ia      ok
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ok        wi
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ut      ca   vaalwynd              wy
                                                     co wa          ky   wv ok                 mt
                                                                                                il il utilco txsc                        nc                                                                                                                 okid id           laia az
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 mosd mo   ga mt          nm  azwany ia ok                     va al ar         or
                                                     co wa ok idok
                                                                   sd
                                                                   ok   sd
                                                                    ky wv nv wvctmn wv       nc
                                                                                             ut
                                                                                              tx
                                                                                              tx
                                                                                              mnilky
                                                                                                   pa
                                                                                                    vaidky  co  sctninar
                                                                                                                         ok
                                                                                                                         in
                                                                                                                        tn              caaz nv              tn                                                                              lama
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ma
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             lama           ok
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            sd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ok ms
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ms
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    dc
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ga
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                va
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              lapa
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                va
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 momn copa
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ga
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ga mt
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ilme
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  va
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 pa
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  iloh  me
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ma
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ilnm
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ma  ca
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ca
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ia
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                mo
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 tn
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ky
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ia   iain
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   inia
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ny
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   inia
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     iainky
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               iaoh ks    caks
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          caks vaalwy
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   wi
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    mtnd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ks
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         tn mdms
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              md           nh
                                                    la
                                                    la    sd            sd sd
                                                                            ne     pa
                                                                                   wv  sd   pa
                                                                                             ut
                                                                                            co
                                                                                             ut    ky
                                                                                                    il       tx  ia
                                                                                                                sc     nv       ut
                                                                                                                                oh  txks nc      mt
                                                                                                                                                wi nd                                                                                              waazok
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ok  idky
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            sd    sd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             kymsidid
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    msne
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      il      ok
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 mo
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                va de
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    sdco  oh
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         momn pa
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              il
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              mt  va
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ny
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  iloh
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ga
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        gaor oh
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              aziany
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               md
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ia in
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  mn
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   mdiatn
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ok     iaut tnks  ca             ks
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ar    ms
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ms                   wy
                                               co    co la dc       ky
                                                               netxkysc  wv
                                                                          nv
                                                                          ms
                                                                           sd la   pa
                                                                                   wvct ky
                                                                                    mo      mi
                                                                                            oh
                                                                                          ctwv
                                                                                         co pailkyid    ma   txca
                                                                                                             txkyia
                                                                                                                  tn
                                                                                                                 wa inar
                                                                                                                   ny    in
                                                                                                                         ok
                                                                                                                        okflky
                                                                                                                         in           ksut
                                                                                                                                         ncwimt wi ksal tn
                                                                                                                                               nv                            or                                                         co             ok mosd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           idky      sd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ga
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    msilva ok
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ga
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ms        idva de
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    mn    ne
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          oh
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ga mt ky
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 pa     gama   ny
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                mo   mo inky
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        oh
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       tn      ia ne ca      ks
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            nc vaalwi
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               va   mt ks md    tn
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                or                  wy
                                                          wa
                                                          sdaz      kyidwv
                                                                     sc
                                                                    kyms
                                                                      idsdmsne
                                                                            co ct ok
                                                                                  lamo
                                                                                   wv
                                                                                    mi
                                                                                    mo
                                                                                       sd
                                                                                      mn
                                                                                      de wv
                                                                                         wv motx
                                                                                              mn
                                                                                             ne
                                                                                                ilpa
                                                                                              ilms  ilga
                                                                                                   pa
                                                                                                    va
                                                                                                    il
                                                                                                   pa
                                                                                                   ky
                                                                                                   ne
                                                                                                   ny
                                                                                                        nm
                                                                                                               ca
                                                                                                                 wa
                                                                                                                 mo
                                                                                                                mdtn   in
                                                                                                                      ia
                                                                                                                       ar
                                                                                                                         in
                                                                                                                         ok nctn
                                                                                                                         in
                                                                                                                                     wi uttn
                                                                                                                                           mn
                                                                                                                                          tn
                                                                                                                                           ks    al kstn
                                                                                                                                                                                        wy                                              co   la wa
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               vt
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ok
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   wa ok id
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   wa        kyid
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ky
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            sd ms
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              sc
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             kyms
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               id
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 sd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ga ms
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 sdnv ne la
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ne
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ga
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ga       la
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 mo
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                va
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 mo
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 momn
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                pa
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               wv
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ia
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                va
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                pa
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ia  sdcoidoh
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ky
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    sdco
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ut
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         pa
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           mn
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           tx
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ms
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           nc
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          oh
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ga
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ne
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ia
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  va
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ia
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  il
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ia
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ga
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         id
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ohky
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         id
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             oh
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             de
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            pa
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                wa
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ohmd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                mo
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ky md
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ny
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ia
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ar
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       tn
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      in
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ar
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        oh
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        inky   iava
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ia
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 vapatxnv
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       or
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       wi
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ut
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ca ks
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            nc
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            nc
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ks
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             tn
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  wy
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               vamt
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               va
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              wi  nv     ks msmstn        arnhor
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ar
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   wy
                                               co     vt
                                                    lama
                                                      malawa
                                                         la   ok
                                                          wa okar id
                                                                 mo kyms wv
                                                                  idkyidwvms
                                                                         id ne
                                                                            co
                                                                            il
                                                                            ne wv  va
                                                                                    mi
                                                                                   pa
                                                                                   va de
                                                                                       nm
                                                                                         wv mo
                                                                                             nc
                                                                                            pa
                                                                                          ctmomn
                                                                                              il
                                                                                              tx   ky
                                                                                                    ia
                                                                                                   ky
                                                                                                    ia
                                                                                                   ny
                                                                                                   pa
                                                                                                   ky   ky
                                                                                                       ga
                                                                                                      ohma
                                                                                                        ky
                                                                                                        ma
                                                                                                            pa
                                                                                                            de kyia
                                                                                                                md
                                                                                                                 ky
                                                                                                                 mo
                                                                                                                ny mn
                                                                                                                    md in
                                                                                                                      ia  flkyut wi
                                                                                                                                ohnctxmd
                                                                                                                                   in
                                                                                                                                  nc     nc
                                                                                                                                      ksnc mn
                                                                                                                                          tn
                                                                                                                                           wi nc   nc
                                                                                                                                                    tnks
                                                                                                                                                      tn al        wy   ar                                                                    ut la
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  la
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   sd ok
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   wa   mi
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        nemo
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         aridky
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            sdsc
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               mssdidga
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    msne
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     sd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ga
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    msne   fl id     ky
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      co mo
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        nm
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         monc
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           mn
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ga
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ms pa  il
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ia
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 al     gaor
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ky
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ilky
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         id
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ga
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 tn
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                mo
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ky
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ohny
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                sc
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                momn
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   md
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ny
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  nd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  mn
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     nd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   inar
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  mn   tn
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      inin         ny
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  wi
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  wiintn
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ks
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       nv
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        mo  nc
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ncmn
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               va  wi nc tn or
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               vaalwi       almstn   wy   ar             wy




                                                                                                                                                                                                                0
                                                      vt          tx  mssd
                                                                         sdga      pa mn wv  nc
                                                                                             ne
                                                                                             ut ilpa
                                                                                                   ne
                                                                                                    ia ga
                                                                                                      me
                                                                                                      ohma      sc  mdia         pa tx
                                                                                                                                   in ks   ks         kstn or                     wy                                                    co
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        co         wa        kyid     va
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ga        wvmomn      ms
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ut      ia
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ilililmo
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ne     oh  pa  mo
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ky
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              risc
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 tn
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ny ar          va     md
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ksut ks
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             tn             tn  or
                                                    lavt wa ok
                                                     ut         ar
                                                               mi  sd
                                                                   sd
                                                                    kyms id
                                                                         wv
                                                                          ms
                                                                         id ne
                                                                           ga
                                                                           ga
                                                                          ms
                                                                       mtwv ne    wv
                                                                            ilva pa
                                                                            ne     va
                                                                                    mo
                                                                                   ia mn
                                                                                       nm
                                                                                      de wv mo
                                                                                             nc
                                                                                            oh
                                                                                            oh
                                                                                            motx
                                                                                              mn
                                                                                             ma
                                                                                          ctwv
                                                                                             ut
                                                                                              msilalia
                                                                                                    ia
                                                                                                   pa  id
                                                                                                    ilmo
                                                                                                   pa
                                                                                                    va  or  pa
                                                                                                             tx
                                                                                                              nh
                                                                                                             oh
                                                                                                            panh
                                                                                                             oh
                                                                                                                 mo
                                                                                                                 ky
                                                                                                                 iany
                                                                                                                    md
                                                                                                                   mn
                                                                                                                   ny
                                                                                                                    in inok
                                                                                                                      ar
                                                                                                                       nv
                                                                                                                       ar
                                                                                                                      ar
                                                                                                                              dewi
                                                                                                                             ia   nctx  catn
                                                                                                                                         ncmn
                                                                                                                                           ksva mtnc
                                                                                                                                            va                     wy
                                                                                                                                                                         nhnh
                                                                                                                                                                                   wy                                                          vt  wa ok
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               vt la
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ut        mi     idga
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              sc  wvnv
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   id ne
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ga
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ne
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ililva   wv   mncoid
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ky
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      co
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           tx
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           mn
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ilms
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           nc
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          oh
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ma
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         pa
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         motx
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ut     pa
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ilal
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ky
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 pa     ganm
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          nm
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ma tx
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              nhmo
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                sc
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ky
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                sc innd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  mn
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  nd  ar
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     nd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ar
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        nj
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ok
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        nj ut     wi
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  wi
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   nein md
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ia   ks
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            nc
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ncwi
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ks
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              mn mt    tnks
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    alnc    tnms
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            al
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            al  or        ar       wy    wy
               0




                                                                                            mi     ne vt       kymo
                                                                                                                  tn
                                                                                                                   mn
                                                                                                                  nj   inoh
                                                                                                                         in  iaoh       ca       al tn                                                                                       la                     ms          pa   ky  wv      ky
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ia               inmo in          nc  md   tn   nv
                                               co   la
                                                     co   sd ne
                                                      ma wa
                                                               mi ky
                                                               ne    scmt
                                                                        ga
                                                                         wv
                                                                           ga
                                                                          dc
                                                                           ga
                                                                            va idva
                                                                                   va
                                                                                    mo
                                                                                   ia
                                                                                    mo
                                                                                   va
                                                                                       sd
                                                                                    mimn
                                                                                       nm
                                                                                            wv
                                                                                            oh
                                                                                            moilms
                                                                                             nc
                                                                                            oh
                                                                                             ne
                                                                                            mo
                                                                                            mi
                                                                                            wvtxilkyilmo
                                                                                                      me
                                                                                                     mo ilor
                                                                                                        ma
                                                                                                       ga
                                                                                                        or  pa
                                                                                                            conh
                                                                                                              vt
                                                                                                                sc
                                                                                                                ny
                                                                                                              rica
                                                                                                                 ky
                                                                                                                sc
                                                                                                                md
                                                                                                                 ia
                                                                                                                 mo
                                                                                                                   ny
                                                                                                                    md
                                                                                                                   ny
                                                                                                                   mn ia
                                                                                                                      ia
                                                                                                                       arin
                                                                                                                          ky
                                                                                                                         ok  ia ohnc
                                                                                                                                 pa
                                                                                                                                 wi
                                                                                                                                  nc
                                                                                                                                 pa
                                                                                                                                 ny
                                                                                                                                 wi
                                                                                                                                 ma
                                                                                                                                     or
                                                                                                                                      ia
                                                                                                                                     tn
                                                                                                                                     wi
                                                                                                                                   innv
                                                                                                                                      ne
                                                                                                                                      ne
                                                                                                                                         nc
                                                                                                                                        caaz
                                                                                                                                         ncks
                                                                                                                                           wi
                                                                                                                                           wi
                                                                                                                                            va
                                                                                                                                                 mt      tn or
                                                                                                                                                      tn al
                                                                                                                                                     ar      tn            nh
                                                                                                                                                                        arnh
                                                                                                                                                                         nhnh
                                                                                                                                                                                   wy
                                                                                                                                                                                  wy                                                         la wa sd mitx sc    ga
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  wv
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    nv
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    nv
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ga
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    nvne
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      va   fl idva
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 mo
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               wv mn
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         mo
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         wv
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         monc
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           mn
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           tx
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ut
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          oh
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ne     ky
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 pa
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ilmo
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ia    ga
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       vt il
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         id  tx
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             nj
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             tx
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            pa
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            co
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             tx
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ky
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              momo
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ky
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ny
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                wa
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ky
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                sc
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  mn
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 tn
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ny  nv
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ar
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  mn ny
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 nj
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 tn
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ny              wi
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ne
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ne
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    nctxks
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       tn    ks
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              mn
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             tn
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ncwial
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        iaarut
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        md
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       or
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       tn           al tntn
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 camtnc tn  al
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            tn
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            tnms
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                or   wy       or
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           nhnh
                                                      vt
                                                      malasd ok
                                                     ut            sd
                                                                  id
                                                                     sc
                                                                     sc
                                                                    ky
                                                                     sc
                                                                         id
                                                                        ganv
                                                                         wv
                                                                        ga  ilva idia
                                                                           ga
                                                                            ne
                                                                           ga
                                                                           ga      va
                                                                                    mo
                                                                                    mi
                                                                                    mo
                                                                                       nm
                                                                                       sd
                                                                                       sd
                                                                                         wv
                                                                                         wv
                                                                                         co
                                                                                         wv
                                                                                         wv
                                                                                            mo
                                                                                            oh
                                                                                            wv
                                                                                           idne
                                                                                              tx
                                                                                             nc
                                                                                             ga
                                                                                            mo
                                                                                             ga
                                                                                             ut
                                                                                                ilpaia
                                                                                                    ia
                                                                                                   al
                                                                                                      vt
                                                                                                      vt
                                                                                                     mo
                                                                                                        ililnm
                                                                                                       ga
                                                                                                       id
                                                                                                        or
                                                                                                       id
                                                                                                       ga
                                                                                                        or
                                                                                                        nm
                                                                                                             tx
                                                                                                             nj
                                                                                                              vt
                                                                                                             oh
                                                                                                              az
                                                                                                             oh
                                                                                                                 ia
                                                                                                                ny
                                                                                                                 wa
                                                                                                              riky
                                                                                                                 kyny
                                                                                                                  nj
                                                                                                                 mo
                                                                                                                  nj
                                                                                                                 mo
                                                                                                                    in in
                                                                                                                      ar
                                                                                                                      ia
                                                                                                                       in
                                                                                                                      mo
                                                                                                                    innd
                                                                                                                   ny
                                                                                                                   mn
                                                                                                                   ny
                                                                                                                    in ar
                                                                                                                      ia
                                                                                                                       ar
                                                                                                                         oh
                                                                                                                         ok
                                                                                                                        tn
                                                                                                                         ok
                                                                                                                         in
                                                                                                                        tn   ia
                                                                                                                          flky
                                                                                                                         nj
                                                                                                                                  nc
                                                                                                                                 ne
                                                                                                                                 ny
                                                                                                                                 wi
                                                                                                                                oh
                                                                                                                                 ny
                                                                                                                                 pa
                                                                                                                                     tn
                                                                                                                                  nctxks
                                                                                                                                      md
                                                                                                                                      ks
                                                                                                                                      md
                                                                                                                                      ne
                                                                                                                                      ks
                                                                                                                                     tn
                                                                                                                                         ncwi
                                                                                                                                        catn
                                                                                                                                        ar
                                                                                                                                            va
                                                                                                                                           ks  wy
                                                                                                                                            vaal
                                                                                                                                           ks
                                                                                                                                            vaca
                                                                                                                                                 al ksal
                                                                                                                                                 mt
                                                                                                                                                 mt
                                                                                                                                                wi
                                                                                                                                                 al   ks tnms
                                                                                                                                                             or
                                                                                                                                                            ks
                                                                                                                                                             or         ar
                                                                                                                                                                        ar  or    wy                                                         la
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             la lasd            mt
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                mtwv
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ga
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  wv
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  sd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   id
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           fl  wv   sd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    mn
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    sd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    nmwv
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      wv
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         mi
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        id
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         wv
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           il
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ne
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ms
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           nc
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ne
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         monc
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           tx
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           tx
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ne  il
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ne
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ky
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 pa
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ky
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 kymo
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       vt
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       vt
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          il
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          orpari
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             nmky
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              nh
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             tx
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            pa ky
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ri
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 tn
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                mo
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               md
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                momn
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  nd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ny
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   md in
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     nd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      in
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         fl
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         fl vanc
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        nj          nc
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ne
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    nc
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ia  ncmn
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ar wicamtwi
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    al
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         tn al
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ksal
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            tn  or
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ks
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                or
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           nh      wy
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   wy
                                                                     sc
                                                                      id id il
                                                                           ga la  wvmimn co
                                                                                         wv mo
                                                                                            ohtx
                                                                                              il    ilmo    co  sc
                                                                                                                md
                                                                                                                 mony
                                                                                                                    in  tn
                                                                                                                         in
                                                                                                                         nj   ri ne
                                                                                                                                 ne
                                                                                                                                 ma  or
                                                                                                                                      ia
                                                                                                                                      mdar
                                                                                                                                         nc va wyal      al
                                                                                                                                                         tn
                                                                                                                                                         al ks     wy                                                                         ut wa
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             la    sd         scmtwv           wv
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              wv           nc
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           il             il txky
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                sc
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                momn
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 nj   nv fl     de ne
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    nc  ks
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       wi
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ia
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        mdartn        nd ks tn
                                               co         sd ok momt    ganv
                                                                         wv        wv coid  wv
                                                                                           nm txky
                                                                                             nc
                                                                                              tx      ohnm
                                                                                                       ga      kyia
                                                                                                                sc  md
                                                                                                                   mn
                                                                                                                    md
                                                                                                                   ny ar
                                                                                                                      ndtn
                                                                                                                         nj
                                                                                                                         ok
                                                                                                                         nj  ia
                                                                                                                              ri wi tx
                                                                                                                                oh
                                                                                                                                 wi  or
                                                                                                                                      ne
                                                                                                                                      ks ks
                                                                                                                                      mo   ks
                                                                                                                                            va wy
                                                                                                                                           mn    alnd ks al
                                                                                                                                                         tn ks
                                                                                                                                                           ms      wy   ar                                                                              ne mt     wv
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  wvnvne wv      monm wv mo
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         wv
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         mitx
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           nc
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ne  ilalilmo
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   mo    uttx
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         uttx
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              vt
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ky  md
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ny     flflfl ne
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      inin             wiks
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    nctxks    wi
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ks va mt
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    mt
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    al   tn al
                                                               mi
                                                         la miid        ganv
                                                                           ga la mn    nm    nc
                                                                                            mo
                                                                                             ga
                                                                                            oh
                                                                                                        nm
                                                                                                   ky txmo
                                                                                              ililal
                                                                                                             tx
                                                                                                            nm    tn
                                                                                                                 wa
                                                                                                                 mo in
                                                                                                                  tn nd  okva
                                                                                                                        tn       wi
                                                                                                                                 ne mdks   ks ca
                                                                                                                                        camn nd
                                                                                                                                      iaar
                                                                                                                                        ar
                                                                                                                                                wi nd tn
                                                                                                                                                      ks
                                                                                                                                                     ar  tnmd
                                                                                                                                                           ms
                                                                                                                                                      tn alms
                                                                                                                                                           ms
                                                                                                                                                             or
                                                                                                                                                                   wy             wy    wy
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             la
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             la            tx mtwv
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                pa
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 minm
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 mi   wvid
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         wvtx
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           mn ilpa mo   ga    nh
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             tx sc
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                wand
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   md innj             nv
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ks mn mt
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  wi txne
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ne
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    al      tnks
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    alndtn al
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              or
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              nh
                                                                           ga
                                                                      idga fl azsd       co   tx                        tn va           caks   wy           ks                                                                                                                           mitx
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ililil vt nm       vt mdfl ri netx
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             tx
                                                    la la ok sc
                                                                                         wv
                                                                                         coidga    alilga
                                                                                                        nm
                                                                                                       ga     mo
                                                                                                              azmd
                                                                                                                 mond
                                                                                                                    innd
                                                                                                                    innd
                                                                                                                   nd
                                                                                                                                oh
                                                                                                                                 ne md
                                                                                                                                      moar     wyalndks
                                                                                                                                                      kstn ms
                                                                                                                                                           ms      wy                                                                                             wv
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      il
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 mi   wv
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      wv   tx
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ilil or njinnd          in wi txmd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        mo
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        md
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        neutks                  or
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            al ks
                                                                                  id nm  co gatxilil ga nm
                                                                                                       id    tx
                                                                                                            nm  md
                                                                                                                 mond okva     vanenv   camn al          tnmd
                                                                                                                                                            ks
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        neid                     misd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    nmwvtx
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      wv   tx
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           tx                                                       alndksal                  nh
                                                                                             ga                                     tx ar
                                                                                                                                        camnal alndks md                                                                                                                                                  or                            md
                                                                                             ga il oh aznd                              ar                                                                                                                          nv                        il             nmmd                  ma ne

                                                                                                                                                                                                    −5
                                                                                         co ga                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ok
  −.2




                                                                                                                                              al
                                                                                                                                              al            ks                                                                                          ne                          nm     tx      mo          md  in ri ma        ma                 nd ks
                                                                                                                                              al                                                                                                                                    nm                   utnm                   ri ny md
                                                                         sd       la                                                 nv            nd
                                                                                                            nm
                                                                                                            nmaznd                                 nd                                                                                                                                                                                                          ks

                                                                                                           nm                                                                                                                                                            nv
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         nm                                                 ks
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   −10
                        −.4




                                                          −.1                                    0                      .1                                                              .2                                                         −.1                                        0                      .1                                                                  .2
                                                                                          Residuals of local funding share                                                                                                                                                             Residuals of local funding share


                                                               (c) Payments per person 65+
                                                                                                           co
                                          10




                                                    co
 Residuals of OAA payments per person 65+




                                                    co                                                     co

                                                                      sd                                                                 ca
                                                    co                                       co co
                                                    ut
                                                    co                                  mn mt co                                 oh
                                                                   okmt                                      co
                               5




                                                                                                mtoh      ut              ok               az
                                                     co       ok
                                                            az sd nvco     co             co mtil ca            ca                wi      utaz
                                               co             ok sdok ga          la ctsd                 ut ia ok               ut
                                                    la
                                                    la wadc   ok  sd       co
                                                                         nvco pact ctpa sd      mt
                                                                                               mn          nmia           ok
                                                                                                                   tnin in oh ca          ut nv  wi
                                                                                                                                                  mt
                                                                      mtms                    ut      va
                                                          wa ok  idok
                                                                   ky     sd fl ok      sd mo
                                                                                        mn   oh       va  id               fl wi camn
                                                                                                                          ok
                                                                                                                          in                 wimtwi
                                               co   la
                                                          wa
                                                         la        kyidsdms
                                                              neidok
                                                              ok   ky
                                                                   kyidsdms
                                                                         msil flctlapa
                                                                          sd        pa
                                                                                     mo mn
                                                                                       dekyct ne
                                                                                               mn
                                                                                              ut
                                                                                           ctpamn
                                                                                              nc
                                                                                               mnilny  il il txscnynv
                                                                                                      pa
                                                                                                      va
                                                                                                      pa      txcawaiatn oh
                                                                                                                           fl ut in ca
                                                                                                                                 ohin nc
                                                                                                                                               mt ks tn            wy             wy
                                                          wa       ky
                                                                   ky
                                                                  sd mssdnv
                                                                        id
                                                                         msne
                                                                           ne  fl okpa
                                                                                   wvmo
                                                                                    va  sd
                                                                                         ky
                                                                                         ky
                                                                                        mn    ut
                                                                                             momn    ny
                                                                                                     kyil
                                                                                                      pa
                                                                                                     ky  menm
                                                                                                           ky
                                                                                                           ma dekymo    inin
                                                                                                                           fl
                                                                                                                          in
                                                                                                                         tn
                                                                                                                          ok              nc                       wy      or
                                                                 mo  ms  nv        wv
                                                                                  la           ilililky           ia                innv  nc wi nvmt ar
                                                                                                                                                 wi    ks tn                            wy
                                                    lama wa
                                                      vt  waazokarsd
                                                           sd      kyms
                                                                   ky   wv
                                                                        id
                                                                       sdnvva la
                                                                           ne       vamn
                                                                                   wv
                                                                                    pa
                                                                                    va   ky
                                                                                        sdco pa
                                                                                           ctwv
                                                                                             pamn
                                                                                              nc
                                                                                              ut
                                                                                             oh       pa
                                                                                                      ia
                                                                                                       il
                                                                                                      ia ga
                                                                                                         ohma
                                                                                                           nm oh
                                                                                                              txny
                                                                                                                ky tn  ia
                                                                                                                        inin
                                                                                                                          ok
                                                                                                                         okky
                                                                                                                           fl iaohpa   kscaaz
                                                                                                                                            ks
                                               co    co
                                                      vt
                                                    la la     ok sd
                                                         lasd ok     id
                                                                   kysd id
                                                                        wv
                                                                        wv
                                                                        wv
                                                                          ga
                                                                         nvne
                                                                           il
                                                                           va idmo
                                                                           ne
                                                                          ga
                                                                           ilva
                                                                           ne
                                                                          ga
                                                                                    pa
                                                                                    ia
                                                                                    va
                                                                                     mosd
                                                                                             mo
                                                                                          cowv
                                                                                             oh
                                                                                             moms
                                                                                              ne
                                                                                             motx
                                                                                              nc
                                                                                               mnpa
                                                                                                      pa
                                                                                                     ky
                                                                                                     ne
                                                                                                     ky
                                                                                                      pa
                                                                                                      ia
                                                                                                     ne
                                                                                                         ga
                                                                                                         meil
                                                                                                           ky
                                                                                                           nm
                                                                                                          ut
                                                                                                          id
                                                                                                         ga
                                                                                                         ga
                                                                                                       ilmo
                                                                                                         ohma
                                                                                                              tx
                                                                                                             co
                                                                                                             paaz
                                                                                                              tx
                                                                                                           ilky
                                                                                                                  mo
                                                                                                               riky
                                                                                                                 ky
                                                                                                                  wa
                                                                                                                  mo
                                                                                                                 sc
                                                                                                                  ia
                                                                                                                    ny
                                                                                                                    mn
                                                                                                                   tn
                                                                                                                  ia md
                                                                                                                     in
                                                                                                                    ny
                                                                                                                    ny
                                                                                                                    mn
                                                                                                                        ar
                                                                                                                       ia ok
                                                                                                                         oh
                                                                                                                        in
                                                                                                                        ar
                                                                                                                     inmo
                                                                                                                           fl
                                                                                                                          in   de
                                                                                                                              iaohin
                                                                                                                              ia     txks
                                                                                                                                      wi  ut
                                                                                                                                          nc
                                                                                                                                          nc
                                                                                                                                            mn
                                                                                                                                            ks
                                                                                                                                             va
                                                                                                                                              va  mt ar almsms
                                                                                                                                                              tn        ar
                                                                                                                                                                        ar nh     wy
                                                                                        sdwv  ga
                                                                                               ilms
                                                                                              ne
                                                                                             mi       ia      tx kytn
                                                                                                                    ny ia
                                                                                                                        in
                                                                                                                         tnflky
                                                                                                                          ok
                                                                                                                          in          or  nc         tnksalms
                    0




                                                      ma wa             id ne
                                                                          ga       wvmo      ohtx
                                                                                              ut     ky
                                                                                                     ne
                                                                                                      pa        ny
                                                                                                                 sc
                                                                                                               riky  inar         ne   md
                                                                                                                                       ia  tn  alwynd         tn        ar
                                                    lavt
                                                     ut
                                                    lamalawa  ok
                                                           sd ne
                                                                 tx sc
                                                                 id
                                                               mimo sc   dc
                                                                        wv ne
                                                                        idga
                                                                       ga
                                                                      mtwv
                                                                        sd ne     laia
                                                                                  la mimn
                                                                                     mo
                                                                                     mo    wv
                                                                                          co
                                                                                             wv
                                                                                            idnc
                                                                                              ma
                                                                                              ne
                                                                                             moms
                                                                                              ga
                                                                                              ga
                                                                                             wv
                                                                                              nc     ky
                                                                                                      pa
                                                                                               ilililpa
                                                                                              ne      ia
                                                                                                         ga
                                                                                                        vt
                                                                                                       ilmo
                                                                                                        vt nm
                                                                                                           ma
                                                                                                          id
                                                                                                          id  tx
                                                                                                             pavt
                                                                                                               nh
                                                                                                              tx
                                                                                                              oh
                                                                                                               nh
                                                                                                                ky
                                                                                                                  ia
                                                                                                                 ky
                                                                                                                  momn
                                                                                                                   tnmd
                                                                                                                     in
                                                                                                                    ny
                                                                                                                       ia
                                                                                                                       ar
                                                                                                                       mo
                                                                                                                       ia
                                                                                                                         tn
                                                                                                                        in
                                                                                                                         tn
                                                                                                                        in
                                                                                                                        nv fl
                                                                                                                          in
                                                                                                                                 oh
                                                                                                                              iautpa
                                                                                                                                 ohnc
                                                                                                                                  wi
                                                                                                                                  pa
                                                                                                                                   nctx
                                                                                                                                     txksnc
                                                                                                                                      tn
                                                                                                                                      tn
                                                                                                                                      wi catn
                                                                                                                                             va
                                                                                                                                           tnwi     nc
                                                                                                                                                    nc tn alms
                                                                                                                                                     tnks
                                                                                                                                                              or
                                                                                                                                                              or           nh
                                                                                                                                                                         nhnh
                                                                                                                                                                                  wy
                                                                                                                                                                                   wy
                                               co        la
                                                          wa ne
                                                         la    mi sc idga
                                                                     id
                                                                    sc
                                                                     id
                                                                    sc  wv
                                                                        wv
                                                                       ganv
                                                                           ilil wv
                                                                               fl id mimn
                                                                                     mo nm
                                                                                        sd
                                                                                        nm
                                                                                        nm
                                                                                           wv
                                                                                           wv
                                                                                           wv
                                                                                             mo
                                                                                             oh
                                                                                            nmga
                                                                                              nc
                                                                                             wv
                                                                                             mi
                                                                                             oh
                                                                                             mo
                                                                                            id
                                                                                               tx
                                                                                              ne
                                                                                              ut
                                                                                              ga
                                                                                             motx
                                                                                              nc
                                                                                               il
                                                                                               txil
                                                                                                     al
                                                                                                      ia
                                                                                                     al
                                                                                                        vt
                                                                                                       mo
                                                                                                       mo
                                                                                                       mo
                                                                                                       ilohma
                                                                                                           il
                                                                                                             pa
                                                                                                           ilconh
                                                                                                               vt
                                                                                                              tx
                                                                                                               mo
                                                                                                              nj
                                                                                                                 sc
                                                                                                                ky
                                                                                                                ny
                                                                                                                md
                                                                                                                md
                                                                                                                  mo
                                                                                                                  mo
                                                                                                                 sc
                                                                                                                  ia
                                                                                                                  wa
                                                                                                                  mo
                                                                                                                 sc
                                                                                                                    ny
                                                                                                                   nj
                                                                                                                   tnmd
                                                                                                                     in
                                                                                                                    ny
                                                                                                                   nj
                                                                                                                    mn
                                                                                                                   njin
                                                                                                                     md
                                                                                                                    ny
                                                                                                                    mn
                                                                                                                        in
                                                                                                                       nd
                                                                                                                        innj
                                                                                                                          ok
                                                                                                                              iawi
                                                                                                                                va
                                                                                                                                  ne
                                                                                                                                   nc
                                                                                                                                  pa
                                                                                                                                  wi
                                                                                                                                   nctx
                                                                                                                                  ny
                                                                                                                                   nc
                                                                                                                                  ny
                                                                                                                                  ne
                                                                                                                                       mo
                                                                                                                                       md
                                                                                                                                       ks
                                                                                                                                      tn
                                                                                                                                      wi
                                                                                                                                      or
                                                                                                                                       ks
                                                                                                                                       md
                                                                                                                                            ks
                                                                                                                                            ks
                                                                                                                                           tnwica
                                                                                                                                            ks
                                                                                                                                            mn
                                                                                                                                            ks al
                                                                                                                                                 wi
                                                                                                                                                wy
                                                                                                                                                 wi
                                                                                                                                                wymt
                                                                                                                                                  al
                                                                                                                                                  mt
                                                                                                                                                    nd ks
                                                                                                                                                       tn tn
                                                                                                                                                          al
                                                                                                                                                            msor   wy
                                                                                                                                                                   wy      or      wy
                                                                     id
                                                                 tx scmtid              nm    nc
                                                                                             oh                az mo   nd
                                                                                                                     in nj oh     ny
                                                                                                                                  wi txks
                                                                                                                                       iaar       al ks   tnmd
                                                     ut sd ok
                                                    la         miid
                                                              ne
                                                               mi    id           wvmi
                                                                                     mi
                                                                                       az
                                                                                        mnco
                                                                                          co
                                                                                           wvmotx
                                                                                               tx
                                                                                               txil mo     or  mo
                                                                                                              tx
                                                                                                              txmo   md
                                                                                                                     innd  fl  ri
                                                                                                                                  ma
                                                                                                                                  ne
                                                                                                                                  wi
                                                                                                                                  ne   md
                                                                                                                                      or
                                                                                                                                  netxmd
                                                                                                                                       md
                                                                                                                                          utmnalwy
                                                                                                                                         ca
                                                                                                                                         ar     wymt
                                                                                                                                                  al   tn tn
                                                                                                                                                          tn
                                                                                                                                                       tn tn
                                                                                                                                                              or   wy      or
                                                    la                               minmidtx  tx
                                                                                               ilil il ortxmd       nd nd wi           ia
                                                                                                                                       md
                                                                                                                                       neca caal ks
                                                                                                                                         ar               tnmdor
                                                              ok
                                                                                  id nm   co il oh        id aznd
                                                                                                                  wa innd ri wi   ma momd
                                                                                                                                       ne           ndks md                             wy
                                                                        sd                                          nd manv            ne mn nd
                                                                                                                                       ne           nd
                                                                         nv                                         nd                   camn                ks                   wy
                                                                                          co                                                                 ks
                                                                         nv                                                                                  ks
        −5




                                                                                                               az                     nv            nd
                                                                                                              nmnd                                           ks
                                                                                                                                                             ks
                                                                         nv                                   nm
                                                                                                                          ok
                                                                                                              nm                                             ks
                                                                                                              nm
                        −10




                                                          −.1                                    0                      .1                                                              .2
                                                                                          Residuals of local funding share




Notes: Figures show partial regression plot of each measure of OAA against local funding share, based on specification
(4) of Tables 1-3. Observation is a county-state border-pair.




                                                                                                                                                                                         31
                                                              Figure 4: Validation of non-wage income measure of recipiency
                Share of 65+ population receiving non−wage income
                                                                1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           utco             co
                                                                                                                                                                                             tx                                                                                               co            co
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            tx              mtco                                co co
                                                                                         va                                                                                tn ut                                                   il mt             co                              ut
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ut                       co
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     il                 mn sd ut          mn   ut  ok            co
                                                       .8




                                                                        va              tx                                                                                             tx
                                                                                                                                                                                       mo           neca      wa               sd  mn    co    mt
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          mtcococo
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         sd              ilco
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           co        ok
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      co
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       mn sdco
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          co il           ok
                                                                                                    nv idne                                                                             ilidne    ok    mn          tx iailmn     co
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 mn   ut
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       cotx           co    txco
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           co    ca
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  co   tx   utut
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           co
                                                                                                                              sd  or sd             mo   maiaoh
                                                                                                                                                           ne       mone
                                                                                                                                                                     wa
                                                                                                                                                                      mo ia
                                                                                                                                                                          mn
                                                                                                                                                                          wi
                                                                                                                                                                           mo tx
                                                                                                                                                                             sd  ne     co
                                                                                                                                                                                       ks  ne
                                                                                                                                                                                           il     co       mt
                                                                                                                                                                                                           ca ok           ok
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          coil  tx
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                sd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 tx ok   sd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        mt  ilco
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           co   cotx
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               co     utco
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ca sd mn     co
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      sd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ok mtok
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ok
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ut  flutca
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               co   cook ut
                                                                                 va vavaia   ia            ia            wanv
                                                                                                                           iatx  in
                                                                                                                                 ne  ia
                                                                                                                                      mo
                                                                                                                                      ia ilor
                                                                                                                                            ne
                                                                                                                                             wa
                                                                                                                                            mi       nc
                                                                                                                                                     wi neia  sd
                                                                                                                                                               oh inmookne
                                                                                                                                                                         mn  mt  sdwa  mt
                                                                                                                                                                                       mn    idca
                                                                                                                                                                                               mo oh  coco
                                                                                                                                                                                                       sd
                                                                                                                                                                                                        tx    ia
                                                                                                                                                                                                             mn
                                                                                                                                                                                                           ilne  okililmt
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ia   mi
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        txok mt
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             tx
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            co mnmn  tx
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    mn okmt ut
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ililut
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           wi ut
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              cosd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ok
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 tx
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  co    wi ok
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            co
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ok
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ut mn    mn
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    tx mt mn comnok co ok  mn
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ok
                                                                                                         wa  ca
                                                                                                           iks
                                                                                                             amnia           wi
                                                                                                                            nd     mo
                                                                                                                                  ia ia  ne
                                                                                                                                        ca  ca wi   flflmo
                                                                                                                                                   mo   sdiloh
                                                                                                                                                          ne  tx mo
                                                                                                                                                                ne            nd
                                                                                                                                                                             mn   mo
                                                                                                                                                                                 newy   camnmnin    tx           tx ok
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  iltn  mn ok
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          mn
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          mi
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         oh    wi
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ilmntxok
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 mn
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                mt
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               tx      mn   mi  sd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                co                             mt
                                                                                     va iawi        pa  nd
                                                                                                        ia
                                                                                                        tx   iaks
                                                                                                             nd iane  ia wi
                                                                                                                         mo
                                                                                                                        wiia
                                                                                                                         iawiks
                                                                                                                             ne
                                                                                                                             nv
                                                                                                                             ky
                                                                                                                            az sd
                                                                                                                              mo
                                                                                                                             ca  oh wa
                                                                                                                                    mook
                                                                                                                                     ne
                                                                                                                                   ilwa
                                                                                                                                         ks
                                                                                                                                         mo
                                                                                                                                         ne sd
                                                                                                                                             ia
                                                                                                                                            ks
                                                                                                                                         flilne
                                                                                                                                               ne
                                                                                                                                                mo
                                                                                                                                               mn
                                                                                                                                               ks  mo
                                                                                                                                                    wy  ks
                                                                                                                                                         mi
                                                                                                                                                          or
                                                                                                                                                          wi tnia
                                                                                                                                                               ia
                                                                                                                                                               mi id
                                                                                                                                                                 sd
                                                                                                                                                               ilmn
                                                                                                                                                                 tx minc
                                                                                                                                                                   ilokwane wa
                                                                                                                                                                           nemo
                                                                                                                                                                           ilnd
                                                                                                                                                                             ndiane
                                                                                                                                                                                 nd
                                                                                                                                                                                 mo    ohca
                                                                                                                                                                                         ca
                                                                                                                                                                                        ca
                                                                                                                                                                                       mt
                                                                                                                                                                                           tx
                                                                                                                                                                                           ia
                                                                                                                                                                                           mntxtx
                                                                                                                                                                                              mn
                                                                                                                                                                                              tx tx id
                                                                                                                                                                                                 ilca
                                                                                                                                                                                                  mn  ne
                                                                                                                                                                                                      ks
                                                                                                                                                                                                    ilca
                                                                                                                                                                                                        tx
                                                                                                                                                                                                        ok
                                                                                                                                                                                                        id
                                                                                                                                                                                                        wi
                                                                                                                                                                                                       tx
                                                                                                                                                                                                      nv   co ilky
                                                                                                                                                                                                              caco  mt miia
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        id   sd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            co
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ok tx
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ca  comico   ok
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 mn
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 sd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 mt ok
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    mt
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    lamt          ok okmt mt     flok oksdla
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                mn           ok
                                                                                  tx ksia
                                                                                  ksva fl  vand
                                                                                             oh
                                                                                                    ga
                                                                                                   ks
                                                                                                    wi
                                                                                                   ia
                                                                                                   or
                                                                                                    wy   ia
                                                                                                        ks
                                                                                                        sd
                                                                                                           ia
                                                                                                           wi
                                                                                                           kswi
                                                                                                            mi
                                                                                                           mn
                                                                                                           ks
                                                                                                            ia
                                                                                                            or
                                                                                                           ar ks
                                                                                                              mn
                                                                                                              ndtxwi
                                                                                                                  ks
                                                                                                                      wi
                                                                                                                     ia
                                                                                                                      ia
                                                                                                                     ia
                                                                                                                      wi
                                                                                                                     oh
                                                                                                                      nd
                                                                                                                        ne
                                                                                                                         ia
                                                                                                                        ky
                                                                                                                        ks
                                                                                                                        ia
                                                                                                                         mn
                                                                                                                           ia
                                                                                                                          mo
                                                                                                                           ia
                                                                                                                             ne
                                                                                                                            ne
                                                                                                                            ia
                                                                                                                              wa
                                                                                                                             nd
                                                                                                                            moia
                                                                                                                             ne
                                                                                                                             or
                                                                                                                             il
                                                                                                                                  ky
                                                                                                                                  ia
                                                                                                                                  wa
                                                                                                                                  ca
                                                                                                                                 il
                                                                                                                                 ia  wa
                                                                                                                                      ne
                                                                                                                                     or
                                                                                                                                      ia
                                                                                                                                      ne
                                                                                                                                        ia
                                                                                                                                        or
                                                                                                                                        nc
                                                                                                                                        id
                                                                                                                                        ne
                                                                                                                                         ia
                                                                                                                                        il
                                                                                                                                        or  in
                                                                                                                                             nd
                                                                                                                                             il
                                                                                                                                            ne
                                                                                                                                            ky flfltx
                                                                                                                                               ia
                                                                                                                                             ilmn
                                                                                                                                                ky
                                                                                                                                                    in
                                                                                                                                                    ks
                                                                                                                                                    ne
                                                                                                                                                   tnnd
                                                                                                                                                     wi
                                                                                                                                                     mn
                                                                                                                                                    mi
                                                                                                                                                    id
                                                                                                                                                          mo
                                                                                                                                                          in
                                                                                                                                                          nd
                                                                                                                                                          ca
                                                                                                                                                         oh
                                                                                                                                                        tx
                                                                                                                                                        sdsd
                                                                                                                                                         ky
                                                                                                                                                         nd
                                                                                                                                                        mn  mo
                                                                                                                                                           wa
                                                                                                                                                               mo
                                                                                                                                                              tx
                                                                                                                                                              wy
                                                                                                                                                               iane
                                                                                                                                                                 mn
                                                                                                                                                                   mn
                                                                                                                                                                  oh
                                                                                                                                                                   mo
                                                                                                                                                                 iltx
                                                                                                                                                                    oh
                                                                                                                                                                    ne
                                                                                                                                                                   ok
                                                                                                                                                                    sd
                                                                                                                                                                    in
                                                                                                                                                                   wi mi
                                                                                                                                                                       tx
                                                                                                                                                                       mo
                                                                                                                                                                      ks
                                                                                                                                                                       oh
                                                                                                                                                                      mn
                                                                                                                                                                      ne
                                                                                                                                                                      wa
                                                                                                                                                                      nd
                                                                                                                                                                          mi
                                                                                                                                                                          tx
                                                                                                                                                                         ne
                                                                                                                                                                            wa
                                                                                                                                                                            oh
                                                                                                                                                                           mn
                                                                                                                                                                              ca
                                                                                                                                                                             tx
                                                                                                                                                                             wi
                                                                                                                                                                              ok
                                                                                                                                                                              ia
                                                                                                                                                                             tn
                                                                                                                                                                             sd
                                                                                                                                                                             mo
                                                                                                                                                                             oh
                                                                                                                                                                             tx
                                                                                                                                                                             ia
                                                                                                                                                                             ks
                                                                                                                                                                                in
                                                                                                                                                                               oh
                                                                                                                                                                              tx
                                                                                                                                                                              mi
                                                                                                                                                                                 ca
                                                                                                                                                                                 oh
                                                                                                                                                                                 wy
                                                                                                                                                                                   ililsd
                                                                                                                                                                                   mo
                                                                                                                                                                                   tx
                                                                                                                                                                                  ca
                                                                                                                                                                                  ne
                                                                                                                                                                                 idi
                                                                                                                                                                                   nd  ca
                                                                                                                                                                                      mt
                                                                                                                                                                                     tx tx
                                                                                                                                                                                        d iltx
                                                                                                                                                                                         ky
                                                                                                                                                                                         tx
                                                                                                                                                                                         okca
                                                                                                                                                                                          ks
                                                                                                                                                                                          oh
                                                                                                                                                                                         ne
                                                                                                                                                                                             ok
                                                                                                                                                                                             wa
                                                                                                                                                                                             il
                                                                                                                                                                                             ok
                                                                                                                                                                                             ca
                                                                                                                                                                                             mi
                                                                                                                                                                                               mo
                                                                                                                                                                                              mi
                                                                                                                                                                                               oh
                                                                                                                                                                                               ca
                                                                                                                                                                                               mo
                                                                                                                                                                                              mt
                                                                                                                                                                                               nd
                                                                                                                                                                                               sdtx
                                                                                                                                                                                                     nv
                                                                                                                                                                                                    sdmt
                                                                                                                                                                                                     sd wa
                                                                                                                                                                                                         intx
                                                                                                                                                                                                           il
                                                                                                                                                                                                             nv
                                                                                                                                                                                                             tx
                                                                                                                                                                                                              co oh
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  sd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 tx
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ok
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ca
                                                                                                                                                                                                                azid
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ok
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ca
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 tx
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    tx
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   utmt
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ut
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        nd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        mt
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       mttx
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ut
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       sc sd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         mi
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        mt
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       catx
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            mn
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             co
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            wi
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             mi
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ca
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             tx
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               oh
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ut
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              tx
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ok
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 sd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                sd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ca
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 wi
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  oh
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   oktx
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       tx
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       mt
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ok mt
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ilsd tx
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           sd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          tx
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             mn
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              nv
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ky
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ok
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             az
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 nv
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 oh
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                fltx
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ok co
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ut  nd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       txokmn
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        co
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ut
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        mt
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              flflilsd ut     txokfl ok la
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           okok
                                                                                      va
                                                                                       va  ia
                                                                                          in
                                                                                         wi ks
                                                                                             ia mn
                                                                                               fl
                                                                                                va   oh
                                                                                                    ga   ny
                                                                                                        iaga
                                                                                                           kin  fl
                                                                                                                tx
                                                                                                                nd
                                                                                                                wy
                                                                                                                s tx
                                                                                                                 in
                                                                                                                in
                                                                                                                 il  iaia
                                                                                                                      mi
                                                                                                                      oh ca
                                                                                                                          ks
                                                                                                                         ne
                                                                                                                         oh ia
                                                                                                                           mo
                                                                                                                          or
                                                                                                                          ga
                                                                                                                          ia
                                                                                                                          wy
                                                                                                                          txilca
                                                                                                                              il
                                                                                                                             or
                                                                                                                            iane ca
                                                                                                                                 mo
                                                                                                                                sdor
                                                                                                                                 oh
                                                                                                                                 kyidid
                                                                                                                                    moin
                                                                                                                                     ia
                                                                                                                                     mo
                                                                                                                                     ma
                                                                                                                                     wi  ne
                                                                                                                                        nd
                                                                                                                                        ky   ma
                                                                                                                                            in
                                                                                                                                            mo
                                                                                                                                            id
                                                                                                                                             caoh
                                                                                                                                               wy
                                                                                                                                                ks
                                                                                                                                               sd
                                                                                                                                                or
                                                                                                                                               ia
                                                                                                                                               ks   oh
                                                                                                                                                     tx
                                                                                                                                                     mn
                                                                                                                                                    nd  wy
                                                                                                                                                         tx
                                                                                                                                                         mt
                                                                                                                                                        mi
                                                                                                                                                        wi
                                                                                                                                                        ne ca
                                                                                                                                                          ia
                                                                                                                                                          wv
                                                                                                                                                          mo
                                                                                                                                                           oh mo
                                                                                                                                                            ilmo
                                                                                                                                                             mnil
                                                                                                                                                              wa
                                                                                                                                                             id  mo
                                                                                                                                                                 mo
                                                                                                                                                                  ne txca
                                                                                                                                                                      nvmo
                                                                                                                                                                         ohkyilsd
                                                                                                                                                                             oh
                                                                                                                                                                            ne
                                                                                                                                                                            id
                                                                                                                                                                             tx
                                                                                                                                                                             wi  tx
                                                                                                                                                                                nv
                                                                                                                                                                                 mtmo   tn
                                                                                                                                                                                        tx    oh
                                                                                                                                                                                             ne
                                                                                                                                                                                             il
                                                                                                                                                                                             tx
                                                                                                                                                                                             mi az
                                                                                                                                                                                                txmo
                                                                                                                                                                                                  wi
                                                                                                                                                                                                  il ne
                                                                                                                                                                                                     tx
                                                                                                                                                                                                    azokiltx
                                                                                                                                                                                                           mt
                                                                                                                                                                                                           comn  mitxtx
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    az
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    oh
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     mn   tx
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         nv  ky
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            nv tx   tx
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    tx     la mi tx
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 tx   tx
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      la
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ut
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       okoktxok        fl
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        sd ok     sd ut fl
                                                                              va wi   mnks      gaks
                                                                                                flks
                                                                                                 txcaks
                                                                                                     ks
                                                                                                    ndin il
                                                                                                         ks ks
                                                                                                           ne
                                                                                                           ks   mo
                                                                                                                 or
                                                                                                                iamo  il
                                                                                                                       wy wv ne
                                                                                                                             ia
                                                                                                                              sd
                                                                                                                              la  ky
                                                                                                                                 mn
                                                                                                                                 nc
                                                                                                                                wy  il
                                                                                                                                    sd
                                                                                                                                    nd
                                                                                                                                    tx
                                                                                                                                    ky  mt
                                                                                                                                        iaia
                                                                                                                                         tx  mo
                                                                                                                                             ia
                                                                                                                                             miil
                                                                                                                                               ne camo  mo
                                                                                                                                                        ne mo
                                                                                                                                                          ne tx
                                                                                                                                                            ca
                                                                                                                                                            iami
                                                                                                                                                               oh
                                                                                                                                                               il
                                                                                                                                                               ks
                                                                                                                                                              id mi
                                                                                                                                                                 wa
                                                                                                                                                                 il  ca   ks
                                                                                                                                                                         nd  mo
                                                                                                                                                                            mi sd ne
                                                                                                                                                                                  sd   tx
                                                                                                                                                                                       sd
                                                                                                                                                                                       mn
                                                                                                                                                                                        oh    tx  in
                                                                                                                                                                                               iltx mo
                                                                                                                                                                                                    kyiltn
                                                                                                                                                                                                       tn    id
                                                                                                                                                                                                             tx in   co
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    tx
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    iltn nv      il
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            mt iltxtxtx   sdky
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ca la    laco         ok ok
                                                                                    va
                                                                                     vaks
                                                                                        nd
                                                                                        wi
                                                                                       pa
                                                                                        vt
                                                                                         va
                                                                                        wi ms
                                                                                          ny
                                                                                         ks    ar   ky  in
                                                                                                        meoh
                                                                                                         id
                                                                                                          vtor
                                                                                                            ks
                                                                                                         flks
                                                                                                            innd tn
                                                                                                                in
                                                                                                                 wi
                                                                                                                nc
                                                                                                                ny
                                                                                                                ks waoh
                                                                                                                     ms
                                                                                                                     mn
                                                                                                                  flks
                                                                                                                 nc  ia ks
                                                                                                                        mn
                                                                                                                       in
                                                                                                                      oh
                                                                                                                      ia  id
                                                                                                                           flmn
                                                                                                                          ia
                                                                                                                          ks
                                                                                                                         ilwi
                                                                                                                         in
                                                                                                                          in nd
                                                                                                                              ne
                                                                                                                             ne  oh
                                                                                                                                 or
                                                                                                                              ilidksks
                                                                                                                                    mi
                                                                                                                                    or
                                                                                                                                  ilksoh
                                                                                                                                     ia
                                                                                                                                      id
                                                                                                                                     mn
                                                                                                                                    in
                                                                                                                                    ky
                                                                                                                                        oh
                                                                                                                                     fltxilin
                                                                                                                                         ca  ne
                                                                                                                                            ky
                                                                                                                                            wv
                                                                                                                                            mo tx
                                                                                                                                               in
                                                                                                                                               flin
                                                                                                                                              ksoh
                                                                                                                                                 or or
                                                                                                                                                    ia
                                                                                                                                                    ne
                                                                                                                                                     mi
                                                                                                                                                     oh wi
                                                                                                                                                        ia
                                                                                                                                                        neca
                                                                                                                                                         ks
                                                                                                                                                          sdwi
                                                                                                                                                           oh
                                                                                                                                                          in
                                                                                                                                                           nd
                                                                                                                                                           nc
                                                                                                                                                          wy
                                                                                                                                                           in
                                                                                                                                                              tx
                                                                                                                                                             oh
                                                                                                                                                             momt
                                                                                                                                                              ne
                                                                                                                                                               nc
                                                                                                                                                              tx
                                                                                                                                                               or
                                                                                                                                                               mn
                                                                                                                                                               id wy
                                                                                                                                                                 wa
                                                                                                                                                                 oh
                                                                                                                                                                    ne
                                                                                                                                                                    mi
                                                                                                                                                                    tx
                                                                                                                                                                    ok floh
                                                                                                                                                                      ia
                                                                                                                                                                       miiain
                                                                                                                                                                           mo
                                                                                                                                                                          tx
                                                                                                                                                                          ks
                                                                                                                                                                         wa
                                                                                                                                                                          mo
                                                                                                                                                                         oh
                                                                                                                                                                             newi
                                                                                                                                                                              mn
                                                                                                                                                                              sd
                                                                                                                                                                               tx
                                                                                                                                                                              wi  in
                                                                                                                                                                                 ilmo
                                                                                                                                                                                  wy
                                                                                                                                                                                 nd
                                                                                                                                                                                  tn   ky
                                                                                                                                                                                       wa
                                                                                                                                                                                       in
                                                                                                                                                                                        tx
                                                                                                                                                                                        wa
                                                                                                                                                                                       id  ilnm
                                                                                                                                                                                          oh wa
                                                                                                                                                                                            la
                                                                                                                                                                                             ilaz
                                                                                                                                                                                             okmn
                                                                                                                                                                                                  id
                                                                                                                                                                                                  ilky
                                                                                                                                                                                                 mo wa
                                                                                                                                                                                                    oktxflmt
                                                                                                                                                                                                        tx
                                                                                                                                                                                                        ky
                                                                                                                                                                                                        tx
                                                                                                                                                                                                         tnmitx
                                                                                                                                                                                                             mi  tx tx
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    mo   flsc
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         tn
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          co        oklatx
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     tx
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           txtx
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ok
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           tx    flfl utla tx
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              flmt
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             tn                            okfl la                     co
                                                                                   va va ks    ca
                                                                                               ndgaks ksks
                                                                                                        vt mi
                                                                                                           ky
                                                                                                           orks
                                                                                                            nc  wi
                                                                                                                ne
                                                                                                                 pa
                                                                                                                kynd
                                                                                                                  oh
                                                                                                                  ky
                                                                                                                  me
                                                                                                                ilvt
                                                                                                                     in
                                                                                                                     ia
                                                                                                                      or
                                                                                                                      mo  md
                                                                                                                         mn nd
                                                                                                                           wv
                                                                                                                           me
                                                                                                                          mo wa
                                                                                                                             in
                                                                                                                            mn
                                                                                                                           mn
                                                                                                                           nj    nc
                                                                                                                                 sd
                                                                                                                                 nd
                                                                                                                                 mn  mi
                                                                                                                                     ia
                                                                                                                                    or
                                                                                                                                    candne
                                                                                                                                        ornm
                                                                                                                                         ks  mn
                                                                                                                                            in
                                                                                                                                             wv
                                                                                                                                            ks
                                                                                                                                            mi
                                                                                                                                            tx
                                                                                                                                            tn
                                                                                                                                             oh mo  ky
                                                                                                                                                     wa
                                                                                                                                                    tx  tn
                                                                                                                                                        oh
                                                                                                                                                        caky
                                                                                                                                                          ne
                                                                                                                                                          mo
                                                                                                                                                          iaazky
                                                                                                                                                              tx
                                                                                                                                                               in
                                                                                                                                                              wi
                                                                                                                                                              mt mi
                                                                                                                                                                 mo
                                                                                                                                                                floh
                                                                                                                                                                 sd
                                                                                                                                                                tx  wy
                                                                                                                                                                    moca
                                                                                                                                                                      ne
                                                                                                                                                                      mt
                                                                                                                                                                      mi in
                                                                                                                                                                          nd
                                                                                                                                                                          ne
                                                                                                                                                                         ks
                                                                                                                                                                         ilwa ky
                                                                                                                                                                           ilmt
                                                                                                                                                                              oh
                                                                                                                                                                              id
                                                                                                                                                                             ky txwi
                                                                                                                                                                                  mo  mi
                                                                                                                                                                                       ky    mtwi
                                                                                                                                                                                                la ok
                                                                                                                                                                                                  mo mo
                                                                                                                                                                                                    tx
                                                                                                                                                                                                    mi sd
                                                                                                                                                                                                       in
                                                                                                                                                                                                       tx
                                                                                                                                                                                                        ky
                                                                                                                                                                                                        ut mo
                                                                                                                                                                                                           txnc
                                                                                                                                                                                                             ky tx fliltx
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 fltx
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         sd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         tx  ca ok tx
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                flsc co
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     la         txtx   tx flok                 txla sdfl              me
                                              .6




                                                                                  nyvawior
                                                                                        mitx
                                                                                           msms
                                                                                            ks
                                                                                            ny
                                                                                            wi
                                                                                           nymsga   mn
                                                                                                    ia
                                                                                                   iany
                                                                                                     in
                                                                                                     pa
                                                                                                     ks
                                                                                                    ny
                                                                                                    vt  ks
                                                                                                        wi pa
                                                                                                         ilny
                                                                                                           ca oh
                                                                                                              vt
                                                                                                             in
                                                                                                             flin ilia
                                                                                                                  ks
                                                                                                                 nd
                                                                                                                 ga
                                                                                                                 idnyor
                                                                                                                     ndme
                                                                                                                        wiar
                                                                                                                         id
                                                                                                                         wv
                                                                                                                        mt
                                                                                                                      ilmn    mn
                                                                                                                             ia
                                                                                                                             ks
                                                                                                                             wv
                                                                                                                              or
                                                                                                                              sd
                                                                                                                             ky   ar
                                                                                                                                  wi
                                                                                                                                 nd
                                                                                                                                 ma
                                                                                                                                  oh wy
                                                                                                                                     mn
                                                                                                                                    nc
                                                                                                                                    ky
                                                                                                                                    waky
                                                                                                                                      mi
                                                                                                                                    ilwv
                                                                                                                                      oh     ky tn
                                                                                                                                                wa
                                                                                                                                             flsd
                                                                                                                                              kky    yazwa
                                                                                                                                                        tx
                                                                                                                                                         ca
                                                                                                                                                         idtn
                                                                                                                                                          oh
                                                                                                                                                          moid
                                                                                                                                                           ohwa
                                                                                                                                                             wvmi
                                                                                                                                                               mn   txmo
                                                                                                                                                                      mi neks la
                                                                                                                                                                             mo
                                                                                                                                                                             mi tn ne  wv
                                                                                                                                                                                       wamo
                                                                                                                                                                                         mo
                                                                                                                                                                                          tn m ky
                                                                                                                                                                                               txla
                                                                                                                                                                                                  txo   tx   sd
                                                                                                                                                                                                              la  tx    okilmiwi
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               txokla
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   az il tx la                               ok
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ga
                                                                            or wi va
                                                                                 mdvava
                                                                                     va
                                                                                      ks
                                                                                      wi
                                                                                     va
                                                                                    va
                                                                                           ny
                                                                                          nd
                                                                                          il
                                                                                         txks
                                                                                          ar
                                                                                          pa pa
                                                                                             ca
                                                                                            ga
                                                                                               me
                                                                                                de
                                                                                               mi
                                                                                                ky
                                                                                               ga
                                                                                               vt  ms
                                                                                                ilin
                                                                                                   nd
                                                                                                    ks
                                                                                                   sc
                                                                                                   pa
                                                                                                   az
                                                                                                   nmpa
                                                                                                     ny
                                                                                                      me
                                                                                                        or
                                                                                                         wi
                                                                                                         ia
                                                                                                        ky
                                                                                                         il
                                                                                                            mn
                                                                                                           wi
                                                                                                            vt
                                                                                                           ma
                                                                                                            nd
                                                                                                            ga
                                                                                                            ia
                                                                                                              nd
                                                                                                             ca
                                                                                                                id
                                                                                                                ks
                                                                                                                oh
                                                                                                                tn
                                                                                                                  ks
                                                                                                                  wi
                                                                                                                  nd
                                                                                                                  ca
                                                                                                                  ks
                                                                                                                  in
                                                                                                                     mn
                                                                                                                     ar
                                                                                                                     nc
                                                                                                                     in
                                                                                                                      wi
                                                                                                                      wa
                                                                                                                      tn
                                                                                                                      tx ia
                                                                                                                         mi
                                                                                                                        wi
                                                                                                                        in
                                                                                                                         ndtn
                                                                                                                           mi
                                                                                                                          sd
                                                                                                                           in or
                                                                                                                              in
                                                                                                                              ga
                                                                                                                             wv
                                                                                                                              mn
                                                                                                                                  ia
                                                                                                                                  md
                                                                                                                                 in
                                                                                                                                  nv
                                                                                                                                  il
                                                                                                                                 nc
                                                                                                                                    nyky
                                                                                                                                     il
                                                                                                                                     ks
                                                                                                                                      wi
                                                                                                                                      tn
                                                                                                                                         ga
                                                                                                                                         tx
                                                                                                                                        oh
                                                                                                                                        mi
                                                                                                                                         ky
                                                                                                                                         wa
                                                                                                                                         az
                                                                                                                                        ks  ne
                                                                                                                                            ar
                                                                                                                                             ga sc
                                                                                                                                               ks
                                                                                                                                               in
                                                                                                                                               tn
                                                                                                                                                  oh
                                                                                                                                                  ne
                                                                                                                                                 ky tn
                                                                                                                                                    wi
                                                                                                                                                    tn
                                                                                                                                                    wv
                                                                                                                                                    in
                                                                                                                                                    mema
                                                                                                                                                     nd mt
                                                                                                                                                        mo
                                                                                                                                                         mo
                                                                                                                                                        nemo
                                                                                                                                                          wv
                                                                                                                                                         ga
                                                                                                                                                          txky
                                                                                                                                                            insd  mo
                                                                                                                                                                 ne
                                                                                                                                                                 tx
                                                                                                                                                                 mo  nesc
                                                                                                                                                                      ky
                                                                                                                                                                      sc
                                                                                                                                                                      tn
                                                                                                                                                                       wvnc
                                                                                                                                                                         tx
                                                                                                                                                                          mo
                                                                                                                                                                           ne
                                                                                                                                                                              flin
                                                                                                                                                                             ky
                                                                                                                                                                              tx
                                                                                                                                                                             in
                                                                                                                                                                              mo
                                                                                                                                                                             nc
                                                                                                                                                                            la ilne
                                                                                                                                                                                 ky
                                                                                                                                                                                   ky
                                                                                                                                                                                  mt
                                                                                                                                                                                 txtn  sc
                                                                                                                                                                                      tx wy
                                                                                                                                                                                        in mo
                                                                                                                                                                                           tx
                                                                                                                                                                                          ky
                                                                                                                                                                                         tx
                                                                                                                                                                                              la
                                                                                                                                                                                             la
                                                                                                                                                                                             tn
                                                                                                                                                                                              tx
                                                                                                                                                                                             mi
                                                                                                                                                                                             ndla
                                                                                                                                                                                              mo  tx  tnoh   mi
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ok
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 tx
                                                                                                                                                                                                                ky      tnfl
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ky ky ok
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ne
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                kyla la
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     txtntn tx
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           flla      il
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         fl la
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           fl               la     la
                                                                                va
                                                                                nm
                                                                               nh  nm
                                                                                    va
                                                                                   ganyny
                                                                                      va
                                                                                       va
                                                                                      me
                                                                                     ny
                                                                                    nmny
                                                                                     ms vaks
                                                                                         ky
                                                                                         va
                                                                                          ny
                                                                                          nj
                                                                                          nyin
                                                                                            ny
                                                                                           nhfl
                                                                                             in wi
                                                                                                ks
                                                                                               nc
                                                                                                pa   wv
                                                                                                    ks
                                                                                                    vt
                                                                                                    ny
                                                                                                     in
                                                                                                     ga  ny
                                                                                                        mo
                                                                                                        ny
                                                                                                        wi
                                                                                                        mi va
                                                                                                          nj
                                                                                                          tx
                                                                                                          nyms
                                                                                                           oh or
                                                                                                              nm
                                                                                                             ks
                                                                                                             ky
                                                                                                             mi
                                                                                                            ct
                                                                                                             ga
                                                                                                             in
                                                                                                            wi  nc
                                                                                                                 ms
                                                                                                                 il
                                                                                                                il
                                                                                                                in ar
                                                                                                                  ks
                                                                                                                  mo
                                                                                                                   al
                                                                                                                  nc
                                                                                                                 ga
                                                                                                                vtmi  oh
                                                                                                                     ny
                                                                                                                      ncnc
                                                                                                                        ky
                                                                                                                        in
                                                                                                                        ar
                                                                                                                        ks
                                                                                                                        pa mn
                                                                                                                           wi
                                                                                                                          in
                                                                                                                           wy mi  mi
                                                                                                                                 oh
                                                                                                                                 mi
                                                                                                                                  ky
                                                                                                                                  inga
                                                                                                                                     tx
                                                                                                                                    wv
                                                                                                                                     ne
                                                                                                                                    alne sc
                                                                                                                                        or
                                                                                                                                        oh
                                                                                                                                        ma
                                                                                                                                         mo
                                                                                                                                         oh
                                                                                                                                        ar   wv
                                                                                                                                             tn
                                                                                                                                             nc
                                                                                                                                            tn ga
                                                                                                                                              ks
                                                                                                                                              flsc wytn
                                                                                                                                                     tx  nc
                                                                                                                                                          in
                                                                                                                                                          tn
                                                                                                                                                          ar
                                                                                                                                                          tx
                                                                                                                                                          arwy
                                                                                                                                                             fl
                                                                                                                                                            mi
                                                                                                                                                            mowy
                                                                                                                                                               aroh
                                                                                                                                                                 tn
                                                                                                                                                                 tx   tn
                                                                                                                                                                     ky
                                                                                                                                                                    tnsc txtnfl
                                                                                                                                                                             wy
                                                                                                                                                                             ky
                                                                                                                                                                            tx
                                                                                                                                                                           mo      ky
                                                                                                                                                                                  ky
                                                                                                                                                                                 txtx
                                                                                                                                                                                   sd
                                                                                                                                                                                   sc    tnks
                                                                                                                                                                                           insd    tn
                                                                                                                                                                                                    la tx  tx
                                                                                                                                                                                                           fl tx          fl tn
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              la    tx   fl
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        nv la       la    tn                    fl la
                                                                           nm
                                                                           me  dc
                                                                               nh
                                                                              nh ga
                                                                                va
                                                                                va pa
                                                                                  nh
                                                                                  va
                                                                                 nh  ms
                                                                                   rial
                                                                                      ct
                                                                                      al
                                                                                       nyilde
                                                                                         ny
                                                                                         pain
                                                                                            ny
                                                                                           va
                                                                                           ct   ms
                                                                                               ny
                                                                                                ga  ar
                                                                                                     ms
                                                                                                    pa
                                                                                                    vt
                                                                                                     in
                                                                                                    tx
                                                                                                     wv
                                                                                                     md
                                                                                                     nj
                                                                                                     ny
                                                                                                    va
                                                                                                   vt   wy
                                                                                                        wi
                                                                                                        al
                                                                                                        mo
                                                                                                         ny
                                                                                                        ms  ny
                                                                                                           ga
                                                                                                            oh
                                                                                                           nd
                                                                                                           inva
                                                                                                              orga
                                                                                                                ar me
                                                                                                                   oh
                                                                                                                  tx
                                                                                                                   ga
                                                                                                                  mo
                                                                                                                  ms    ga
                                                                                                                      flaral
                                                                                                                         ky
                                                                                                                        ga
                                                                                                                        ar nc
                                                                                                                          ks
                                                                                                                           in mi
                                                                                                                             tx
                                                                                                                            ohnc ar
                                                                                                                                  wi
                                                                                                                                  nd tn
                                                                                                                                    wvoh
                                                                                                                                      nc
                                                                                                                                     ga
                                                                                                                                      tntx
                                                                                                                                        ky
                                                                                                                                         in
                                                                                                                                         al
                                                                                                                                         wv tx
                                                                                                                                             me tx   wv
                                                                                                                                                    in
                                                                                                                                                     ar ar
                                                                                                                                                        tn
                                                                                                                                                         mt
                                                                                                                                                        ncar
                                                                                                                                                         ky  ky
                                                                                                                                                             mdncid wamo
                                                                                                                                                                      wvtx
                                                                                                                                                                       catn   ky
                                                                                                                                                                             ohmi
                                                                                                                                                                              id tntx  mo
                                                                                                                                                                                       scks    ks
                                                                                                                                                                                              tx    kyidnv id la
                                                                                                                                                                                                               id
                                                                                                                                                                                                              in
                                                                                                                                                                                                              mt
                                                                                                                                                                                                              txtn
                                                                                                                                                                                                                mo          sc              tx tx txlautil flfl
                                                                              vanh
                                                                                ny
                                                                                vava
                                                                                   va
                                                                                  va
                                                                                 panm
                                                                                   ny
                                                                                   va
                                                                                      md
                                                                                     va
                                                                                     pa
                                                                                     ny
                                                                                     pame
                                                                                       ks
                                                                                      va
                                                                                      pa
                                                                                     nh
                                                                                      nmky
                                                                                        al
                                                                                       nj
                                                                                        va
                                                                                        ny
                                                                                       ga
                                                                                        pa ga
                                                                                          ny ilny
                                                                                             oh
                                                                                            pa
                                                                                            va
                                                                                                ny
                                                                                                me
                                                                                                nm
                                                                                               pa
                                                                                              ga
                                                                                               ms
                                                                                               nj
                                                                                               ar
                                                                                                nm
                                                                                                   me
                                                                                                    vt
                                                                                                    ct
                                                                                                    ny
                                                                                                    mi
                                                                                                    pa
                                                                                                    ky
                                                                                                   pa
                                                                                                    nj
                                                                                                    ms
                                                                                                    ny
                                                                                                     ms
                                                                                                    ga
                                                                                                        ga
                                                                                                         ga
                                                                                                          in
                                                                                                         pa
                                                                                                         az
                                                                                                        ma
                                                                                                         wv wi
                                                                                                           md in
                                                                                                              ga
                                                                                                              id
                                                                                                             nc
                                                                                                            ga   ne
                                                                                                                vt ne
                                                                                                                  ky
                                                                                                                 ar
                                                                                                                 ms
                                                                                                                 nc
                                                                                                              ilms ga
                                                                                                                     nm
                                                                                                                      wi
                                                                                                                     ar
                                                                                                                      ar
                                                                                                                     ky
                                                                                                                     nj
                                                                                                                      almoga
                                                                                                                         al
                                                                                                                        mo ohky
                                                                                                                            ar
                                                                                                                            ohms
                                                                                                                             nc
                                                                                                                             la
                                                                                                                              nc
                                                                                                                              ar
                                                                                                                                 ms
                                                                                                                                 tx
                                                                                                                                  nc
                                                                                                                                 mi
                                                                                                                                 arwimi
                                                                                                                                     ks
                                                                                                                                      ar
                                                                                                                                     ar
                                                                                                                                     nd
                                                                                                                                      wv
                                                                                                                                     in ma
                                                                                                                                         in
                                                                                                                                         ky
                                                                                                                                        tn   il
                                                                                                                                            id
                                                                                                                                            in  tx
                                                                                                                                                ga
                                                                                                                                               ar ohky
                                                                                                                                                    mi
                                                                                                                                                     il
                                                                                                                                                        mi
                                                                                                                                                         tx
                                                                                                                                                         sc
                                                                                                                                                        ar
                                                                                                                                                        wv
                                                                                                                                                        nc
                                                                                                                                                        sc nc
                                                                                                                                                          ky
                                                                                                                                                              nc
                                                                                                                                                             tn
                                                                                                                                                              la
                                                                                                                                                             momi
                                                                                                                                                               ky
                                                                                                                                                              txnc
                                                                                                                                                               ia
                                                                                                                                                               ar
                                                                                                                                                               tnsctx tn ky
                                                                                                                                                                        la tn
                                                                                                                                                                           sc ky
                                                                                                                                                                             ar
                                                                                                                                                                             kywv
                                                                                                                                                                              ky
                                                                                                                                                                             tx  ky
                                                                                                                                                                                 tx      ky
                                                                                                                                                                                         mo   mo
                                                                                                                                                                                              la sc
                                                                                                                                                                                                mosc
                                                                                                                                                                                                    tn    tn     tx    lafl   tx
                                                                         nmva   md ny
                                                                                  ct
                                                                                 nh
                                                                                 ny  al
                                                                                     al ga
                                                                                        al
                                                                                        va
                                                                                        ga
                                                                                        pa
                                                                                       va   pa
                                                                                            awv
                                                                                           ms
                                                                                           oh
                                                                                           va
                                                                                           tx
                                                                                          pa
                                                                                           tx
                                                                                           ms    ar
                                                                                                ga
                                                                                                ga  pa
                                                                                                  lnmilin
                                                                                                    oh
                                                                                                   pa
                                                                                                    ar   pa
                                                                                                        ms
                                                                                                        nc  al
                                                                                                           in
                                                                                                           al
                                                                                                           md
                                                                                                            or
                                                                                                           nj nc
                                                                                                              ga arva ms
                                                                                                                      ms
                                                                                                                     tx ky
                                                                                                                      ilal
                                                                                                                        patxnc
                                                                                                                            mi
                                                                                                                           oh
                                                                                                                           ky nc
                                                                                                                              ma
                                                                                                                              tx
                                                                                                                             in
                                                                                                                             nc
                                                                                                                             id
                                                                                                                            ar ky
                                                                                                                               ga ar
                                                                                                                                 tn oh
                                                                                                                                  flmd
                                                                                                                                   ms sc
                                                                                                                                      gaal
                                                                                                                                        sc   txtn   ks
                                                                                                                                                   tn ky
                                                                                                                                                     wv
                                                                                                                                                     nc tnnc
                                                                                                                                                         sc
                                                                                                                                                         tn txnc
                                                                                                                                                              ky
                                                                                                                                                              tn
                                                                                                                                                              nc
                                                                                                                                                             wiminc ilgatn
                                                                                                                                                                         kynm
                                                                                                                                                                            mo   wv
                                                                                                                                                                                  nd
                                                                                                                                                                                  nc       laid   scnc       tntntnfl sdfl                                                            fl
                                                                                gapa
                                                                                   ga wi
                                                                                      mo          alar
                                                                                                   ms   ga
                                                                                                         nymi
                                                                                                           tx
                                                                                                            ma     ms
                                                                                                                   ga    nc
                                                                                                                         in         tn
                                                                                                                                    nc   ga
                                                                                                                                         mi ar
                                                                                                                                            nc       ma
                                                                                                                                                     md                    ky ilnc tx mi
                                                                                                                                                                                       tn                                                       la txfl
                                                                            vanh
                                                                              va
                                                                                pa
                                                                                ny
                                                                                md
                                                                               nj
                                                                                pa
                                                                                al
                                                                                ny
                                                                                   va
                                                                                  pa
                                                                                  ga ny
                                                                                    md
                                                                                   pa
                                                                                    nj
                                                                                       ny
                                                                                      wv
                                                                                      ri
                                                                                      va
                                                                                     va
                                                                                      pa
                                                                                     ga
                                                                                    ga
                                                                                     pa
                                                                                      va
                                                                                     de
                                                                                      tx
                                                                                      md
                                                                                      nj
                                                                                     ky
                                                                                        ga
                                                                                       ms
                                                                                        ga
                                                                                        pa
                                                                                        nm
                                                                                       ny
                                                                                       va
                                                                                       nmmd
                                                                                         ms
                                                                                         wv
                                                                                        ga
                                                                                           al
                                                                                           ct
                                                                                          ny
                                                                                           ga
                                                                                          pa
                                                                                          mo
                                                                                           tx
                                                                                          va
                                                                                         ga
                                                                                          pa
                                                                                          ga
                                                                                          nm
                                                                                             md
                                                                                             va
                                                                                             ms
                                                                                             pa
                                                                                             va
                                                                                             ny
                                                                                            nj  ar
                                                                                               ms
                                                                                                tx
                                                                                                mt
                                                                                                va
                                                                                               ny
                                                                                                va
                                                                                                va
                                                                                                ga
                                                                                                   va
                                                                                                   ms
                                                                                                   md
                                                                                                   va
                                                                                                  ms
                                                                                                   sc
                                                                                                     ms
                                                                                                    mdga
                                                                                                      al
                                                                                                     ar
                                                                                                     al
                                                                                                    ms
                                                                                                    va
                                                                                                         ga
                                                                                                         al
                                                                                                         sc
                                                                                                        ga
                                                                                                         nc
                                                                                                         ms
                                                                                                            ms
                                                                                                            mi
                                                                                                           pa
                                                                                                           ga
                                                                                                           pa
                                                                                                           tx
                                                                                                           ar
                                                                                                             ms
                                                                                                            tx
                                                                                                            ky
                                                                                                             al
                                                                                                              tn
                                                                                                                 tn
                                                                                                                 ms
                                                                                                                 nc
                                                                                                                 ga
                                                                                                                nc
                                                                                                                   tn
                                                                                                                   wv
                                                                                                                  ar
                                                                                                                 ms
                                                                                                                 mi
                                                                                                                  nc
                                                                                                                  sc
                                                                                                                      in
                                                                                                                      ma
                                                                                                                     ny
                                                                                                                     in
                                                                                                                      nc
                                                                                                                        ma
                                                                                                                        ga
                                                                                                                        ar ga
                                                                                                                          ar
                                                                                                                         ga
                                                                                                                         mn
                                                                                                                        ar
                                                                                                                             ga
                                                                                                                            wv
                                                                                                                            mo
                                                                                                                           nc
                                                                                                                            al
                                                                                                                              ar
                                                                                                                             sc
                                                                                                                             tn
                                                                                                                              ga
                                                                                                                              nc
                                                                                                                              mi
                                                                                                                                alnc
                                                                                                                                  mn
                                                                                                                                  al
                                                                                                                                  ga
                                                                                                                                     ga
                                                                                                                                    mt
                                                                                                                                    la
                                                                                                                                    ncar
                                                                                                                                     tx
                                                                                                                                        tn
                                                                                                                                         nc
                                                                                                                                         nc
                                                                                                                                        nc
                                                                                                                                             sc
                                                                                                                                             tx
                                                                                                                                             ar
                                                                                                                                            tn
                                                                                                                                             mi
                                                                                                                                            nc
                                                                                                                                               ar
                                                                                                                                               wv
                                                                                                                                              ga
                                                                                                                                              nc
                                                                                                                                              wv
                                                                                                                                               ky sc    tx    tx
                                                                                                                                                               ia
                                                                                                                                                              ky nc
                                                                                                                                                                 nval
                                                                                                                                                                       tn
                                                                                                                                                                      ky
                                                                                                                                                                      tn
                                                                                                                                                                      mo
                                                                                                                                                                      wv
                                                                                                                                                                         sc
                                                                                                                                                                         ky
                                                                                                                                                                        sc
                                                                                                                                                                           sc
                                                                                                                                                                          ms           sc
                                                                                                                                                                                        az
                                                                                                                                                                                           flla
                                                                                                                                                                                           ky  flky
                                                                                                                                                                                                  kytxtn
                                                                                                                                                                                                        nc kync
                                                                                                                                                                                                          tn
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  tntn
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    lasc
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          la
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              fl fl sc
                                                                          vapa va
                                                                               ny
                                                                              va va
                                                                                 ky
                                                                                pava
                                                                                 va
                                                                                  ga
                                                                                 al nm
                                                                                   va
                                                                                   papava
                                                                                      ga
                                                                                     al
                                                                                      ct
                                                                                     ga
                                                                                    va    ri
                                                                                          ms
                                                                                          al
                                                                                         pa
                                                                                         va
                                                                                          ms me
                                                                                             vanc
                                                                                                ga
                                                                                               pa
                                                                                               ms
                                                                                               txarms
                                                                                                   pa
                                                                                                   msar
                                                                                                    ms
                                                                                                     ga
                                                                                                    msgawv
                                                                                                         ga  al
                                                                                                              oh al
                                                                                                                laoh
                                                                                                                 nc
                                                                                                                ms    ms
                                                                                                                     ga
                                                                                                                      ar
                                                                                                                      nm
                                                                                                                      gams
                                                                                                                        tx
                                                                                                                        nc ga
                                                                                                                           ms
                                                                                                                          ar
                                                                                                                           al
                                                                                                                           gams
                                                                                                                             ga   sc  mstx   md
                                                                                                                                            tn
                                                                                                                                            mo           mt           altn
                                                                                                                                                                        tn               ncky
                                                                                                                                                                                        la              ky                    fl    la                                                 fl
                                                                                 wv
                                                                              txnj      ms
                                                                                       wv
                                                                                      nj va  al
                                                                                            ct     nc
                                                                                                    ms
                                                                                                   al
                                                                                                   mi     pa  ks
                                                                                                             ga
                                                                                                            al
                                                                                                           al    ga   oh
                                                                                                                      wval
                                                                                                                        ga
                                                                                                                         ms ar
                                                                                                                           ms
                                                                                                                            kyid
                                                                                                                              md  ar
                                                                                                                                 nc  ga
                                                                                                                                      nm ar                                              mo            wvnetxtx
                                                                            ga
                                                                             ga
                                                                             nm    pa
                                                                                   va
                                                                                   gava
                                                                                     ga
                                                                                    pa vaga
                                                                                        ga
                                                                                       nyal va
                                                                                             al  ga
                                                                                                 pa
                                                                                                va
                                                                                               nm ncva
                                                                                                    va
                                                                                                   tx   ms ms
                                                                                                          ga
                                                                                                         ga   vaal
                                                                                                                tnga
                                                                                                                  nc
                                                                                                                  ga  ga nc
                                                                                                                        nc  ga
                                                                                                                             md
                                                                                                                             tn
                                                                                                                             nm         mt
                                                                                                                                         sc  nm nc      mi
                                                                                                                                                         nmtnky       ncsc        ncmoky                                                                            fl
                                   .4




                                                                              pa va
                                                                                paky  ms
                                                                                     al
                                                                                      vaar
                                                                                        ga
                                                                                        vaga
                                                                                           rial ms
                                                                                                ga  ga
                                                                                                    ms
                                                                                                    ar
                                                                                                    alms
                                                                                                     al
                                                                                                    ny
                                                                                                   nj   ga ar
                                                                                                           ga gamsla
                                                                                                                   mdga
                                                                                                                      nc
                                                                                                                      wvga   ga
                                                                                                                              ar
                                                                                                                              ar        tn   sc     ky
                                                                                                                                                    tx  nm
                                                                                                                                                        tn   msga                                                               la la
                                                                         vavavapa
                                                                               nj
                                                                                alva
                                                                                   va
                                                                                  al
                                                                                 va  al
                                                                                     va
                                                                                    pa al
                                                                                      wv   ga
                                                                                          ms
                                                                                         pa     ga
                                                                                                ga
                                                                                                ms
                                                                                                gamiga
                                                                                                   gaal    al
                                                                                                           tx
                                                                                                              al
                                                                                                              mn ms
                                                                                                                  ga
                                                                                                                     ga nc  ncsc  ga
                                                                                                                                 sc     ms
                                                                                                                                      arnc   wv
                                                                                                                                              nm        la    al  ky   ga         wv
                                                                                                                                                                                       id
                                                                                                                                                                                       sc
                                                                                                                                                                                                        sc   wv                wv                nc
                                                                                 njnjny   gaga
                                                                                          ga
                                                                                         va
                                                                                        ga  va  la wvga    ks
                                                                                                          ar  alnc    ms
                                                                                                                     wv
                                                                                                                     al       nc                        md      txnmmo                mo
                                                                                                                                                                                       la                    in ky               la
                                                                              ga       alal
                                                                                       ny     nm
                                                                                              al  msga       ga            ga     ga  nc md   nclala
                                                                            vanj
                                                                               ga
                                                                               va
                                                                                txvava
                                                                                      va
                                                                                       vapa   msva  ga                wvnc
                                                                                      ga
                                                                                     va ms       gatx wv                                        ga
                                                                                 va gawv                                                                       nc     wv                                                        la
                                                                                   tx tx ga
                                                                           tx                    ms                                                                                                                                                                   la
                          .2




                                                                                         va

                                                                                               tx
                0




                                                                    0                                        .2             .4             .6            .8                                                                                                                                                       1
                                                                                                          Recipients as share of 65+ population, December 1939



Notes: Figure plots share of individuals 65 and above receiving non-wage income in 1939 against actual county OAA
recipiency rates in December 1939. For sources and notes, see text.




                                                                                                                                                                                              32
                Table 1: Relationship between county recipiency rate and local funding

                                                     (1)       (2)     (3)       (4)       (5)
             Local funding share                   -0.310∗∗∗ -0.215∗ -0.221∗∗∗ -0.413∗∗∗ -0.403∗∗∗
                                                  (0.110) (0.125) (0.067) (0.069) (0.069)

             Final decision local                                                     0.036      0.033
                                                                                     (0.027)    (0.027)

             99th percentile OAA                                                      0.008∗∗∗ 0.009∗∗∗
             payment                                                                 (0.001) (0.001)

             Any minimum                                                              -0.030     -0.013
             income+benefit                                                          (0.020)    (0.023)

             Relative responsibility                                                  -0.039∗∗ -0.038∗
             requirement                                                             (0.019) (0.020)

             Eligibility age of 70                                                    -0.061∗∗ -0.065∗∗
                                                                                     (0.025) (0.026)

             No citizenship or US                                                     -0.027     -0.032
             residency requirement                                                   (0.019)    (0.020)

             Any property limitation                                                  0.103∗∗∗ 0.096∗∗∗
                                                                                     (0.019) (0.018)

             Property limit and home                                                  -0.044∗ -0.036
             disregard                                                               (0.026) (0.026)

             Claim on property                                                        0.007      0.008
                                                                                     (0.016)    (0.017)
             Observations                           3095        1320       1320       1320       1319
             Border fixed effects                                           X           X          X
             Other OAA policy variables                                                 X          X
             Other county characteristics                                                          X
Dependent variable: county recipiency rate in December 1939, adjusted for joint recipiency. Other OAA policy
variables are those included in the table and, except for the 99th percentile payment, are indicators for the specified
policy. Other county characteristics are urban population share, nonwhite population share, median years of schooling
for men 25+, share of the population below 15 or 65 and above, home ownership rate, share of dwellings not needing
major repairs, share of dwellings with running water (all measured in 1940), and the share of dwellings with a radio
in 1930. Standard errors (in parentheses) are clustered at the state level. ∗ : p < 0.10, ∗∗ : p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ : p < 0.01




                                                           33
            Table 2: Relationship between county payment per recipient and local funding

                                                      (1)           (2)        (3)         (4)     (5)
              Local funding share                    8.425         5.356     -1.105      -4.030∗ -4.439∗
                                                    (9.360)       (8.616)   (2.511)     (2.338) (2.391)

              Final decision local                                                       0.908       0.960
                                                                                        (0.627)     (0.639)

              99th percentile OAA                                                        0.267∗∗∗ 0.265∗∗∗
              payment                                                                   (0.045) (0.046)

              Any minimum                                                                5.002∗∗∗ 4.448∗∗∗
              income+benefit                                                            (0.802) (0.833)

              Relative responsibility                                                    0.921∗      0.784
              requirement                                                               (0.475)     (0.474)

              Eligibility age of 70                                                      4.501∗∗∗ 4.587∗∗∗
                                                                                        (0.648) (0.672)

              No citizenship or US                                                       -1.512∗∗ -1.424∗∗
              residency requirement                                                     (0.665) (0.673)

              Any property limitation                                                    3.520∗∗∗ 3.640∗∗∗
                                                                                        (0.837) (0.859)

              Property limit and home                                                    -2.197∗∗∗ -2.390∗∗∗
              disregard                                                                 (0.766) (0.777)

              Claim on property                                                          1.284∗∗ 1.306∗∗
                                                                                        (0.576) (0.581)
              Observations                            3095         1320      1320        1320    1319
              Border fixed effects                                            X            X       X
              Other OAA policy variables                                                   X       X
              Other county characteristics                                                         X
Dependent variable: county payment per recipient in December 1939, adjusted for joint recipiency. Other OAA
policy variables are those included in the table and, except for the 99th percentile payment, are indicators for the
specified policy. Other county characteristics are urban population share, nonwhite population share, median years
of schooling for men 25+, share of the population below 15 or 65 and above, home ownership rate, share of dwellings
not needing major repairs, share of dwellings with running water (all measured in 1940), and the share of dwellings
with a radio in 1930. Standard errors (in parentheses) are clustered at the state level. ∗ : p < 0.10, ∗∗ : p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ :
p < 0.01




                                                             34
          Table 3: Relationship between county payment per person 65+ and local funding

                                                     (1)           (2)       (3)      (4)       (5)
             Local funding share                   -1.956        -1.579    -4.272∗∗ -8.889∗∗∗ -8.830∗∗∗
                                                  (3.669)       (4.046)   (2.054) (1.788) (1.799)

             Final decision local                                                     1.632∗∗∗ 1.570∗∗∗
                                                                                     (0.575) (0.578)

             99th percentile OAA                                                      0.180∗∗∗ 0.182∗∗∗
             payment                                                                 (0.026) (0.026)

             Any minimum                                                              1.318∗     1.498∗∗
             income+benefit                                                          (0.719)    (0.729)

             Relative responsibility                                                  0.125      0.077
             requirement                                                             (0.493)    (0.492)

             Eligibility age of 70                                                    0.063      0.006
                                                                                     (0.495)    (0.495)

             No citizenship or US                                                     -0.764     -0.810∗
             residency requirement                                                   (0.483)    (0.482)

             Any property limitation                                                  2.548∗∗∗ 2.452∗∗∗
                                                                                     (0.466) (0.449)

             Property limit and home                                                  -1.122     -1.056
             disregard                                                               (0.684)    (0.693)

             Claim on property                                                        0.052      0.070
                                                                                     (0.403)    (0.407)
             Observations                           3095         1320      1320       1320       1319
             Border fixed effects                                           X           X          X
             Other OAA policy variables                                                 X          X
             Other county characteristics                                                          X
Dependent variable: county payment per person 65+ in December 1939. Other OAA policy variables are those
included in the table and, except for the 99th percentile payment, are indicators for the specified policy. Other
county characteristics are urban population share, nonwhite population share, median years of schooling for men
25+, share of the population below 15 or 65 and above, home ownership rate, share of dwellings not needing major
repairs, share of dwellings with running water (all measured in 1940), and the share of dwellings with a radio in 1930.
Standard errors (in parentheses) are clustered at the state level. ∗ : p < 0.10, ∗∗ : p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ : p < 0.01




                                                           35
       Table 4: Predicted changes in OAA payments and recipiency using base specification

                                  Recipiency rate       Payment per recipient         Payment per person
                                  (actual=0.216)          (actual=18.970)               (actual=4.092)
          0% local funding             0.041                    0.350                        0.879
         25% local funding            -0.062                   -0.657                       -1.344
         50% local funding            -0.166                   -1.665                       -3.566
Notes: For each combination of local funding and level of decision making, table shows change in OAA recipiency
rates, payment per recipient, and payment per person 65 and above implied by coefficients reported in column (4) of
Tables 1-3.



      Table 5: Results in base specification are robust to using 1937-1939 changes in funding

                                          (1)       (2)       (3)      (4)                      (5)       (6)
                                        Recipiency rate Payment per recipient                Payment per person
  County funding share                  -0.458∗∗∗ -0.422∗∗∗ -8.172∗  -4.749                   -8.806∗∗∗ -8.213∗∗∗
                                       (0.101) (0.096) (4.141)      (4.346)                  (1.975)    (1.753)
  Observations                           2531      2531      2531     2531                     2531      2531
  County fixed effects                     X         X         X        X                        X         X
  Border-year fixed effects                X         X         X        X                        X         X
  Other OAA policy variables                         X                  X                                  X
Dependent variables: payment per person 65+, recipiency rate, payment per recipient (latter two are adjusted for
joint recipiency). Standard errors (in parentheses) are clustered at the state level. ∗ : p < 0.10, ∗∗ : p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ :
p < 0.01




                                                          36
                         Table 6: Interacting local funding and decision-making

                                         (1)      (2)     (3)       (4)                     (5)       (6)
                                       Recipiency rate Payment per recipient              Payment per person
  Local funding share                  -0.042   -0.227∗∗ 6.542     1.270                   0.345    -3.643∗∗∗
                                      (0.097) (0.087) (3.932)     (2.728)                 (2.186)  (1.258)

  Local funding share                  -0.602∗∗∗ -0.346∗∗ -17.574∗∗∗         -9.852∗      -16.506∗∗∗ -9.751∗∗
  × final decision local              (0.155) (0.170) (6.062)               (5.303)       (4.559)    (3.865)

  Final decision local                 0.135∗∗∗ 0.063∗         2.971∗∗∗      1.679∗∗       3.845∗∗∗      2.396∗∗∗
                                      (0.037) (0.033)         (1.078)       (0.818)       (1.004)       (0.743)
  Observations                         1320     1320           1320          1320          1320          1320
  Border fixed effects                   X        X              X             X             X             X
  Other OAA policy variables                      X                            X                           X
Dependent variables: recipiency rate, payment per recipient, payment per person 65 and above. Other OAA policy
variables are as in Tables 1-3. Standard errors (in parentheses) are clustered at the state level. ∗ : p < 0.10, ∗∗ :
p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ : p < 0.01




                                                         37
    Table 7: Predicted changes in OAA payments and recipiency using interacted specification

               Panel A. Recipiency rate (actual=0.216)
                                    Local decision State decision Actual decision
                  0% local funding      0.081           0.018          0.048
                 25% local funding     -0.062          -0.039         -0.050
                 50% local funding     -0.206          -0.096         -0.149
               Actual local funding     0.024          -0.005            0
               Panel B. Payment per recipient (actual=18.970)
                                    Local decision State decision Actual decision
                  0% local funding      1.348          -0.332          0.484
                 25% local funding     -0.798          -0.014         -0.394
                 50% local funding     -2.943           0.304         -1.273
               Actual local funding     0.602          -0.221            0
               Panel C. Payment per person (actual=4.092)
                                    Local decision State decision Actual decision
                  0% local funding      2.324          -0.072          1.083
                 25% local funding     -1.025          -0.983         -1.003
                 50% local funding     -4.373          -1.894         -3.089
               Actual local funding     1.000          -0.432            0
Notes: For each combination of local funding and level of decision making, table shows change in OAA recipiency
rates, payment per recipient, and payment per person 65 and above implied by coefficients reported in columns (2),
(4), and (6) of Table 6.




                                                       38
                     Table 8: Validation of non-wage income measure of recipiency

                                                               (1)      (2)
                                   Recipiency rate            0.426∗∗∗ 0.354∗∗∗
                                                             (0.014) (0.022)

                                   Constant                   0.464∗∗∗
                                                             (0.004)
                                   Observations               3068      1310
                                   Sample                      full    border
                                   Border fixed effects                  X
Dependent variable: Share of population 65 and above reporting non-wage income in 1939. Eicker-Huber-White
standard errors in parentheses. ∗ : p < 0.10, ∗∗ : p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ : p < 0.01




  Table 9: Summary statistics on share of 65+ population with non-wage income who are black

            Panel A. All counties
                                                                           Mean      Median      N
            Share of blacks 65+ with nonwage income                         0.500     0.488     2273
            Share of whites 65+ with nonwage income                         0.591     0.600     3068
            Share black of total 65+ population                             0.100     0.010     3068
            Share black of 65+ with nonwage income                          0.089     0.008     3068
            Share black of 65+ with NWI - share black of 65+               -0.011    -0.0003    3068
            Panel B. Southern counties
                                                                           Mean      Median      N
            Share   of blacks 65+ with nonwage income                       0.445     0.441     1306
            Share   of whites 65+ with nonwage income                       0.549     0.545     1398
            Share   black of total 65+ population                           0.211     0.151     1398
            Share   black of 65+ with nonwage income                        0.186     0.121     1398
            Share   black of 65+ with NWI - share black of 65+             -0.025    -0.013     1398
Table reports summary statistics at the county level (unweighted). Southern counties are those in the Census South.
Only counties with non-wage income nonmissing for any individuals 65 and above are included.




                                                        39
Table 10: Local funding reduces share black of 65+ non-wage income relative to population share


                                       (1)        (2)             (3)          (4)         (5)          (6)
 Local funding share                 -0.0165 ∗∗ -0.0601∗∗       -0.0039 ∗∗∗  -0.0238 ∗∗∗ -0.0749 ∗∗∗  -0.0037∗∗∗
                                    (0.0074) (0.0224)          (0.0006)     (0.0071) (0.0236)        (0.0010)

 Share black of total 65+            0.9446∗∗∗ 0.9395∗∗∗ 1.0078∗∗∗ 0.9434∗∗∗ 0.9364∗∗∗ 1.0078∗∗∗
 population                         (0.0220) (0.0235)    (0.0094)  (0.0219) (0.0239)   (0.0093)

 Final decision local                                                        0.0022       0.0092∗       0.0001
                                                                            (0.0029)     (0.0046)      (0.0002)

 99th percentile OAA                                                         0.0005∗∗ 0.0002            0.0000
 payment                                                                    (0.0002) (0.0004)          (0.0000)

 Any minimum                                                                 -0.0028                    -0.0004
 income+benefit                                                             (0.0018)                   (0.0005)

 Relative responsibility                                                     0.0009       0.0077        -0.0003∗∗
 requirement                                                                (0.0016)     (0.0053)      (0.0001)

 Eligibility age of 70                                                       0.0041∗                    -0.0001
                                                                            (0.0022)                   (0.0003)

 No citizenship or US                                                        -0.0007      -0.0041       -0.0002
 residency requirement                                                      (0.0016)     (0.0043)      (0.0002)

 Any property limitation                                                     0.0077∗∗∗ 0.0225∗∗         -0.0000
                                                                            (0.0029) (0.0085)          (0.0002)

 Property limit and home                                                     -0.0048      -0.0144       0.0002
 disregard                                                                  (0.0032)     (0.0093)      (0.0002)

 Claim on property                                                           0.0065∗∗∗ 0.0009          -0.0006
                                                                            (0.0014) (0.0035)         (0.0005)
 Observations                         1310         559          751           1310      559              751
 Region                                All        South      Non-South         All     South         Non-South
 Border fixed effects                  X            X            X             X         X                X
 Other OAA policy variables                                                    X         X                X
Dependent variable: share of 65+ receiving non-wage income who are black. No Southern states had a minimum
income+benefit or an eligibility age of 70. Standard errors (in parentheses) are clustered at the state level. ∗ :
p < 0.10, ∗∗ : p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ : p < 0.01.




                                                       40
Appendix


        Table A1: Robustness of main results to restricting comparison to adjacent counties

             Panel A. Recipiency rate
                                            (1)      (2)      (3)        (4)        (5)
                     Local funding share -0.220 ∗  -0.222 ∗ -0.225 ∗∗∗ -0.402 ∗∗∗ -0.394∗∗∗
                                          (0.117) (0.122) (0.083) (0.092) (0.096)
                            Observations   1130     2397     2397       2397       2395
                       Pair fixed effects                      X          X          X
             Other OAA policy variables                                   X          X
             Other county characteristics                                            X
             Panel B. Payment per recipient
                                            (1)      (2)      (3)        (4)        (5)
                     Local funding share 4.913      5.256   -0.977     -3.626     -3.738
                                          (8.536) (8.464) (3.133) (2.911) (2.970)
                            Observations   1130     2397     2397       2397       2395
                       Pair fixed effects                      X          X          X
             Other OAA policy variables                                   X          X
             Other county characteristics                                            X
             Panel C. Payment per person 65+
                                            (1)      (2)      (3)        (4)        (5)
                     Local funding share -1.709    -1.615   -4.407∗ -8.671∗∗∗ -8.597∗∗∗
                                          (3.889) (3.934) (2.587) (2.395) (2.431)
                            Observations   1130     2397     2397       2397       2395
                       Pair fixed effects                      X          X          X
             Other OAA policy variables                                   X          X
             Other county characteristics                                            X
Dependent variables: recipiency rate, payment per recipient, payment per person 65 and above. All columns include
only counties on state borders. Unit of observation in Column (1) is a county and in Columns (2)-(5) is a county by
county-pair. Other OAA policy variables and other county characteristics are as in Tables 1-3. Standard errors (in
parentheses) are clustered by state and by state border group. ∗ : p < 0.10, ∗∗ : p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ : p < 0.01




                                                        41
                        Table A2: Robustness to controls for economic conditions

             Panel A. Recipiency rate
                                             (1)       (2)     (3)       (4)        (5)
                        Local funding share-0.289∗∗∗ -0.207∗ -0.220∗∗∗ -0.414∗∗∗ -0.351∗∗∗
                                          (0.102) (0.122) (0.067) (0.069) (0.072)
                            Observations    3042      1305    1305      1305       1304
                     Border fixed effects                       X         X          X
             Other OAA policy variables                                   X          X
             Other county characteristics                                            X
             Panel B. Payment per recipient
                                             (1)       (2)     (3)       (4)        (5)
                     Local funding share 8.849        5.973  -0.888    -3.691     -3.925∗
                                          (9.361) (8.635) (2.557) (2.293) (2.249)
                            Observations    3042      1305    1305      1305       1304
                     Border fixed effects                       X         X          X
             Other OAA policy variables                                   X          X
             Other county characteristics                                            X
             Panel C. Payment per person 65+
                                             (1)       (2)     (3)       (4)        (5)
                     Local funding share -1.547      -1.376  -4.260 ∗∗ -8.845 ∗∗∗ -7.946∗∗∗
                                          (3.644) (4.037) (2.075) (1.795) (1.649)
                            Observations    3042      1305    1305      1305       1304
                     Border fixed effects                       X         X          X
             Other OAA policy variables                                   X          X
             Other county characteristics                                            X
Dependent variables: recipiency rate, payment per recipient, payment per person 65 and above. Other OAA policy
variables are as in Tables 1-3. Other county characteristics include those in Tables 1-3 as well as unemployment-to-
population in 1937 from Haines (2010), WPA spending per capita from 1935-39 from Fishback, Kantor and Wallis
(2003), and log per capita retail sales in 1939 from Fishback, Horrace and Kantor (2005). Sample comprises counties
for which these variables are available. Standard errors (in parentheses) are clustered at the state level. ∗ : p < 0.10,
∗∗
   : p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ : p < 0.01




                                                           42
               Table A3: Robustness to controls for other state policies and preferences

             Panel A. Recipiency rate
                                             (1)       (2)     (3)       (4)       (5)
                       Local funding share -0.311∗∗∗ -0.217∗ -0.222∗∗∗ -0.426∗∗∗ -0.418∗∗∗
                                          (0.110) (0.125) (0.067) (0.072) (0.072)
                            Observations    3094      1318    1318      1318      1317
                     Border fixed effects                       X         X         X
                  Other policy variables                                  X         X
             Other county characteristics                                           X
             Panel B. Payment per recipient
                                             (1)       (2)     (3)       (4)       (5)
                     Local funding share 8.450        5.469  -0.909    -5.289∗   -5.833∗∗
                                          (9.364) (8.627) (2.540) (2.666) (2.683)
                            Observations    3094      1318    1318      1318      1317
                     Border fixed effects                       X         X         X
                  Other policy variables                                  X         X
             Other county characteristics                                           X
             Panel C. Payment per person 65+
                                             (1)       (2)     (3)       (4)       (5)
                     Local funding share -1.961      -1.607  -4.271∗∗ -10.031∗∗∗-10.011∗∗∗
                                          (3.670) (4.052) (2.063) (2.042) (2.054)
                            Observations    3094      1318    1318      1318      1317
                     Border fixed effects                       X         X         X
                  Other policy variables                                  X         X
             Other county characteristics                                           X
Dependent variables: recipiency rate, payment per recipient, payment per person 65 and above. Other policy variables
include the OAA policy variables in Tables 1-3 as well as an indicator for the state facing debt contraints and the
vote share for the Progressive Party presidential candidate in 1924. Other county characteristics include those in
Tables 1-3 as well as religious membership in 1936 from Haines (2010). Sample comprises counties for which these
variables are available. Standard errors (in parentheses) are clustered at the state level. ∗ : p < 0.10, ∗∗ : p < 0.05,
∗∗∗
    : p < 0.01




                                                          43
         Table A4: Robustness of non-wage income results restricting to adjacent counties


                                        (1)      (2)               (3)         (4)           (5)            (6)
 Local funding share                  -0.0131∗ -0.0423∗          -0.0035∗∗∗ -0.0161        -0.0497        -0.0029∗∗
                                     (0.0076) (0.0251)          (0.0008)    (0.0110)      (0.0386)       (0.0013)

 Share black of total 65+             0.9952∗∗∗ 0.9963∗∗∗ 0.9934∗∗∗ 0.9901∗∗∗ 0.9799∗∗∗ 0.9939∗∗∗
 population                          (0.0403) (0.0447)    (0.0176)  (0.0385) (0.0406)   (0.0170)

 Final decision local                                                          0.0017      0.0068         -0.0001
                                                                              (0.0031)    (0.0060)       (0.0004)

 Approx 99th percentile                                                        0.0004      0.0001         -0.0000
 OAA payment                                                                  (0.0002)    (0.0006)       (0.0000)

 Minimum income+benefit                                                        -0.0037                    -0.0005
                                                                              (0.0024)                   (0.0008)

 Relative responsibility                                                       0.0005      0.0058         -0.0004∗
 requirement                                                                  (0.0026)    (0.0077)       (0.0002)

 Eligibility age of 70                                                         0.0044                     -0.0003
                                                                              (0.0030)                   (0.0004)

 No citizenship or US                                                          -0.0015     -0.0065        -0.0003
 residency requirement                                                        (0.0023)    (0.0051)       (0.0002)

 Any property limitation                                                       0.0076∗∗∗ 0.0211∗∗         -0.0000
                                                                              (0.0029) (0.0084)          (0.0003)

 Property limit and home                                                       -0.0038     -0.0110        0.0001
 disregard                                                                    (0.0037)    (0.0099)       (0.0002)

 Claim on property                                                             0.0048∗∗ 0.0009           -0.0007
                                                                              (0.0022) (0.0055)         (0.0006)
 Observations                          2375         1015        1360            2375     1015             1360
 Region                                 All        South      Non-South          All    South          Non-South
 Pair fixed effects                     X            X           X               X        X                 X
 Other OAA policy variables                                                      X        X                 X
Dependent variable: share of 65+ receiving non-wage income who are black. No Southern states had a minimum
income+benefit or an eligibility age of 70. In all columns, unit of observation is a county by county-pair. Standard
errors (in parentheses) are clustered by state and state border group. ∗ : p < 0.10, ∗∗ : p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ : p < 0.01.




                                                        44
