                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                  SECURITIES LENDING AS WHOLESALE FUNDING:
                EVIDENCE FROM THE U.S. LIFE INSURANCE INDUSTRY

                                     Nathan Foley-Fisher
                                     Borghan Narajabad
                                      Stephane Verani

                                     Working Paper 22774
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w22774


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   October 2016


All authors are in the Division of Research and Statistics of the Board of Governors of the
Federal Reserve System. For providing valuable comments, we would like to thank, without
implication, Tobias Adrian; Jack Bao; Celso Brunetti; Jon Danielsson; Stefan Gissler; Michael
Gordy; Diana Hancock; Yesol Huh; Sebastian Infante; Victoria Ivashina; Anastasia Kartasheva;
Frank Keane; Beth Kiser; Florian Nagler; Michael Palumbo; Pedro Saffi; Larry Schmidt; Enrique
Schroth; Andreas Uthemann; and participants in the NBER 2016 Conference on Long-Term
Asset Management, the Society for Economic Measurement 2016 Annual Meeting, the European
Finance Association 2016 Annual Meeting, the European Economic Association 2016 Annual
Meeting, as well as seminars at the Federal Reserve Banks of Cleveland and Philadelphia, LSE
Systemic Risk Centre, Bank for International Settlements, Swiss National Bank, Graduate
Institute Geneva, UC Santa Barbara and Federal Reserve Board. We are grateful to Della
Cummings and Melissa O’Brien for exceptional research assistance. The views in this paper are
solely the authors’ and should not be interpreted as reflecting the views of the Board of
Governors of the Federal Reserve System, any other person associated with the Federal Reserve
System, or the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2016 by Nathan Foley-Fisher, Borghan Narajabad, and Stephane Verani. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Securities Lending as Wholesale Funding: Evidence from the U.S. Life Insurance Industry
Nathan Foley-Fisher, Borghan Narajabad, and Stephane Verani
NBER Working Paper No. 22774
October 2016
JEL No. G11,G22,G23

                                            ABSTRACT

The existing literature assumes that securities lenders primarily respond to demand from
securities borrowers and reinvest their cash collateral in short-term markets. We offer compelling
evidence for a supply channel, using new data matching U.S. life insurers' individual bond
lending and reinvestment decisions to the universe of securities lending transactions. We show
that an insurer's decision to lend a bond is positively correlated with liquidity transformation in its
lending program, even after controlling for demand for that bond. We discuss how using
securities lending cash collateral as a source of wholesale funding might impair securities markets
in times of stress.

Nathan Foley-Fisher                              Stephane Verani
Federal Reserve Board                            Federal Reserve Board
20th Street and Constitution Avenue              20th Street and Constitution Avenue
NW Washington, DC 20551                          NW Washington, DC 20551
nathan.c.foley-fisher@frb.gov                    stephane.h.verani@frb.gov

Borghan Narajabad
Federal Reserve Board
20th Street and Constitution Avenue
NW Washington, DC 20551
borghan.narajabad@frb.gov
Introduction

Securities lending is widely understood to play an important role in the functioning of securities
markets. By agreeing to purchase an asset and return it at a later date, securities borrowers—
typically dealers acting for themselves or on behalf of clients such as hedge funds—temporarily
gain economic ownership of the asset in exchange for collateral, which is usually cash in the
U.S. In addition to managing inventory, financial institutions borrow securities to facilitate
short positions, to avoid delivery fails and to use the borrowed security as collateral in other
transactions. In the absence of securities lending, a large volume of securities would be tied up
in institutions that hold big asset portfolios—pension funds, mutual funds, and life insurance
companies—for asset-liability management or regulatory reasons.
       In this paper, we study the securities lending market from the lenders’ perspective. To
understand the decision processes that we analyze, it is helpful to consider the stylized map of
shadow banking depicted in Figure 1. The cloud represents the general functioning of securities
markets, illustrated with the example of hedge funds taking long and short positions. Securities
market participants typically borrow both cash funding and securities using broker-dealers as
intermediaries. Broker-dealers obtain cash from several sources, for example, money market
mutual funds (MMFs) through short-term funding markets. Securities lenders decide whether
to lend assets from their portfolio and whether to invest the cash collateral they receive back
into short-term markets or into long-term markets.1 In the latter case, they may invest, for
example, in relatively longer-term corporate bonds or asset-backed securities.
       The existing literature implicitly or explicitly assumes that securities lending is primarily
driven by demand from borrowers and that lenders reinvest their cash collateral through short-
term markets.2 Some examples include Duffie, Gârleanu & Pedersen (2002), who study the effect
of search and bargaining in the securities lending market on pricing in the securities market,
abstracting from the reinvestment decisions of securities lenders (Figure 2a). Brunnermeier &
Pedersen (2009) and Gorton & Metrick (2012) consider securities market transactions funded
through margin accounts and bilateral repurchase agreements (repo), abstracting from the source
of securities (Figure 2b). And Krishnamurthy, Nagel & Orlov (2014) focus on the cash provided
to broker-dealers from MMFs and securities lenders through short-term funding markets, taking
as given the lending and reinvestment decisions of securities lenders (Figure 2c).3
   1
      Although agent lenders are often involved in the securities lending process, as we describe in Section 1, their
role is incidental to our analysis.
   2
      Lenders may reinvest in short-term markets directly through tri-party repo or indirectly through MMFs.
   3
      In addition, the securities lending market has been studied empirically to better understand the connections
between the securities lending market and pricing in the securities market (including, for example, D’avolio
(2002), Nashikkar & Pedersen (2007), Saffi & Sigurdsson (2011), Asquith, Au, Covert & Pathak (2013), Kaplan,
Moskowitz & Sensoy (2013), and Kolasinski, Reed & Ringgenberg (2013)), and has been exploited to study equity


                                                         2
    We offer compelling evidence for an alternative, supply-driven, motive for securities lending.
This supply channel arises because the short-term cash collateral available in exchange for lending
securities represents a potential source of wholesale funding for lenders. By lending securities at
relatively short duration to create and maintain a pool of cash collateral, lenders can finance a
portfolio of longer-duration, higher-yielding assets. The liquidity and maturity transformations
associated with this strategy allow lenders to increase the return on their asset portfolio. To
be sure, our empirical analysis does not attempt to test the demand channel against the supply
channel to establish the dominant motive for securities lending. Rather, our analysis seeks
to provide the first empirical evidence for a supply channel that shapes the decision to lend
securities conditional on the demand channel already established by the literature.
    To establish a supply channel in the market for securities lending, we analyze a new dataset
that combines data on U.S. life insurers lending programs with the market for securities lending.
Specifically, we match every U.S. life insurer’s bond portfolio, as well as their lending and
reinvestment decisions, to the universe of securities lending transactions. We collect new annual
regulatory data made available from 2011, which specify the bonds in an insurer’s portfolio
that are on loan at the time of filing as well as the composition of the insurer’s cash collateral
reinvestment portfolio. We combine this information with microdata on loan transactions from
the most comprehensive source on the securities lending market, including the amount of each
bond borrowed and the terms of the loans. By matching these data at the security level, we
can assess how life insurers’ decisions to lend individual bonds are related to lending market
conditions. To our knowledge, our study is the first to focus on the securities lending market for
bonds, where life insurers play a major role.
    We use these data to investigate the relationship between the decision to lend securities and
the degree of liquidity transformation in the cash collateral reinvestment portfolio. The main
empirical challenge is to obtain variation in the decision to lend securities that is independent
of demand factors. First, the demand for securities may vary with observable and unobservable
time- and security-specific characteristics. Second, including equilibrium market variables as a
control for demand may not be appropriate. The concern is that, when specifying the factors that
determine the lending decision, omitting any variable that jointly determines the equilibrium
market variables will likely invalidate all the coefficient estimates. We demonstrate the severity
of the empirical challenge by showing that the cost of borrowing a bond is a function of the
distribution of holdings in that bond. Intuitively, this new finding suggests that lenders of hard-
to-find bonds can get a better deal on their transaction—as in Duffie (1996)—and the terms of
voting preferences (Aggarwal, Saffi & Sturgess (2015)). These studies do not consider how securities lenders may
reinvest the cash collateral they receive from lending their securities.


                                                      3
the transaction may affect their decision to lend particular bonds.
   We address this challenge by exploiting the ability to observe in our dataset the same bonds
at the same time across different life insurers’ portfolios. Our specification includes bond–time
fixed effects to control for potentially confounding factors in a reduced form that encompasses
the cost of cash borrowing as well as the availability and distribution of holdings associated
with each bond. Our proxy for the degree of liquidity transformation is the fraction of assets
in an insurer’s cash reinvestment portfolio that have a residual maturity of more than one year.
Under a demand-driven securities lending strategy, this proxy would be uncorrelated with the
decision to lend after controlling for demand. By contrast, we find that an insurer’s decision
to lend a particular bond is positively correlated with the degree of liquidity transformation in
their reinvestment strategy, even after controlling for demand for that bond.
   We develop our analysis to address a further concern: Our proxy for the degree of liquidity
transformation may not be independent of unobservable time-varying demand that is common
across insurers’ bonds. For example, life insurers may have bundles of securities that are
collectively in demand during some years and this common demand will not be absorbed by
either individual insurer or security–time fixed effects. We adopt an instrumental variable (IV)
approach. We exploit the institutional feature that securities lending managers take their asset
portfolios as given when deciding which assets to lend. Our instrument for the degree of liquidity
transformation by an insurer is the annual change in unrealized gains/losses as a fraction of that
insurer’s total assets. Intuitively, a securities lender can compensate for unrealized losses on its
asset portfolio by increasing the return on its cash reinvestment portfolio. Unrealized losses on
the entire portfolio of holdings are plausibly unrelated to the unobserved demand that is the
source of the endogeneity concern.
   Our findings consistently reject the hypothesis that securities lenders’ reinvestment strategies
are solely demand-driven. Our baseline IV specification suggests that a one standard deviation
(28 percent) increase in the fraction of the cash reinvestment portfolio that has a residual
maturity of more than one year, on average, is associated with a 0.7 standard deviation
(11 percentage points) greater likelihood that a lender will lend a security. Importantly, this
finding is based on data available since 2011, indicating that liquidity transformation in securities
lending programs was not eliminated by the regulatory responses to the 2008-09 financial crisis.
   Our evidence of the use of securities lending cash collateral as a source of wholesale
funding suggests important new channels through which securities market functioning could
be impaired during a time of overall financial stress. As is widely known, liquidity and maturity
transformation are associated with vulnerabilities to runs (Diamond & Dybvig 1983, Goldstein



                                                 4
& Pauzner 2005) and roll-over risk (He & Xiong 2012).4 The vulnerability of securities lending
to runs has the potential to affect securities markets in two ways. First, as securities borrowers
return the securities and demand the return of their cash collateral, securities lenders would likely
withdraw their reinvestment of cash collateral from short-term markets, which would reduce
funding liquidity and adversely affect securities market liquidity (Brunnermeier & Pedersen
2009). Second, the return of borrowed securities reduces market making activity, which could
also impair the functioning of securities markets.
       The collapse during the 2008-09 financial crisis of tri-party repo funding provided by securities
lenders illustrates how liquidity transformation in, and runs on, securities lending programs may
have been a root cause of the collapse in short-term funding supporting the functioning of
securities markets.5 Figure 3a shows the total cash collateral held by securities lenders (red
dashed line) compared to the total assets held by MMFs (blue solid line). Amid widespread
concerns about the liquidity and credit quality of cash reinvestment portfolios, securities
borrowers ran on securities lenders by calling their cash collateral.6 By the first quarter of
2009, cash collateral from securities lending had fallen almost $1 trillion while MMF assets
had only begun to decline from pre-crisis levels. Contagion to the broader financial system
occurred when, to meet the demand to return cash, securities lenders drew first on the portion
of cash collateral that was reinvested in short-term funding markets. The effect of the run on
securities lenders’ cash collateral on market funding liquidity can be seen in Figure 3b, showing
the tri-party repo funding provided by securities lenders (red dashed line) and MMFs (blue solid
line).7 By the first quarter of 2009, repo funding from securities lenders had collapsed by almost
$300 billion while MMF funding remained relatively more available.
       The remainder of the paper proceeds as follows. In Section 1, we provide an overview of the
market for lending securities. Section 2 presents our data and summary statistics. Section 3
presents our empirical results on the supply channel of securities lending, including our IV
estimates and robustness tests. We discuss some implications of our findings and conclude in
   4
     At an institutional level, these vulnerabilities were manifest at AIG’s $80 billion securities lending program
in 2008, which had retained only about 20 percent of its cash collateral in short-term assets, while 65 percent was
reinvested in longer-term RMBS and other ABS (Peirce 2014, McDonald & Paulson 2015). Increasing concerns
among investors about the value of this reinvestment portfolio drove demands for greater collateral reductions.
The cumulative and consequential losses ultimately required AIG to request a series of government interventions.
   5
     Unfortunately, the new regulatory data on insurer’s securities lending programs do not cover the crisis period.
   6
     The experience of securities lenders was repeated throughout the financial system, with runs on repo markets
(Gorton & Metrick 2010a,b, 2012), asset-backed commercial paper (Covitz, Liang & Suarez 2013, Schroth, Suarez
& Taylor 2014), MMFs (Schmidt, Timmermann & Wermers 2016), and life insurance companies (Foley-Fisher,
Narajabad & Verani 2015).
   7
     Figures 3a and 3b reflect only part of the sylized map in Figure 1. Figure 3a shows the total cash collateral
that flowed from broker-dealer to securities lenders. However, the red dashed line in Figure 3b shows only the
part of cash collateral that was reinvested directly into repo; it does not include cash collateral that was reinvested
by securities lenders in MMFs.




                                                          5
Sections 4 and 5.


1     Securities lending and life insurance companies

In this section, we first briefly outline the typical structure of a securities lending transaction,
together with the motivations of each party to the deal. Then we provide an overview of the
securities lending market and the specific role of U.S. life insurers. And, finally, we discuss the
distinction between the demand and supply channels of securities lending.


1.1    Securities lending transactions

In a prototypical loan, the security lender transfers full legal and economic ownership of the
security to the borrower.8 In exchange, the borrower gives the lender collateral in the form of
cash or another security. The term of the loan is usually open-ended, with either party able to
terminate the deal at any time by returning the security/collateral.9 The securities lender is free
to reinvest the cash and, in some cases, rehypothecate the securities used as collateral. In the
case of non-cash collateral, the securities lender earns a fee from the borrower. In the case of cash
collateral, the securities lender pays a percentage of the reinvestment income to the securities
borrower, called the “rebate.” Both the rebate and fee are equilibrium prices negotiated at the
outset of the deal that may reflect the scarcity of the security on loan: A hard-to-find “special ”
security may command a high fee and a low or negative rebate. Typically, the loan is marked
to market daily and is “overcollateralized,” with borrowers providing, for example, $102 in cash
for every $100 in notional value of a security. The percentage of overcollateralization is called
the “margin,” which serves to insure the securities lender against the cost of replacing the lent
security if the borrower defaults. In addition to the loss of collateral, the security borrower is
dissuaded from defaulting on the loan by reputational effects: lender–borrower relationships are
formed through repeated transactions, and are often governed by a single master agreement.
Overall, the structure of cash-collateralized securities lending is closely related to a sale and
repo transaction, in which the securities borrower is entering a reverse-repo arrangement (Duffie
1996, Garbade 2006).
    A securities lending transaction usually involves three or four parties. The ultimate owner
of the security is typically an institutional investor such as a pension fund, insurance company,
mutual fund, or sovereign wealth fund. Owners of large portfolios will often conduct their own
   8
     Although they are transferred by default, the parties may agree that the securities borrower will return any
dividend/interest payments and/or voting rights.
   9
     Flexibility is often preserved, even in term loans, by allowing either party to break the terms early in
exchange for a fee.



                                                       6
lending programs, while smaller owners execute their programs through agent lenders, such as
custodian banks or asset managers, that act as large warehouses for securities made available for
lending. The end users of the borrowed securities are typically dealers and hedge funds. These
security market participants generally use large financial institutions, for example, broker-dealers
and investment banks, as intermediaries that regularly search for securities and have established
relationships with lenders.
       The ultimate owners decide which securities in their portfolios will be made available to lend
and how the cash collateral proceeds of their lending programs will be reinvested. When they
choose to employ agent lenders, the owners typically provide guidelines or specific instructions
for the type of lending transactions (for example, minimum fee criteria or hard-to-find securities
only) and for the reinvestment of cash collateral. In some cases, these reinvestment strategies
are subject to regulatory limits.
       If agent lenders are involved, they execute owners’ instructions to lend particular securities
and reinvest cash collateral. Because agent lenders often have access to the same securities
from many ultimate owners, they typically allocate borrowing requests to securities using an
algorithm that ensures no owner receives preferential treatment. The agents earn a share of
the profits associated with lending securities, including fees and/or reinvestment income after
rebate. In exchange, agents will customarily provide indemnification against the risk that the
non-cash collateral is insufficient to replace the lent securities if the borrower defaults. To be
clear, this indemnification does not protect the owner against the risk of losses associated with
reinvesting cash collateral.
       The borrowing intermediary generally performs three functions as it matches end-user
requests for securities with lenders’ availability.        First, the intermediary helps to assuage
securities lenders’ potential concerns about the credit quality of end users, which may be small
and weakly regulated. Second, by establishing relationships with lenders and borrowers, they
can lower search costs. In the case of broker-dealers, their securities lending intermediation is
often combined with prime brokerage to lower costs further. Third, the intermediary may assume
some liquidity risk by establishing open-ended loans with lenders, giving them the freedom to
recall the securities as needed, and extending term loans to end users so they can be sure their
short positions are covered. In exchange for these services, the borrowing intermediary receives
a payment from the end user.10
       The end users have a variety of reasons for borrowing a particular security. The most common
motivations are to manage inventory (Faulkner 2008); to take a short position or to cover a naked
  10
     Huh & Infante (2016) show how securities lending allows broker-dealers to separate their own portfolio
positions from their ability to fulfill client orders.


                                                    7
short position (Duffie 1996, Keane 2013); to avoid a settlement/delivery failure (Musto, Nini
& Schwarz 2011), possibly as part of market making activity; to combine one security with
other securities as part of an arbitrage trading strategy; to obtain collateral for use in other
transactions (Dive, Hodge, Jones & Purchase 2011); and to take advantage of tax or regulatory
arbitrage (Faulkner 2006). The details of these trading strategies are often complex and we refer
the reader to the reference list for further explanation.


1.2      The securities lending market

Securities lending is a global market totaling more than one trillion U.S. dollars in outstanding
contracts, with U.S. loans accounting for about half of the worldwide market. Figure 6 shows
U.S. entities’ securities lending broken down by the type of lender. Retirement and pension
funds account for more than 60 percent of securities lending by U.S. institutions, followed by
mutual and investment funds, which together cover about 30 percent of the market. Insurance
companies are the third largest group of U.S. securities lenders. Because life insurers typically
invest in fixed income securities rather than equities, their lending is heavily biased towards
bonds, in particular the corporate bond market. Indeed, U.S. life insurers were the principal
lenders of corporate bonds in the pre-crisis period and remain key participants in the market
even though their programs shrank during the 2008-09 financial crisis (Figure 7).
       The majority of securities lent in the U.S. are against cash collateral. Although lending
against non-cash collateral increased in the aftermath of the 2008-09 financial crisis, lending
against cash collateral still accounts for the lion’s share of the U.S. securities lending market
(Keane 2013, Baklanova, Copeland & McCaughrin 2015). Because most of the securities lending,
particularly by life insurers, is against cash collateral, the reinvestment of cash collateral is an
essential component of the strategies adopted by securities lenders.


1.3      The supply channel of securities lending

In this paper, we emphasize the distinction between the demand and supply channels affecting
the decision to lend securities. The former may be represented by a financial institution with a
large portfolio of assets that responds to borrowing demand and reinvests the short-term cash
collateral received in safe assets of short duration.11 The absence of maturity and liquidity
transformation allows this securities lender to scale up or down the size of its lending program
in response to demand without any attendant run risk.
  11
     This characterization of lending institutions is typical in studies of securities lending, for example,
Krishnamurthy et al. (2014).




                                                    8
   In the supply channel, by contrast, the financial institution aims to supply its securities
so as to create and maintain a pool of cash collateral that it uses to finance a portfolio of
longer-duration, higher-yielding assets. The greater return associated with reinvesting the cash
collateral in less liquid and/or longer-term assets is not without cost. In particular, this lender
creates and bears run risk associated with liquidity and maturity transformation. The correlation
between the lending decision and the creation of liquidity transformation that underpins the
supply channel of securities lending is the empirical evidence we will look for in our data.
   To be sure, we are not ruling out the possibility that a lender may respond to borrowing
demand and reinvest the cash collateral in illiquid, longer-term assets. Nor are we excluding
the possibility that a lender may aim to create a pool of cash collateral with the intention of
reinvesting in safe, short-term assets. We also acknowledge that demand-driven and supply-
driven strategies are not mutually exclusive. That is, a securities lender aiming to create a pool
of cash collateral may take demand conditions into account when deciding which securities to
lend and/or may reinvest a portion of its pool of cash collateral in short-term assets. Moreover,
we do not seek to test the demand channel against the supply channel to establish the dominant
motive for securities lending.
   For these reasons, it is important to state clearly that the goal of our paper is to provide the
first empirical evidence of an alternative to the prevailing view on securities lending. The frontier
literature only considers the demand channel, portraying securities lenders as solely responding
to borrowing demand and reinvesting the cash collateral in safe, short-term assets, for example
Duffie et al. (2002) and Krishnamurthy et al. (2014). Our intention is to implement an empirical
strategy that carefully controls for the demand channel to establish convincingly that there is a
supply channel in the securities lending market.
   To better understand the supply channel of securities lending requires detailed data on
individual loans and cash reinvestment decisions.        For this reason, the 2010 adoption by
state insurance regulators of the NAIC guidelines for enhanced reporting on securities lending
programs presents a golden opportunity to observe new and detailed information about all
aspects of securities lending and cash reinvestment activities by U.S. life insurers. We can
observe for the first time the individual bonds that are lent by life insurers, the maturity of the
collateral they received, and their cash reinvestment portfolios. When combined with security-
level data on the broader securities lending market, we can deepen our understanding of the
strategic use of securities lending by U.S. life insurers to raise the return on their portfolio of
assets.




                                                 9
2         Data

We combine several data sources to obtain the dataset we use in our analysis. The data on
insurance company holdings and securities lending activity come from the NAIC Quarterly and
Annual Statutory Filings.12 Within these filings, Schedule D contains reports of all life insurers’
individual fixed income holdings at year-end, together with cross-sectional information about
each security, including the CUSIP indentifier and whether the bond was on loan as part of the
insurer’s securities lending program. We drew information about the total size and performance
of the life insurer’s investment portfolio from the summary balance sheet. We focus on all
insurance companies that had a securities lending program at any point during our sample
period. Our baseline dataset includes information on 107 life insurers, with holdings data on
over half a million bonds. The first four columns of Table 1 report descriptive statistics for the
baseline sample. The average bond holding is about $9 million with a standard deviation of
$27.6 million. The dummy variable for securities lending indicates that about 3 percent of US
life insurers’ bond holdings were on loan during the period.
         We merge life insurers’ holdings data with Mergent FISD using the CUSIP identifier.
FISD provides a wide range of security-level information for fixed income securities, including
corporate, agency, and government bonds, with a geographical focus on the U.S. While
approximately one-half of all Schedule D holdings by insurers in our sample appear in FISD,
95 percent of the lent securities in our data are matched. Our interpretation is that almost all
securities lent in our sample are non-privately placed fixed income bonds issued by U.S. entities.
Excluding the bond holdings that do not appear in FISD reduces the size our data sample
to about 250,000 individual bond holdings across the same set of 107 life insurers. Columns 5
through 8 of Table 1 report the additional descriptive statistics, including amount issued, offering
yield, credit rating, and residual maturity. In this merged subsample, the average offering
amount of the bonds held is $10 million (with a standard deviation of $22.8 million), with a
yield at origination of about 6 percent. The average residual maturity across all year-end bond
holdings is 11.2 years (with a standard deviation of 9.6 years). Our numerical rating measure
indicates that the average is about 20, equivalent to a Standard & Poor’s bond rating of BBB.13
Lastly, the average total amount outstanding across all bonds held by life insurers is $900 million.
         The NAIC Quarterly and Annual Statutory Filings also contain the Schedule DL, a relatively
    12
      Historical NAIC Quarterly and Annual Statutory Filings are contained in the NAIC Financial Data
Repository, a centralized warehouse of financial data used primarily by state and federal regulators.
   13
      We collect data on ratings from Moody’s, Fitch, and Standard & Poor’s and combine them into a single
rating using the lowest rating when only two are available and the median rating when all three are available.
To average the ratings, we set AAA, or equivalent = 28, AA+ = 26, AA = 25, AA- = 24 ... CCC- = 9, CC =
7, and C = 4.



                                                     10
new report of individual investments made by life insurers using cash collateral received from
securities lending, both on- and off-balance sheets. The Schedule DL was introduced in 2010 as
one of many changes to the reporting and statutory accounting of securities lending transactions
adopted as a response to the 2008-09 financial crisis.14 Figure 4 shows an extract from one
life insurer’s filing in 2012 showing a sample of the individual investments made using cash
collateral received in exchange for lending securities. In general, the new data allow us to better
track the securities lending transactions entered into by an insurer and to observe detailed
information about the life insurers’ use of the collateral received. For example, from 2010, if the
collateral received from securities lending could “be sold or pledged by custom or contract by the
reporting entity or its agent,” then the reinvested collateral should be recorded on the balance
sheet.15 We hand-coded data about the maturity of the collateral received in the securities
lending transactions from the regulatory Note 5(e) to the Financial Statements. Figure 5 shows
the relevant notes for the same 2012 sample regulatory filing. Because we rely on the detailed
information collected as part of the new reporting requirements, our sample by necessity begins
in 2011. Figure 9 shows that the total amount of securities lending by U.S. life insurers reached
over $55 billion at the end of 2013.
       It is difficult to compare the bonds lent by life insurers (Schedule D) to the securities in
which they reinvested the cash collateral they received (Schedule DL). The sample reinvestment
portfolio reported in Figure 4 indicates that a large proportion of CUSIP identifiers contain “#”
and “@” symbols representing privately placed securities.16 Indeed, if we attempt to merge FISD
by CUSIP on the reinvestment portfolios, we can match only 30 percent of individual securities
even when excluding cash and cash-like reinvestments.17 Recall, by comparison, that we can
match over 95 percent of bonds being lent with FISD. This contrast in match rates hints at the
liquidity transformation created by securities lending programs.
       Thus, to better proxy for the degree of liquidity transformation, we compute the fraction
of assets in an insurer’s cash reinvestment portfolio that have a residual maturity of more than
  14
     The new guidelines stem from a review of the securities lending practices at AIG that contributed to its
collapse during the 2008-09 financial crisis. In particular, the guidelines specify that borrowers should post cash
in the amount of at least 102 percent of domestic securities borrowed (and at least 105 percent if the securities
are foreign), that individual loans should not be more than 5 percent of admitted assets, that cash reinvestment
should be “prudent,” and that all cash reinvestment securities (on- and off-balance sheet) are reported in the
NAIC Quarterly and Annual Statutory Filing Schedule DL. In addition, each asset financed with cash collateral
recorded in the NAIC Quarterly and Annual Statutory Filing Schedule D attracts a risk-based capital charge
consistent with its NAIC designation code.
http://www.dfs.ny.gov/insurance/circltr/2010/cl2010_16.htm
http://www.naic.org/capital_markets_archive/110708.htm
  15
      Amendments to SSAP No. 91–R, Accounting for Transfers and Servicing of Financial Assets and
Extinguishments of Liabilities.
  16
     https://www.cusip.com/pdf/CUSIP_Intro_03.14.11.pdf
  17
     We identify cash and cash-like reinvestments by selecting descriptions that contain variations of the words
"cash", "money market", "MMF", "prime money", and "MMKT".


                                                       11
one year minus the fraction of cash collateral that is received by the life insurer for a duration
of more than one year. The one-year threshold is not crucial for the results in the paper.
Rather, we choose it so that our variable represents the investment by life insurers in assets that
MMFs cannot purchase for regulatory reasons.18 It follows that these assets are likely to offer
a higher return than cash instruments. Figure 10 shows that there is considerable variation in
the calculated fraction across life insurers and over time.
    Lastly, we add information on the market for securities lending using Markit Securities
Finance. This dataset covers about 85 percent of the global market and more than 90 percent of
the U.S. market. The daily transaction level data include identifiers for individual lent securities,
such as CUSIP and ISIN, as well as the value, quantity, duration, lending fee, rebate rate, and
collateral of the loan. For each lent security, the total value and quantity of the inventory
available to lend is also reported. We cannot observe counterparties to individual loans, nor
information on lenders’ reinvestment of cash collateral. We construct weighted averages of
the available variables, for each security, across all transactions conducted during the 14 days
around year-end and merge with our other data using the CUSIP identifier. Roughly three-
quarters of all bond holdings that appear in both regulatory filings and FISD can be matched to
Markit. Moreover, consistent with the high coverage of the securities lending market, more than
95 percent of the securities that insurers report as being on loan are observed in Markit. The
high proportion of bond holdings covered by Markit Securities Finance hints at the enormous
potential for securities lending by U.S. life insurers.
    Our final three–way merged dataset of 107 life insurers contains information on over 190,000
bond holdings, of which more than 13,000 are recorded as being on loan. Columns 9 through 12
of Table 1 report the descriptive statistics for this final dataset. The information from the
securities lending market suggests that the weighted average rebate on the bonds is about zero.
On average, life insurers hold about 3 percent of each security’s total lendable amount (with a
standard deviation of 16 percent), and a concentration of holdings index (HHI) value equal to
0.37. Lastly, our measure of each security’s market tightness, defined as the ratio of the total
amount lent to the total amount that is lendable, indicates that, on average, about 14 percent
of the available amount of each security is actually lent. The remaining entries in these columns
show that the other observable characteristics of the bond holdings do not vary significantly
between the baseline and merged datasets.
  18
     Amendments to regulation Rule 2a-7, adopted by the SEC in July 2014, imposes a set of constraints on
MMF investment portfolio, including that every security in the portfolio must have a maturity not exceeding 397
days, and that the dollar-weighted maturity of the entire portfolio cannot exceed 60 days. Thus, our one year
threshold is six times the regulatory limit on the overall maturity of a mutual fund’s cash reinvestment portfolio.
https://www.sec.gov/rules/final/2014/33-9616.pdf



                                                       12
         Simple tabulations show that, conditional on the portfolios they hold, life insurers did not
disproportionately lend bonds issued by particular industries. Of the bonds lent by life insurers,
roughly 62 percent were issued by industrial companies, 23 percent by financial companies,
10 percent by utilities, 5 percent by government and agencies, and less than half a percent by
other institutions. The distribution of insurers’ bond lending across types of issuers is almost
the same as the distribution of their bond holdings.19 Table 2 offers more detail on the types of
bonds used in lending transactions compared with those bonds that are not lent. In general, the
bonds that life insurers tend to lend have a slightly larger par value and have a longer residual
maturity in comparison with the rest of their portfolio. Life insurers also tend to lend bonds
with a lower rebate (higher fee) and in which there is a greater concentration of holding and
market tightness. Of course, these pairwise comparisons of characteristics are only indicative.


3         Identifying the supply channel of securities lending

3.1        Bond-specific endogeneity

To formalize our empirical test of the supply channel for securities lending, we denote by Loan ijt
the binary lending decision that takes a value of 1 if insurer j is loaning bond i at year t, and 0
otherwise. As evidence for the presence of a supply channel of securities lending, our goal is to
establish a correlation between the lending decision and the creation of liquidity transformation
(Transformation jt ). Recall that our proxy for the degree of liquidity transformation is the
fraction of assets in an insurer’s cash reinvestment portfolio that have a residual maturity of
more than one year minus the fraction of cash collateral that is received by the life insurer for
a duration of more than one year.
         The main empirical challenge is to obtain variation in the decision to lend securities
that is independent of demand factors.              Estimates of the correlation between Loan ijt and
Transformation jt will be biased if there is unobservable variation in bond-specific demand and
insurer-specific heterogeneity. In a linear regression setting, one way to control for unobservable
variation in individual bond-specific demand and insurer-specific heterogeneity is to include a
set of fixed effects (α) to absorb heterogeneity across securities, life insurers, and report dates:


                       Loanijt = αi1 + αj2 + αt3 + βTransformationjt + Zit γ + ijt .                          (1)
    19
     About 60 percent of their bond holdings were issued by industrial companies, 23 percent by financial
companies, 12 percent by utilities, 4 percent by government and agencies, and half a percent by other institutions.
As before, each bond holding is counted as a separate observation, because we do not know how much of each
security is actually lent.




                                                       13
That said, the coefficient on Transformation jt when estimating Equation 1 may still be biased
if the unobservable bond-specific demand and insurer-specific heterogeneity are time varying.
       Including bond-specific equilibrium lending market variables as time-varying proxies for
demand will likely produce inconsistent estimates of the partial correlation between the lending
decision and liquidity transformation. Intuitively, either quantities traded or prices could proxy
for demand if the lender is sufficiently small relative to the overall market. However, life insurers
that have the potential to affect these equilibrium market variables and factors that affect
the lending decision may also affect these demand proxies. To see this endogeneity problem
more formally, consider the previous regression specification representing the loan decision in
conjunction with a specification that represents the equilibrium rebate:


               Loanijt = αi1 + αj2 + αt3 + βTransformationjt + δRebateit + Zit γ + ijt                          (2)

              Rebateit = α̃i1 + α̃t3 + Z̃it γ̃ + ˜ijt .


If any common variable in Z̃it and Zit is omitted from the loan decision specification, the
estimate of the β coefficient will be inconsistent (Greene 2012).
       While it is difficult to accurately gauge the severity of this endogeneity problem, the
regression results in Table 3 suggest it is significant. As an example of equation 2, Column 1
shows the results from a regression of our main dependent variable (Loan ijt ) on insurer j’s
market share (Market share ijt ) in bond i controlling for the bond rebate rate as well as insurer,
year, and bond issuer fixed effects. Market share ijt is the year-t holding by insurer j in bond
i as a share of the total amount of the bond that is made available to securities borrowers by
all lenders. The association between Loan ijt and Market share ijt is positive and statistically
significant at less than the 1 percent level.20 Column 2 shows that this association is robust
to controlling for bond characteristics, loan market tightness, and concentration for individual
securities in the life insurance industry.21 Column 3 reports the results from a regression of the
bond’s rebate on Market share ijt controlling for insurer, year, and bond issuer fixed effects. The
coefficient on Market share ijt is positive and statistically significant at less than the 1 percent
level. Column 4 shows that the estimate remains broadly unchanged after controlling for loan
  20
      The coefficient on Market share ijt suggests that, on average, a one standard deviation (12.9 percent) increase
in an insurer’s market share in a particular bond is associated with a 0.7 percent increase in the probability that
the bond is loaned.
   21
      Loan market tightness is defined as the fraction of a bond that is on loan relative to the total amount of that
bond that is made available for loan by all lenders. Bond characteristics include the issuer, residual maturity,
offering yield, offering amount, amount outstanding, and credit rating. Bond concentration is measured by the
Herfindahl–Hirschman Index computed at the bond-year level using only life insurers’ market shares in each
individual bond. The calculation is limited by our ability to observe only life insurers’ holdings in our data–i.e.,
by necessity, it assumes atomistic holdings by other institutions.




                                                        14
market tightness, holdings concentration, and other bond-level characteristics.22
       Taken together, Table 3 shows that both Z̃it and Zit likely contain the market share and
concentration of holdings in that bond. Intuitively, lenders of hard-to-find securities can get a
better deal on their transaction—as in Duffie (1996)—and this may affect their decision to lend
particular securities. Because Table 3 shows that known variables are correlated with a bond’s
rebate, it is likely that other (potentially unobservable) determinants of the lending decision are
also correlated with the bond’s rebate. Appendix A explores this association further, providing
evidence that life insurers not only may affect the market equilibrium of individual bonds, but
may also affect the shadow value of their entire lending program.


3.2      Controlling for unobservable bond-specific demand

To overcome this severe endogeneity problem, we exploit the ability to observe in our data the
same bonds at the same time across different life insurers’ portfolios. We introduce security–time
fixed effects to control for potentially confounding time-varying bond-specific demand factors
in a reduced form that encompasses the cost of cash borrowing, as well as the availability and
distribution of holdings:


                    Loanijt = αi1 + αj2 + αt3 + αi1 × αt3 + βTransformationjt + ijt .                             (3)


Testing whether the partial correlation β is positive is equivalent to testing for the supply channel
of securities lending. If securities lending decisions were solely driven by the demand channel,
Transformation jt would be uncorrelated with Lend ijt .
       Recall that, since we seek only a partial correlation between Loanijt and Transformationjt
that is plausibly orthogonal to the demand channel, our strategy relies only on the assumption
that the interaction term, αi1 × αt3 , fully absorbs the demand channel of the decision to lend. In
particular, we are assuming that the demand channel does not directly affect Transformationjt .
This assumption holds, for example, when lenders are simply endowed with a portfolio of
securities over which they can make lending decisions. In the US life insurance industry, the
investment portfolios are determined first and foremost by asset-liability (actuarial) management
considerations.23 After the investment portfolios have been determined, portfolio managers can
  22
      Reassuringly, our key variable of interest, Transformation jt , is not statistically related to the bond-specific
rebate rate (Rebate it ).
  23
      For example, the traditional business of life insurers typically consists of meeting a known liability with
unknown timing with a lump sum payment. Life insurers also offer annuities-type contracts that may include life
and non-life contingencies. Since the liabilities of life insurers tend to be of longer duration, part of the company’s
asset-liability management process is to select longer duration and inflation protected assets to match those of
the liability.




                                                         15
attempt to enhance returns by lending securities.24 A standard practice is for insurers to use
agent lenders, who are instructed only in the management of the securities lending portfolio and
are not responsible for the insurer’s asset liability management or broad investment strategy.25
       Table 4 summarizes our main evidence for a supply channel of securities lending.
Columns 1 and 2 of Table 4 report the results of estimating equation 3 with only life insurer fixed
effects and then including security–time fixed effects, respectively. Column 3 shows that using
errors two-way clustered by insurer and bond as a replacement for the heteroscedasticity-robust
Huber-White standard errors has no effect on the statistical significance of the results. The
coefficient on Transformation jt suggests that, on average, a one standard deviation (29 percent)
increase in the degree of liquidity transformation created by the life insurer’s reinvestment
strategy is associated with a 3 percent increase in the probability that the bond is loaned.
This association is significant at less than the 1 percent level.


3.3      Controlling for unobservable insurer-specific heterogeneity

While the interacted fixed effects (αi1 × αt3 ) can control for bond-specific, time-varying
unobservable factors, they cannot control for all time-varying insurer heterogeneity that affects
its ability to lend bonds. For example, life insurers may have bundles of bonds that facilitate
lending only in some years. More formally, the concern is that the residual error term ijt
in equation 3 may contain unobservable insurer-specific time-varying demand factors that are
potentially correlated with Transformation jt . Since we cannot observe these demand factors,
we cannot be sure how they might relate to our explanatory variable, or how they might vary
over time, and therefore it is not clear in what direction they potentially bias our estimation of
the correlation between Loan ijt and Transformation jt . However, if we find a source of variation
in the degree of liquidity transformation that is plausibly related only to the supply channel, we
can address this concern by adopting an instrumental variable approach.
       We propose an instrumental variable to deal with possibly unobservable time-varying insurer
heterogeneity. To obtain variation in the degree of liquidity transformation that is plausibly
independent of the insurer’s time-varying heterogeneity, we introduce, as an instrumental
variable, the annual change in the amount of unrealized gains/losses on the life insurer’s bond
portfolio as a fraction of that insurer’s total assets (∆Unrealized gain jt ). Under statutory
accounting rules, an insurance company must report the current market value of the securities
in its portfolios. Life insurers calculate the unrealized gain/loss as the difference between the
  24
     http://www.naic.org/capital_markets_archive/110708.htm
  25
     See, for example, this Nov. 2, 2009 press release by J.P. Morgan announcing that it would provide securities
lending services for Jackson National http://investor.shareholder.com/jpmorganchase/releasedetail.cfm?
ReleaseID=420779.


                                                      16
cost of its portfolio and the current liquidation value. The unrealized gain/loss on a portfolio
is incorporated into ratings agencies’ evaluations of the financial strength of an insurer, because
they can predict actual economic losses (Standard and Poor’s 2009).
       Our identification strategy is predicated on the idea that a securities lender will attempt
to compensate for the change in unrealized losses on its underlying portfolio by increasing the
return on its cash reinvestment portfolio. As described before, portfolio managers are generally
endowed with assets, often purchased years before, and decide which securities to lend. In the
face of portfolio losses beyond their control, securities lenders can attempt to mitigate these losses
by engaging in greater liquidity transformation in their lending programs, further enhancing the
return on their assets. Importantly, unrealized losses on the insurer’s entire portfolio of holdings
are plausibly unrelated to the unobserved demand that is the source of the endogeneity concern.
       Columns 3 and 4 of Table 4 report the first- and second-stage results of a regression of
Loan ijt on Transformation jt , instrumenting Transformation jt with ∆Unrealized gain jt . As with
the reduced form in Column 2 of Table 4, the IV regression includes bond, bond–year, and insurer
fixed effects. Column 3 of Table 4 shows that there is a positive first-stage association between
Transformation jt and ∆Unrealized gain jt . The coefficient on Transformation jt in Column 4 of
Table 4 suggests that, on average, a one standard deviation (28 percent) increase in the fraction
of an insurer’s cash reinvestment portfolio invested in assets with maturities greater than 1 year
is associated with an 11 percentage point increase in the probability that the bond is loaned.
While the estimated IV coefficient is not statistically different from the reduced form estimate,
the point estimate is somewhat larger than the estimated OLS coefficient reported in Table 4.
Unfortunately, we cannot say whether this is due to unobservable shifts in demand or due to
how these demand factors relate to Transformation jt .26


3.4      Robustness tests

Table 5 summarizes further tests of the robustness of the association between the decision to lend
bonds and the degree of liquidity transformation by the life insurer. Each pair of columns in the
Table reports the first and second stages, respectively, of a variant to the baseline instrumental
variable estimation presented in Table 4. In addition to testing the robustness of our result to
alternative standard error specification, we offer some evidence that omitted variables are not
confounding our results, we check that the largest life insurers are not driving the result, and
we report the findings from a placebo test of our instrument.
       Our main analysis specifies standard errors that are two-way clustered by insurer and bond.
  26
     One possible explanation is that our empirical approach places greater weight on life insurers that have more
variation in active reinvestment over time (Angrist, Graddy & Imbens 2000).


                                                       17
A natural concern is that the error terms may be correlated within insurer-years. Columns 1
and 2 repeats the baseline estimation using errors two-way clustered by insurer-year and bond.
Since the alternative clustering assumption only strengthens the statistical result, we continue
to report all errors two-way clustered by insurer and bond.
   In the context of our empirical model that seeks to identify the supply channel of securities
lending while controlling for borrower demand, an important concern is that unobservable
demand factors may be correlated with supply factors that affect both the lending decision and
the degree of liquidity transformation. Plausible confounding candidates include that borrowers
know which insurers to approach when they have a demand for particular securities, for example,
because some insurers have large securities lending programs, or because insurers specialize in
holding particular securities, or because common shocks to demand may differentially affect
insurers depending on the amount of each security that they hold. Columns 3 and 4 report the
instrumental variable results including as a control the size of the insurer’s securities lending
program (SL program size jt ), showing that, while the program size is important for the lending
decision, it is not significantly correlated with the degree of liquidity transformation. Columns 5
and 6 report the results including bond–insurer fixed effects, which absorb the time-invariant
association of insurers with particular bonds. Columns 7 and 8 include the ratio of insurer j’s
holding of bond i to all insurers’ total holdings of bond i interacted with year dummies. While
the overall share of an insurer’s holding is positively correlated with the lending decision, the
share of holding is not correlated with the degree of liquidity transformation. In all cases, we
obtain estimated correlations between the decision to lend bonds and the degree of liquidity
transformation that are broadly similar to our baseline result.
   A further concern relating to the size of individual life insurers, beyond the potential
confounding demand factors, is that the result is being driven solely by the largest insurers.
To address this concern we excluded in columns 9 and 10 the six largest securities lenders in our
sample of life insurers (MetLife, Midland National Life, Aegon, Wellpoint, Lifetime Healthcare
and Primerica). Although the sample drops by about one-third, the association between the
probability that a bond is loaned and the degree of liquidity transformation on a life insurer’s
securities lending program remains the same.
   Finally, our instrumental variable may be picking up persistence in borrower demand, instead
of actual variation in the degree of liquidity transformation. As a placebo test of the validity
of our instrument, in Columns 11 and 12 we replace ∆Unrealized gain jt with its lagged value
(∆Unrealized gain jt−1 ). Neither the first- nor second-stage results are significant, reassuring us
of the relevance of our instrumental variable.



                                                 18
4         Discussion

As mentioned in the introduction, securities lenders that engage in liquidity transformation
create a vulnerability for securities markets. In response to concerns about the liquidity and
credit quality of cash reinvestment portfolios, securities borrowers may run on securities lenders
by calling their cash collateral. Such a run could affect securities markets in two ways. First,
to meet the demand to return cash, securities lenders will likely draw on their short-term
investments, that is, the portion of cash collateral that was reinvested in short-term funding
markets. Following the theory of Brunnermeier & Pedersen (2009), the associated collapse
in funding liquidity would adversely affect the functioning of the securities market. Second,
the same concern about securities lenders’ cash reinvestment portfolios may lead securities
borrowers—e.g. broker–dealers—to return the borrowed securities, thus reducing their market
making activity.        In both cases, the underlying vulnerability to runs stems from liquidity
transformation of securities lending programs.
         Our findings highlight the importance of fully understanding the mechanisms through which
vulnerabilities in certain locations within the financial system may impact the broader system
when, for example, designing financial regulatory policy. To be sure, securities lending may
play an important and efficient role within the financial system. But, as the 2008-09 financial
crisis amply demonstrated, it behooves regulators to be fully aware of any vulnerabilities
associated with financial market activity. Our evidence is based on data from the period after
the implementation of sweeping macro- and microprudential reforms that followed the 2008-09
financial crisis, yet nonetheless demonstrates the vulnerabilities posed by securities lenders to
securities market functioning.
         One possible reason that life insurers continue to engage in liquidity transformation is the
persistent low interest rate environment.            Low returns to institutional investors’ portfolios
deriving from a long period of low interest rates increase their incentive to raise the return
on assets by levering up and investing in higher yielding asset through their securities lending
program.27 This incentive extends to pension funds, where only limited data on securities lending
are available. Although some funds report aggregate level information on their portfolio holdings
and lending programs, crucial data are missing on their individual security loan decisions and
their cash reinvestment strategies.
         In light of these vulnerabilities, measures such as the degree of liquidity transformation in
    27
     Regulatory arbitrage as a source of reach for yield has already been documented in the U.S. life insurance
industry through the deliberate portfolio selection of more risky corporate bonds within a rating class (Becker &
Ivashina 2015), the use of captive reinsurers to lower regulatory capital charges (Koijen & Yogo 2016), and the
issuance of institutional funding agreements (Foley-Fisher et al. 2015).



                                                      19
securities lending programs and the extent to which securities lenders provide tri-party repo
funding are important financial stability metrics.                Careful monitoring of securities lenders’
programs is especially important for the functioning of corporate bond markets, where financial
stability concerns are greatest. Although these measures are available to some extent in the
regulatory filings of U.S. life insurers, they are not widely available for all securities lenders.28
         Finally, the parameter estimates reported in Section 3.3 suggest there would be only a small
reduction in securities lending if something akin to the current regulatory limits on MMF cash
reinvestment were also placed on the securities lending programs of U.S. life insurance companies.
Table 1 shows that life insurers in our post-crisis sample have on average about 17 percent of
their cash collateral portfolio reinvested in assets with a residual maturity of at least one year.
A regulation similar to the one faced by MMFs (Rule 2a-7) would remove these assets entirely
from the reinvestment portfolio.29 Using the coefficient estimate from Table 4 of the effect of
Transformation jt on the probability of lending (0.4), elimination of the active lending channel
would reduce lending by 0.4×0.17, which is about 7 percent. Figure 9 shows that life insurers’
lending against cash collateral amounts to about $55 billion, indicating a potential decline in
the market of 0.07×$55 billion, or less than $4 billion. This crude calculation suggests that
regulation equivalent to Rule 2a-7 on cash collateral reinvestment by life insurers could enhance
financial stability with only minor consequences for bond market functioning.


5         Conclusion

This paper brings together new micro-level data on all aspects of the life insurers’ securities
lending programs and offers the first empirical evidence that certain financial institutions use
securities lending as a source of wholesale funding. That is, some firms raise and maintain
a level of cash collateral by lending bonds and investing the proceeds in longer-term higher-
yielding securities. The evidence of a supply channel of securities lending stands in contrast to
the widespread prevailing perception in the literature that securities lenders passively respond
to borrower demands and reinvest their cash collateral in short-term funding markets. While
our data do not cover the 2008-09 financial crisis, our evidence of the use of securities lending
cash collateral as a source of wholesale funding offer a plausible explanation for the collapse in
short-term funding in 2008-2009.
    28
     Measures of maturity mismatch and repo funding associated with securities lending programs would augment
the data collection proposed by Adrian, Begalle, Copeland & Martin (2012). Koijen & Yogo (2015) note that life
insurers’ statutory filings lack details on the international dimensions of life insurers’ securities lending programs.
  29
     In addition to restricting the weighted average maturity of the reinvestment portfolio to less than 60 days,
Rule 2a-7 specifies that mutual funds can only invest in non-MMF eligible securities with an exception from the
SEC. MMF eligible securities must have a residual maturity of less than 397 days.



                                                         20
References

Adrian, T., Begalle, B., Copeland, A. & Martin, A. (2012), ‘Repo and Securities Lending’,
  National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No. 18549 .

Aggarwal, R., Saffi, P. & Sturgess, J. (2015), ‘The role of institutional investors in voting:
  Evidence from the securities lending market’, The Journal of Finance 70(5), 2309–2346.

Angrist, J., Graddy, K. & Imbens, G. (2000), ‘The interpretation of instrumental variables
  estimators in simultaneous equations models with an application to the demand for fish’,
  Review of Economic Studies 67(3), 499–527.

Asquith, P., Au, A. S., Covert, T. & Pathak, P. A. (2013), ‘The market for borrowing corporate
  bonds’, Journal of Financial Economics 107(1), 155–182.

Baklanova, V., Copeland, A. M. & McCaughrin, R. (2015), ‘Reference guide to US repo and
  securities lending markets’, FRB of New York Working Paper No. 740 .

Becker, B. & Ivashina, V. (2015), ‘Reaching for yield in the bond market’, The Journal of
  Finance 70(5), 1863–1902.

Brunnermeier, M. K. & Pedersen, L. H. (2009), ‘Market liquidity and funding liquidity’, Review
  of Financial Studies 22(6), 2201–2238.

Covitz, D., Liang, N. & Suarez, G. A. (2013), ‘The evolution of a financial crisis: Collapse of
  the asset-backed commercial paper market’, The Journal of Finance 68(3), 815–848.

D’avolio, G. (2002), ‘The market for borrowing stock’, Journal of Financial Economics
  66(2), 271–306.

Diamond, D. W. & Dybvig, P. H. (1983), ‘Bank Runs, Deposit Insurance, and Liquidity’, The
  Journal of Political Economy 91(3), 401–419.

Dive, M., Hodge, R., Jones, C. & Purchase, J. (2011), ‘Developments in the global securities
  lending market’, Bank of England Quarterly Bulletin .

Duffie, D. (1996), ‘Special repo rates’, The Journal of Finance 51(2), 493–526.

Duffie, D., Gârleanu, N. & Pedersen, L. H. (2002), ‘Securities lending, shorting, and pricing’,
  Journal of Financial Economics 66(2), 307–339.

Faulkner, M. (2006), An Introduction to Securities Lending, London: Spitalfields Advisors.

Faulkner, M. (2008), An Introduction to Securities Lending, in M. Faulkner, ed., ‘Handbook of
  Finance, Financial Markets and Instruments’, John Wiley & Sons, Inc.

Foley-Fisher, N., Narajabad, B. & Verani, S. (2015), ‘Self-fulfilling Runs: Evidence from the
  U.S. Life Insurance Industry’, Finance and Economics Discussion Paper Series 2015-032 .

                                              21
Garbade, K. (2006), ‘The evolution of repo contracting conventions in the 1980s’, Economic
  Policy Review 12(1).

Goldstein, I. & Pauzner, A. (2005), ‘Demand–deposit contracts and the probability of bank
  runs’, the Journal of Finance 60(3), 1293–1327.

Gorton, G. & Metrick, A. (2010a), ‘Haircuts’, Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis Review
  (Nov), 507–520.

Gorton, G. & Metrick, A. (2010b), ‘Regulating the shadow banking system’, Brookings Papers
  on Economic Activity pp. 261–312.

Gorton, G. & Metrick, A. (2012), ‘Securitized banking and the run on repo’, Journal of Financial
  Economics 104(3), 425 – 451.

Greene, W. (2012), Econometric Analysis (7th Edition), Pearson Education.

He, Z. & Xiong, W. (2012), ‘Dynamic debt runs’, Review of Financial Studies 25(6), 1799–1843.

Huh, Y. & Infante, S. (2016), ‘Bond Market Liquidity and the Role of Repo’, mimeo .

Kaplan, S. N., Moskowitz, T. J. & Sensoy, B. A. (2013), ‘The effects of stock lending on security
  prices: An experiment’, The Journal of Finance 68(5), 1891–1936.

Keane, F. M. (2013), ‘Securities loans collateralized by cash: Reinvestment risk, run risk, and
  incentive issues’, Current Issues in Economics and Finance 19(3).

Koijen, R. S. & Yogo, M. (2015), ‘Risks of Life Insurers: Recent Trends and Transmission
  Mechanisms’, mimeo .

Koijen, R. S. & Yogo, M. (2016), ‘Shadow insurance’, Econometrica 84(3), 1265–1287.

Kolasinski, A. C., Reed, A. V. & Ringgenberg, M. C. (2013), ‘A multiple lender approach
  to understanding supply and search in the equity lending market’, The Journal of Finance
  68(2), 559–595.

Krishnamurthy, A., Nagel, S. & Orlov, D. (2014), ‘Sizing up repo’, The Journal of Finance
  69(6), 2381–2417.

McDonald, R. & Paulson, A. (2015), ‘AIG in Hindsight’, Journal of Economic Perspectives
  29(2), 81–105.

Musto, D., Nini, G. & Schwarz, K. (2011), ‘Notes on bonds: Liquidity at all costs in the great
  recession’, mimeo .

Nashikkar, A. J. & Pedersen, L. H. (2007), ‘Corporate Bond Specialness’, mimeo .

Peirce, H. (2014), ‘Securities Lending and the Untold Story in the Collapse of AIG’, George
  Mason University Mercatus Center Working Paper No. 14-12 .

                                              22
Saffi, P. & Sigurdsson, K. (2011), ‘Price Efficiency and Short Selling’, The Review of Financial
  Studies pp. 821–852.

Schmidt, L., Timmermann, A. & Wermers, R. (2016), ‘Runs on money market mutual funds’,
  American Economic Review 106(9), 2625–57.

Schroth, E., Suarez, G. A. & Taylor, L. A. (2014), ‘Dynamic debt runs and financial fragility:
  Evidence from the 2007 ABCP crisis’, Journal of Financial Economics 112(2), 164–189.

Standard and Poor’s (2009), ‘Methodology And Assumptions For Gauging The Impact Of
  Unrealized Losses On Insurers’ Financial Strength’.




                                              23
     Table 1: Summary statistics. Columns 1 through 4 report the number of observations, mean, median, and standard deviation of variables                                      6
     used in our analysis from the annual Statutory filings of insurance companies. Securities lending programs are scaled by the size of the general
     account. Liquidity transformation is the fraction of the cash reinvestment portfolio that has a residual maturity of at least one year minus the
     fraction of cash collateral that has a residual maturity of more than one year. The change in unrealized gains/losses are scaled by the size of
     the general account. Columns 5 through 8 show statistics after merging the Statutory filings with Mergent FISD, adding information on bond
                                                                                                                                                                                Tables



     characteristics. We numerically translate and average credit ratings across the three main agencies, setting AAA, or equivalent = 28, AA+ =
     26, AA = 25, AA- = 24 ... CCC- = 9, CC = 7, and C = 4. Columns 9 through 12 provide statistics after subsequently merging with Markit
     Securities Finance data on the securities lending market. Weighted averages are calculated using the value of the loan.

                                                                    NAIC Annual Statements                  Merge with FISD                       Merge with Markit
                                                               (1)        (2)    (3)      (4)       (5)       (6)    (7)        (8)       (9)        (10)   (11)       (12)
                                                              Obs.       Mean    Med.   St. Dv.    Obs.      Mean    Med.     St. Dv.    Obs.       Mean    Med.      St. Dv.

      Life insurance companies                                107          .      .          .     107         .      .          .       107          .       .          .
      General account value ($bn)                             311        22.31   4.96    43.75     311       22.31   4.96      43.75     311        22.31   4.96       43.75
      Securities lending (SL program size jt )                299         .02    .01      .03      299        .02    .01        .03      299         .02     .01        .03




24
      Liquidity transformation (Tranformation jt )            237         .17     0       .28      237        .17     0         .28      237         .17     0          .28
      ∆ unrealized gains/loss (bps) (∆Unrealized gain jt )    311         -.04    0       .45      311        -.04    0         .45      311         -.04    0          .45
      Par value of bond holding ($m)                         549,693     9.36     4      27.58    249,483    10.03    5        22.76    192,272     10.28    5         25.22
      Dummy variable for lent security (Loan ijt )           549,693      .03     0       .16     249,483     .05     0         .23     192,272      .07     0          .25
      Offering amount ($bn)                                     .          .      .          .    249,483     .94     1         4.6     186,852      1.14    1         2.81
      Offering yield (percent)                                  .          .      .          .    204,568     5.79    6        2.38     152,168      5.59    6         2.48
      Residual maturity (yrs)                                   .          .      .          .    248,284    11.19    8        9.59     185,988      11.3    8         9.34
      Amount outstanding ($bn)                                  .          .      .          .    131,144     .93     1        3.02     95,419       1.19    1         3.43
      Credit rating                                             .          .      .          .    239,673    19.87    20       3.04     180,086      19.8    20        3.08
      Weighted avg rebate (Rebate it )                          .          .      .          .       .         .      .          .      192,272       0      0          .07
      % total lendable held (Market share ijt )                 .          .      .          .       .         .      .          .      192,272      .03     0          .16
      HHI of life insurers’ holdings (HHI it )                  .          .      .          .       .         .      .          .      192,272      .37     0         7.85
      Total lent/total lendable (Market tightness it )          .          .      .          .       .         .      .          .      192,272      .14     0          .43
     Table 2: Summary statistics of lent and non-lent bonds. Using the final merged dataset, the two panels compare
     characteristics of bonds lent by insurance companies with those that are not lent.


                                                     Non-lent securities: Loan ijt = 0            Lent securities: Loan ijt = 1
                                                    (1)       (2)      (3)         (4)      (5)        (6)        (7)        (8)
                                                   Obs.     Mean      Median   Std. Dev.   Obs.       Mean     Median     Std. Dev.



      Par value of bond holding ($m)              179,152   10.06      5.01       24.42    13,120     13.45      5.73        34.2
      Offering amount ($m)                        173,952   1,061.5    600       2,663.5   12,900    1,482.6     744.3     3,994.9




25
      Offering yield (percent)                    141,992    5.58      5.67       2.45     10,176      5.55       5.6        2.61
      Residual maturity (yrs)                     173,214   11.25       8         9.32     12,774     12.04        8         9.62
      Amount outstanding ($m)                     89,022    1,129.9    600       3,229.4   6,397     1,575.5     687.5     5,276.4
      Credit rating                               167,607   19.82       20        3.04     12,479     19.61       20         3.55
      Avg weighted rebate (Rebate it )            179,152     .01       0          .08     13,120      -.02        0         .12
      % total lendable held (Market share ijt )   179,152     .09      .04         .14     13,120      .09        .05        .13
      HHI of total lendable held (HHI it )        179,152     .47      .15        7.79     13,120      .48        .12        8.52
      Market tightness (Market tightness it )     179,152     .24      .13         .36     13,120       .3        .21        .39
Table 3: Endogeneity challenge stemming from unobservable bond demand. In
columns 1 and 2, the dependent variable (Loan ijt ) takes a value of 1 if insurer j is lending
bond i at time t and 0 otherwise. Column 1 reports a regression of Loan ijt on the transaction-
weighted average rebate (Weighted Rebate it ), the insurer’s holding as a share of the amount
available to borrow (Market share ijt ), and our measure of liquidity transformation in the
insurer’s securities lending program (Transformation jt ). Column 2 adds controls for the
concentration of life insurers’ holdings (HHI it ), the amount available to borrow relative to
the amount outstanding (Market tightness it ), residual maturity, amount outstanding, rating,
offering yield, and amount issued. Column 3 reports a regression of Weighted Rebate it on
Market share ijt and Transformation jt . Column 4 adds the same set of controls as in Column 2.
All the regressions include fixed effects for insurer, year, and bond issuer; and specify Huber-
White standard errors. *** p<0.01; ** p<0.05; * p<0.1.


                              (1)           (2)               (3)                  (4)
  Dependent variable:       Loan ijt      Loan ijt     Weighted Rebate it   Weighted Rebate it

  Transformation jt        0.204***      0.175***           -0.00224             -0.00189
                            (0.0126)      (0.0204)         (0.00219)            (0.00324)
  Market share ijt         0.0563***     0.0689***        -0.0222***            -0.00722**
                           (0.00609)      (0.0104)         (0.00201)            (0.00308)
  Weighted Rebate it       -0.275***     -0.272***
                            (0.0167)      (0.0283)
  HHI it                                -0.0160***                             -0.00744***
                                         (0.00415)                              (0.00106)
  Market tightness it                    0.0398***                             0.00386***
                                         (0.00434)                              (0.000816)
  Residual maturity it                  0.000801***                            0.000262***
                                        (0.000152)                              (2.82e-05)
  Amount outstanding it                  0.0143***                             0.00569***
                                         (0.00419)                              (0.00122)
  Rating it                             -0.00543**                             0.00482***
                                         (0.00231)                              (0.000701)
  Offering yield i                      -0.00301***                            0.000752***
                                         (0.00106)                              (0.000189)
  Offering amount i                      -0.00816*                              -0.00251**
                                         (0.00450)                              (0.00122)
  Fixed effects:
   Insurer, year, issuer       Y             Y                 Y                    Y
  Observations              154,612        58,122           150,621               56,655
  R-squared                  0.149         0.163             0.532                0.587

                                            26
Table 4: The supply channel of securities lending. The dependent
variable (Loan ijt ) takes a value of 1 if insurer j is lending bond i at time
t and 0 otherwise. The main explanatory variable (Transformation jt ) is the
fraction of cash collateral reinvestment that has a residual maturity of more
than one year minus the fraction of cash collateral that has a residual maturity
of more than one year. Columns 1, 2 and 3 report reduced form correlations
including insurer, bond, year, and bond–year fixed effects. Columns 4 and 5
contain the first and second stages, respectively, of a two-stage least squares
estimation. The instrumental variable (∆Unrealized gain jt ) is the unrealized
gain/loss made by insurer j on its bond portfolio. Columns 1 and 2 report
Huber-White heteroskedasticity consistent standard errors. Columns 3, 4 and 5
report errors two-way clustered by insurer and bond (87 insurer clusters and
31,382 bond clusters). The sources for the data used in the analysis are described
in Section 2 of the main text. *** p<0.01; ** p<0.05; * p<0.1.


                            (1)         (2)        (3)         (4)        (5)
  Dependent variable:    Reduced     Reduced    Reduced      Instrum. variable
  Loan ijt                 form        form       form      Stage 1     Stage 2



  Transformation jt      0.071***    0.121***   0.121***               0.400***
                          (0.004)     (0.007)    (0.046)                (0.148)
  ∆Unrealized gain jt                                       -0.033**
                                                             (0.015)
  Fixed effects:
   Insurer                   Y             Y        Y          Y           Y
   Bond                      N             Y        Y          Y           Y
   Year                      N             Y        Y          Y           Y
   Bond×Year                 N             Y        Y          Y           Y


  Observations            462,433    343,465     343,465    343,465     343,465
  R-squared                0.036      0.287       0.287       0.963      0.281




                                      27
     Table 5: Robustness tests. The dependent and main explanatory variables are the same as in Table 4. Each pair of columns reports the first
     and second stages, respectively, of a variation to the baseline 2SLS IV presented in Table 4. All columns except columns 1 and 2 report errors
     two-way clustered by insurer and bond; in the first two columns the errors are two-way clustered by insurer-year and bond. Columns 3 and 4
     include the size of the insurer’s securities lending program. Columns 5 and 6 include CUSIP–Insurer fixed effects. Columns 7 and 8 include the
     ratio of an insurer’s bond i holding to insurers’ total i holdings interacted with year dummies. Columns 9 and 10 exclude the top six securities
     lenders (MetLife, Midland National Life, Aegon, Wellpoint, Lifetime Healthcare and Primerica). And columns 11 and 12 replace the instrumental
     variable with its lagged value. The sources for the data are described in Section 2 of the main text. *** p<0.01; ** p<0.05; * p<0.1.

       Dependent variable:             (1)         (2)        (3)        (4)         (5)        (6)        (7)        (8)         (9)        (10)       (11)       (12)
       Loan ijt                      Stage 1     Stage 2    Stage 1    Stage 2    Stage 1     Stage 2   Stage 1     Stage 2    Stage 1     Stage 2    Stage 1     Stage 2

       Transformation jt                         0.400***              0.596**                0.394**               0.403***               0.359***               -0.184
                                                 (0.122)               (0.247)                (0.175)               (0.149)                (0.124)                (1.060)
       ∆Unrealized gain jt          -0.0329***              -0.0321*              -0.0313**             -0.0326**              -0.0447**
                                     (0.0112)               (0.0165)              (0.0151)              (0.0153)               (0.0183)




28
       Share of holdings ijt                                                                             -0.0197    0.0277**
                                                                                                        (0.0178)    (0.0123)
       2012 share of holdings ijt                                                                        0.0103     -0.0165
                                                                                                        (0.0230)    (0.0178)
       2013 share of holdings ijt                                                                        0.0444     -0.0143
                                                                                                        (0.0358)    (0.0167)
       ∆SL program size jt                                   -0.232    1.929***
                                                            (0.648)    (0.543)
       ∆Unrealized gain jt−1                                                                                                                          0.00195
                                                                                                                                                      (0.00351)
       Observations                  343,465     343,465    343,465    343,465    293,944     293,944   343,274     343,274    290,114     290,114    343,465     343,465
       R-squared                      0.963       0.281      0.963      0.272       0.962      0.626      0.963      0.281       0.909      0.296      0.962       0.280
       Fixed effects:
        Insurer, year, bond             Y           Y          Y          Y          Y          Y          Y           Y          Y           Y          Y          Y
        bond×Year                       Y           Y          Y          Y          Y          Y          Y           Y          Y           Y          Y          Y
        bond×Insurer                    N           N          N          N          Y          Y          N           N          N           N          N          N
7    Figures




Figure 1: A stylized map of securities lenders’ role in the shadow banking system.
Broker-dealers obtain cash from money market mutual funds and securities lenders through
short-term funding markets. The dealers provide the cash to securities market participants.
The cloud represents the general functioning of securities markets, illustrated with the example
of hedge funds taking long and short positions. Securities market participants borrow both cash
funding and securities. Securities lenders decide whether to lend assets from their portfolios
in exchange for collateral in the form of either cash or other securities, from broker-dealers.
When they receive cash collateral, securities lenders decide whether to invest back into short-
term markets or into long-term markets. In the latter case, they may invest, for example, in
long-term corporate bonds or asset-backed securities.


                                     MMF                       security
                                                               cash

                            Short-term market
                                                         Hedge Fund Long

              Securities           Broker/
                                                         Securities market
               Lender              Dealer
                                                        Hedge Fund Short
                   Long-term market




                                              29
Figure 2: Coverage of the stylized map of securities lending by the existing
literature. Duffie et al. (2002) (Panel (a)) study the effect of interactions between securities
lenders and broker-dealers on pricing in the securities market. Brunnermeier & Pedersen (2009)
and Gorton & Metrick (2012) (Panel (b)) consider the effect of haircuts on cash funding and the
functioning of securities markets. Krishnamurthy et al. (2014) (Panel (c)) describe how securities
lenders and MMFs participate in short-term funding markets. The overall map is described in
the notes to Figure 1.

                           (a) Duffie, Gârleanu & Pedersen (2002)


                                         MMF                  security
                                                              cash

                                  Short-term market
                                                        Hedge Fund Long

                     Securities         Broker/
                                                        Securities market
                      Lender            Dealer
                                                        Hedge Fund Short
                         Long-term market




             (b) Brunnermeier & Pedersen (2009), Gorton & Metrick (2012)


                                         MMF                  security
                                                              cash

                                  Short-term market
                                                        Hedge Fund Long

                     Securities         Broker/
                                                        Securities market
                      Lender            Dealer
                                                        Hedge Fund Short
                         Long-term market




                          (c) Krishnamurthy, Nagel & Orlov (2014)


                                         MMF                  security
                                                              cash

                                  Short-term market
                                                        Hedge Fund Long

                     Securities         Broker/
                                                        Securities market
                      Lender            Dealer
                                                        Hedge Fund Short
                         Long-term market




                                                  30
Figure 3: Securities lenders’ and MMFs’ tri-party repo market funding.                    Panel
(a) shows the total resources potentially available to securities lenders and MMFs for lending.
Panel (b) shows the amount of funding that securities lenders and MMFs provided through the
tri-party repo market. Source: Krishnamurthy, Nagel & Orlov (2014), based on data from Risk
Management Associates.

                                         (a) Total resources available to lend

                     4200

                     3700

                     3200

                     2700
            USD bn




                     2200

                     1700

                     1200

                      700
                             4

                                     1

                                           2

                                                   3

                                                         4

                                                                 1

                                                                       2

                                                                               3

                                                                                     4

                                                                                             1

                                                                                                   2

                                                                                                           3

                                                                                                                 4

                                                                                                                         1
                            Q

                                  Q

                                          Q

                                                Q

                                                        Q

                                                              Q

                                                                      Q

                                                                            Q

                                                                                    Q

                                                                                          Q

                                                                                                  Q

                                                                                                        Q

                                                                                                                Q

                                                                                                                      Q
                        06

                                07

                                      07

                                              07

                                                    07

                                                            08

                                                                  08

                                                                          08

                                                                                08

                                                                                        09

                                                                                              09

                                                                                                      09

                                                                                                            09

                                                                                                                    10
                       20

                             20

                                     20

                                           20

                                                   20

                                                         20

                                                                 20

                                                                       20

                                                                               20

                                                                                     20

                                                                                             20

                                                                                                   20

                                                                                                           20

                                                                                                                 20

                                           MMF total assets                             Total cash collateral




                                                (b) Tri-party repo funding

                      650

                      600

                      550

                      500
            USD bn




                      450

                      400

                      350

                      300

                      250

                      200
                             4

                                     1

                                           2

                                                   3

                                                         4

                                                                 1

                                                                       2

                                                                               3

                                                                                     4

                                                                                             1

                                                                                                   2

                                                                                                           3

                                                                                                                 4

                                                                                                                         1
                            Q

                                  Q

                                          Q

                                                Q

                                                        Q

                                                              Q

                                                                      Q

                                                                            Q

                                                                                    Q

                                                                                          Q

                                                                                                  Q

                                                                                                        Q

                                                                                                                Q

                                                                                                                      Q
                        06

                                07

                                      07

                                              07

                                                    07

                                                            08

                                                                  08

                                                                          08

                                                                                08

                                                                                        09

                                                                                              09

                                                                                                      09

                                                                                                            09

                                                                                                                    10
                       20

                             20

                                     20

                                           20

                                                   20

                                                         20

                                                                 20

                                                                       20

                                                                               20

                                                                                     20

                                                                                             20

                                                                                                   20

                                                                                                           20

                                                                                                                 20




                                           Repo from MMFs                               Total repo from cash collateral




                                                                      31
Figure 4: Extract from Schedule DL. The exhibit below is an extract from the 2012
regulatory filing by the Metropolitan Life Insurance Company, showing a sample of the individual
security-level investments made using cash collateral received from securities lending.




                                              32
Figure 5: Extract from Note 5(e) to the Financial Statements. The exhibit below is an
extract from the 2012 regulatory filing by the Metropolitan Life Insurance Company, showing a
breakdown by maturity of the cash collateral received from securities lending.




                                             33
Figure 6: Securities lending against cash collateral in the United States. These
daily data aggregate the fair value of all securities lent against cash collateral in the United
States, including equity, Treasuries, agency securities, and corporate bonds. The category of
other lenders includes corporations, endowments, foundations, and government bodies. Source:
authors’ calculations based on data from Markit Securities Finance.
                          1.5




                                                                                                 1.5
       Trillions of US$




                                                                                                       Trillions of US$
                          1.2




                                                                                                 1.2
                          .9




                                                                                                 .9
                          .6




                                                                                                 .6
                          .3




                                                                                                 .3
                          0




                                                                                                 0




                                2007   2008   2009   2010   2011    2012   2013   2014   2015

                                         Retirement & Pension Plans               Mutual Funds
                                         Insurance                                Other




                                                               34
Figure 7: Corporate bond lending against cash collateral in the United States. These
daily data aggregate the fair value of all corporate bonds lent against cash collateral in the
United States. The category of other lenders includes corporations, endowments, foundations,
and government bodies. Source: authors’ calculations based on data from Markit Securities
Finance.
                                 .2




                                                                                                                    .2
        Trillions of US$




                                                                                                                          Trillions of US$
                                 .15




                                                                                                                    .15
                                 .1




                                                                                                                    .1
                                 .05




                                                                                                                    .05
                                 0




                                                                                                                    0
                                       2007   2008    2009    2010      2011      2012   2013     2014   2015

                                                  Retirement & Pension Plans                      Mutual Funds
                                                  Insurance                                       Other




Figure 8: Securities lending cash collateral reinvestment. The blue shaded region shows
the quarterly total amount of cash collateral received by securities lenders. The black and yellow
lines, respectively, show the mean and median weighted average maturity of the reinvestment
portfolio. Source: authors’ calculations based on data from Risk Management Associates, from
a survey of about 14 agent lenders.
                                                                                                                                               250
                       1.8




                                                                                                                                             Days
        Trillions of US$




                                              Total Cash Reinvestment
                                              (left axis)
              1.5




                                                                                                                                             200
                           1.2




                                                   Mean WAM
                                                                                                                                             150




                                                   (right axis)
                           .9




                                                                                                                                             100
                           .6




                                                                  Median WAM
                                                                                                                                             50




                                                                   (right axis)
                           .3
                           0




                                                                                                                                             0




                           2000Q1        2002Q1      2004Q1       2006Q1    2008Q1       2010Q1     2012Q1       2014Q1




                                                                            35
Figure 9: Securities lending by U.S. life insurers. The line shows the quarterly amount of
cash collateral received by U.S. life insurers through their securities lending programs. Source:
authors’ calculations based on data from NAIC Quarterly Statutory Filings.


                         55
                         50
                USD bn
                         45
                         40




                         2011q1                                         2011q3   2012q1        2012q3   2013q1      2013q3




Figure 10: Variation in life insurers’ liquidity transformation. We proxy for liquidity
transformation using the fraction of each life insurer’s cash reinvestment portfolio that has a
residual maturity of more than one year minus the fraction of the cash collateral the insurer
received that has a duration of more than one year. Each box-and-whisker plot shows the
distribution of the 100 available U.S. life insurance companies, with the solid area covering
the 25-th to 75-th percentiles and the line within the solid area showing the median of the
distribution. The whiskers reflect the remaining observations, up to 1.5 times the interquartile
range, and the dots are outliers. There is a considerable variation in the degree of liquidity
transformation across life insurers, in some instances reinvesting almost all their cash collateral
into securities with a residual maturity of more than one year. Source: authors’ calculations
based on NAIC Annual Statutory Filings.
                                                         1
                              Fraction of cash reinvestment portfolio
                                  with residual maturity > 1 year
                                  .2        .4       .6  0     .8




                                                                          2011                 2012          2013




                                                                                          36
A     Appendix

A.1    Determinants of an insurer’s overall cost of cash collateral

In this appendix, we analyze the determinants of life insurers’ overall cost of funding and
show that life insurers’ can potentially affect their overall cost of obtaining cash collateral
by lending bonds. Section 3.1 provided some evidence that using market equilibrium
variables as a proxy for demand might result in inconsistent coefficient estimates because
these variables could be correlated with potentially unobserved determinants of the
lending decision. However, it could be that life insurers have the ability to affect the
market equilibrium only for a small fraction of the bonds in their portfolio. For example,
although an insurer might be able to influence the rebate rate on some of the bonds it
holds, its ability to influence the rebate rate on other bonds could be more limited.
    As a first step to assessing the ability of life insurers to affect their cost of raising
cash collateral by lending their bonds, we need to aggregate and summarize the content
of each insurer’s bond portfolio. Aggregating to the level of the entire portfolio will
result in few observations and low testing power. Instead, we rank each life insurer’s
bond portfolio according to the rebate of each bond and divide the portfolios according
to rebate quantiles, which yields equal-sized groups of bonds that differ by the average
rebate of the bonds in each group. Then, for each bond group within a quantile, we
compute weighted-average analogues of the variables used to estimate Equation 2 in the
main text. Throughout the analysis, each bond observation is weighted by its fair value
divided by the total fair value of all bonds in the quantile. The unit of observation for
this analysis is thus a rebate quantile q for bonds held by a life insurer j at the end of
year t. With variables defined as before, the regression specification is:


    Loanqjt = αq1 + αj2 + αt3 + βTransformationjt + δMarket shareqjt + Zqjt γ + qjt .     (4)


    Columns 1 and 4 of Table 6 summarize the regression results for 32 and 64
rebate groups, respectively.     These specifications control for weighted average bond
characteristics in each group, as well as insurer and year fixed effects. The coefficient
estimates suggest there is a positive and robust association between the fraction of
bonds on loan and the weighted average market share in those bonds, conditional on
the weighted average rebate and concentration. Columns 2 and 3 perform the same test
on the subsets of 32 rebate groups above and below the median rebate, respectively. The
coefficient on Market share qjt is broadly similar, with marginally weaker significance for
rebate groups below the median rebate. Columns 5 and 6 repeat this test on the subsets of
64 rebate groups above and below the median rebate, respectively. Here, the coefficient on
Market share qjt is only significant for the sample of groups above the median, suggesting
that the positive association between the loan and market share is likely to be more
pronounced in the portion of the portfolio that has a higher average rebate. However,
since a higher rebate tends to be associated with a higher probability of loaning a bond,
increasing the number of quantiles mechanically reduces the fraction of loaned bonds in
the lower group. As a result, any correlation between average loan and market share is
likely to be weaker.
   Taken together, these results suggest that the association between the fraction of
bonds loaned and the weighted average market share is significant in a large portion of
life insurers’ bond portfolios–at least half of the bonds–and especially so in the portion
of the portfolio above the median rebate rate. We interpret this result as suggesting that
life insurers are likely to be able to influence their overall cost of funding via securities
lending. This finding invalidates the potential strategy of aggregating market equilibrium
variables over life insurers’ portfolios to use as a exogenous proxy for the cost of raising
cash collateral via securities lending.




                                             38
Table 6: Relationship between fraction lent and weighted average market share
in the portfolio. We divide life insurers’ portfolios into groups according to rebate quantile.
The dependent variable Loan qjt is the fraction of bonds in group q lent by insurer j at time t.
The main explanatory variable (Market share qjt ) is the fair-value-weighted average holding
of bonds in group q by insurer j relative to the total amount of the bonds made available
to securities borrowers by all lenders. Columns 1 and 4 divide the porfolios into 32 and 64
groups, respectively, and include controls for various bond and market characteristics as well
as insurer and year fixed effects. Columns 2 and 3 and Columns 5 and 6 divide the groups
into those that are above and below the median, respectively. The sources for the data used
in the analysis are described in Section 2. Huber–White robust standard errors are reported
in parentheses. *** p<0.01; ** p<0.05; * p<0.1.

                         (1)          (2)               (3)          (4)          (5)          (6)
  Dep. variable:         All        32 parts          32 parts       All        64 parts     64 parts
  Loan qjt              perc.      > 50 perc.        ≤ 50 perc.     perc.      > 50 perc.   ≤ 50 perc.

  Transformation jt   0.0535**      0.0692*           0.0382      0.0527**     0.0663**      0.0388
                       (0.0254)     (0.0363)          (0.0323)     (0.0214)     (0.0314)     (0.0269)
  Market share qjt    0.0836**      0.116*            0.0896      0.0585**      0.112**      0.0497
                       (0.0411)     (0.0604)          (0.0580)     (0.0286)     (0.0450)     (0.0380)
  Rebate qt           -0.322***    -0.496***         -0.336***    -0.326***    -0.646***    -0.352***
                       (0.0360)     (0.185)           (0.0406)     (0.0307)     (0.130)      (0.0336)
  HHI qt              -0.0622***   -0.0676***        -0.0537***   -0.0453***   -0.0375**    -0.0430***
                       (0.0144)     (0.0232)          (0.0188)    (0.00968)     (0.0169)     (0.0114)
  Amt outst qt         0.00127     0.00270*           -0.00677     0.00253     0.00367**     -0.00245
                      (0.00167)    (0.00164)         (0.00516)    (0.00156)    (0.00161)    (0.00416)
  Rating qt            0.0678       0.0574            0.0722       0.0362       0.0156       0.0349
                       (0.0816)     (0.123)           (0.111)      (0.0613)     (0.0875)     (0.0849)
  Offering amt qt     0.006***     0.004***          0.016***     0.006***     0.005***     0.014***
                       (0.001)      (0.001)           (0.004)      (0.001)      (0.001)      (0.003)
  Offering yield qt    -0.261*      -0.00232          -0.449**    -0.335***      -0.184     -0.432***
                       (0.149)      (0.229)           (0.195)      (0.0982)     (0.176)      (0.119)
  Residual mat qt       -0.198       0.103             -0.427      -0.0295      0.372*       -0.367**
                       (0.191)      (0.266)           (0.270)      (0.132)      (0.199)      (0.171)
  Fixed effects:
   Insurer, year          Y            Y                 Y            Y            Y            Y


  Observations          8,280        4,109             4,171       14,094        6,934        7,160
  R-squared             0.318        0.352             0.338        0.269        0.296        0.287




                                                39
