                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                             FINANCIAL INNOVATIONS IN
                          INTERNATIONAL FINANCIAL MARKETS




                                 Richard M. Levich




                              Working Paper No. 2277




                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     June 1987




Prepared for the conference on "The Changing Role of the United States and the
World Economy" organized by the National Bureau of Economic Research, March
5—8, 1987. I am grateful to participants in the conference on "Capital Market
Developments and Financial Stability" organized by the Ditchley Foundation and
the Graduate School of Business of the University of Chicago and held at Ditchley
Park, England for coninents on a related paper, and to Michael Dooley and Martin
Feldstein for helpful coments on an earlier draft of this paper. Julapa
Rungkasiri provided efficient research assistance. Support from the Mellon
Foundation is gratefully acknowledged. The research reported here is part of
the NBER's research programs in International Studies and Economic Fluctuations.
Any opinions expressed are those of the authors and not those of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
                                        NBER Working Paper #2277
                                        June 1987




   Financial   Innovations in International Financial Markets




                            ABSTRACT
     The central theme of this paper is that financial
innovation has become a major force effecting the United
States and other developed economies. The common features of

the process include product innovation, securitization,
liberalization of domestic financial market practices,

globalization of markets, and increased competition among
financial institutions. The paper offers a review of the
product and process changes that have occurred in
international financial markets, an analysis of the factors
leading to these changes, and an examination of the
implications for both financial market participants and
macroeconomic policy makers.



                                       Richard M. Levich
                                       Graduate School of
                                          Business Administration
                                       New York University
                                       100 Trinity Place
                                       New York, NY 10006
                                       212—285—8924
          FINANCIAL INNOVATIONS IN INTERNATIONAL FINANCIAL MARKETS

 I. Introduction
       A wave of financial innovation begun in the early 196 Os is now

 sweeping throughout the     United   States and other developed economies,

 producing major changes in the       financial   landscape. While the details

 of the process differ country by country, there are several common
 features including (i) Innovation ——      the   development of new financial

products and markets, (ii) Securitization —- a greater tendency toward
market—determined interest rates and marketable financial instruments
rather than bank loans (iii) Liberalization —-        of   domestic financial

market practices either through explicit deregulation or a breaking
down of conventions, (iv) Globalization -- as national barriers erode
and financial markets grow more integrated and (v) Increased
competition among financial institutions with many of the traditional
distinctions between commercial banks, investment banks and securities
firms becoming blurred in the process.1
      A major feature of this process has been the introduction of a

wide variety of new products that trade in new market settings,
thereby reducing the reliance upon banks for traditional credit
instruments and credit evaluations. Many of these new products (e.g.
currency and interest rate swaps, currency and interest rate options)
are of obvious assistance for risk management purposes ——          to   enable

the   individual   or firm to tailor the various dimensions of risk (e.g.

currency, maturity, credit, interest rate, default, and so forth) more
precisely than before. Other products (e.g. Note Issuance Facilities
and Eurocurrency Commercial Paper) appear to directly reduce the cost
of funding a desired financial position. The basic principles


                                      1
underlying today's new financial products are being extended and re—
applied to yield still more products.2
    It is not an exaggeration to claim that these developments are
having a profound impact on all aspects of the financial services
industry. For individual employees, innovation has affected the job

description  of the typical bank "lending" officer at major money—
center banks, the human capital needed to perform well and even the
definition of normal business hours. At the level of the financial
services firm, innovation has affected the geographic location of

activities, the financial product line, the risks that are being
traded or carried, the identity of the major players and the intensity
of competition. Non—financial firms are faced with a vast array of
financial choices —— new financial markets and products, each with

their own risk and return properties ——   that   require increasingly
sophisticated analysis. Naturally, all of these factors feed into

macroeconomic performance. Policymakers and regulatory agencies are
keen to understand the potential benefits (or costs) of these new
products, new procedures and new players and to incorporate these new
factors into macroeconomic policies and regulatory decisions.
    The general theme of this paper is to provide a broad
assessment of these recent developments surrounding financial
innovation including their impact on financial stability and national
policymaking. This theme suggests several basic questions:
         i) What financial product and process changes have occurred
            over the last 20—25 years in U.S. and interhational
            financial markets?
        ii) What factors account for these changes?

       iii) What are the implications of these changes for individuals
            and the aggregate macro—economy from both a positive and
            policy perspective?

                               2
The purpose of this paper is to lay a foundation that will address
these questions.

      We begin in Section II by outlining the dimensions of the
international financial marketplace. Data presented on the volume of
activity in the Eurocurrency and Eurobond markets offer a good
reflection of the general phenomenon in financial markets ——

mushrooming volume, transforming markets once thought to be. ancillary
or for a specialized few into major centers of activity. Data on the
extent   of securitization and on trading in new risk management and
funding vehicles (e.g. futures, options, and swaps) are also
presented. Again the picture is one of securities or markets that    were
virtually   non—existent a decade ago, but now have grown to substantial
importance.
      In Section   III, we present an overview of the types of new
financial products that are available and their functions. Several
financial market innovations are described to illustrate their

workings and recent evolution and to demonstrate how the products add
value for market participants. These examples also illustrate how new

financial products might be engineered from existing products. This is
important to demonstrate that the new instruments need not add new
price risk to the system, but by adding liquidity and new
intermediaries, they may contribute additional credit or liquidity
risks.

      The causes of financial market innovation are explored in Section
IV. We first consider the demand for financial market services in a
"Perfect Capital Market" setting, and then argue that financial market
innovations may be viewed as attempts to overcome real world market

                                   3
imperfections. A distinction is made between imperfections that are
ran—made (e.g. taxes, regulatory barriers, and information disclosure)
versus those that segment domestic markets and are naturally present
(e.g. transaction costs, heterogeneous expectations, and heterogeneous
consumption/investment/risk preferences). Innovations that overcome
the former may directly thwart national economic policies, including
useful pndential policies, while innovations that overcome the
latter tend to increase economic (allocational) efficiency.

     The implications of financial market innovation are discussed on
two levels. First, in Section V1 we examine the consequences of
innovation on financial market prices, international price

relationships and financing opportunities. Then in Section VI, we
analyze the consequences of innovation for macro-prudential policy and
broader macroeconomic policy.

     On the markets side, innovations act to reduce the impact of
market imperfections, whether man—made or natural. As a result, we

should expect to observe greater capital mobility, greater similirity
in the cost of funds in alternative capital markets, greater
integration of international capital markets and greater
substitutability among assets as a result of improved hedging
opportunities.
     On the policy side, there are two major concerns. One is whether
recent innovations have the capacity to impose negative externalities
on society. As stated above, innovations act to reduce the impact of

markets imperfections, including those macro—prudential policies
designed to improve welfare by safeguarding the financial system. One
specific concern is that the innovative process has led to a kind of

"regulatory arbitrage" with financial institutions attempting to lower

                                4
 their costs and expand their activities by seeking out the least

 regulated environment. These shifts in activity have raised fears that
 innovation may increase the risk burden on financial institutions and
 adversely affect the safety and soundness of the financial system.
 These fears are compounded by the prospect of nations competing for

financial services activity by further reductions in the regulatory
burden.

      Securitization poses another specific example of potential welfare
losses associated with financial innovation. Securitization and the
increased use of financial intermediaries place the burden of credit

evaluation on a larger pool of participants; the increase in market
linkages may itself be seen as a source of added risk. To some extent,
this may be because the new instruments lack transparency (i.e. they

are not well understood) and they have not stood the test of two or
three business cycles. Increased reliance on the market system (i.e.
adequate information disclosure of off—balance sheet items, marking—
to-market of financial positions, and so forth) may provide an
adequate remedy for some of these fears.

      The second major policy concern is the impact of financial
innovation on macroeconomic policies in general and monetary policy in
particular. At one level, these concerns are operational. The
availability of variable rate financing and hedging techniques makes
the   timing and incidence of monetary policy more uncertain. And
related to this, the increasing ease of substitutability between
assets and new techniques of obtaining credit may reduce the meaning
and usefulness of traditional monetary and credit aggregates as
indicators of monetary policy.


                                 5
    A more fundamental concern is that greater international
                                                               mobility
 of capital and tighter integration of financial markets has altered
the channels through which monetary policy works, ultimately
threatening the welfare gains associated with international trade.
Innovation appears to have reduced (to various degrees in different
countries) the ability of authorities to adopt direct quantitative
controls over credit or interest rate ceilings. With the effectiveness
of the credit and controls channels reduced, it appears that monetary

policy now has a greater impact on exchange rates, directly effecting
the real competitiveness of domestic manufacturing. A country

following a comparatively tight domestic monetary policy is therefore
likely to lose international competitiveness, possibly setting off

demands for trade protection. To the extent that countries seek to

reduce the variability of exchange rate movements, the new financial
environment limits the scope for effective and independent domestic
monetary policies.

    Viewed in isolation, the recent wave of financial innovations
holds the potential to produce an international allocation of capital
that is more consistent with economic risk/return considerations and

allocational efficiency. An erosion of the gains from trade in
manufactures and commodities would represent significant potential

welfare losses. The major policy question, then, is whether free trade
is antithetical to capital liberalization. Dealing with this added

dimension of policy coordination will be the challenge for policy
makers in the years to come.




                               6
 II. Dimensions of International Financial Markets

      The international financial marketplace has undergone a tremendous
 expansion in terms of the variety of products, the volume of
                                                                   trading,
 and the capitalized value of available securities. The data presented
 in this section suggest that a variety of financial markets, which

were in their infancy or non—existent two decades ago, have grown to
become major centers of activity and influence. The growth of these

markets demonstrates their significance and potential implications for
investors, corporate managers, and national policymakers. We begin by
reviewing the growth of three traditional international financial
markets ——     the   foreign exchange market, the Eurocurrency market and
the Eurobond market. Then data on the rise of securitization are

presented, followed by measures of activity in the markets for
futures,. options and swaps.
      A.   Foreign Exchange and the Euro—markets
    The foreign exchange market, the inter—bank market for the
exchange of bank deposits denominated in different currencies,      has
existed in one form or another for centuries and could hardly be
called a modern innovation. In recent times, the foreign exchange

market has been organized as a dispersed, broker—dealer market with
high—speed telecommunications systems linking together the various
participants in this worldwide, 24-hour market. The volume and
efficiency of the market is such that the spread between bid and offer
prices in the spot market is often one—tenth of one percent, or less,
for the major currencies.
    The data in Table 1 suggest the tremendous volume of activity
handled in the foreign exchange market and its recent growth. Surveys
carried out within the last year indicate that London is the most
                                     7
 active foreign exchange trading location with transactions totalling
 $90 billion per day. New York is the second most active center trading
 $50 billion per day, and Tokyo is close behind with $48 billion per
day. The total for these three centers is $188 billion per day. Adding
in the contributions from other centers (e.g. Frankfurt, Zurich, Hong

Kong and Singapore), worldwide foreign exchange could possibly exceed
$250 billion per day, or more than $60 trillion per year.3 With an
order flow of this size, many times in excess of world GNP and world
trade, it becomes easy to understand the depth and speed• of the
foreign exchange market.


                           Insert Table 1 here


    For comparison, daily trading volume in New York in 1977 was
estimated to be only $5 billion, one—tenth of the estimated volume in
1986. The growth of trading in New York over this period was probably
greater than that in London, and therefore overstates the worldwide

growth in foreign exchange trading. Nevertheless, foreign exchange
trading clearly grew at a faster pace than other nominal magnitudes

over this ten—year period. The figures for New York also indicate
changes in the composition of trading, away from. the Canadian dollar
and certain European currencies and toward the Japanese yen and
Deutsche mark.

    The Eurocurrency market has a much shorter tenure than the foreign
exchange market. The Eurocurrency market, a market for deposits
denominated in a currency different from the indigenous currency of

the financial center, began to take shape in the early 1960s. The
Russians played an important role in the early development of the


                                 8
 market. They were reluctant in those Cold War days to hold their
                                                                          u.s.
 dollars (needed for international
                                   trade transactions) in U.S.
 accounts. Instead, they deposited their dollars in Paris with an
 affiliate of a state—owned, Russian bank.4 The
                                                 true stimulus to the
 Eurocurrency market, however, was the differential regulation between
 offshore and onshore banking operations. Particular u.s. banking

 regulations (i.e. interest rate ceilings on time deposits, mandatory
 reserve requirements held at zero interest,
                                                  and mandatory deposit
 insurance) became increasingly costly throughout the l960s, resulting
 in a greater share of banking activity being pushed offshore. The

 innovation in the Eurocurrency market is an example of "unbundling" --
 in    this case, taking the exchange risk of one currency (the U.S.

dollar, for example) and combining it with the regulatory climate and
political risk of another financial center.


                            Insert Table 2 here

       The data in Table 2 indicate the growth of the Eurocurrency

deposit market, from roughly zero in 1960 to over $3.0 trillion on a
gross basis and over $1.5 trillion on a net basis (netting out all
interbank deposits) in 1986. The market, once exclusively dollar—
denominated, has now stabilized to become roughly 75—80% dollar based,
with the currencies of other industrialized countries making up the
remainder of the market. The Eurocurrency market was once small enough

to be ignored; today it rivals U.S. financial markets in terms of
size   and importance. The short—term lending rate in the Eurocurrency
market (LIBOR, or London Interbank Offer Rate) as it has been
determined largely by free—market forces, has become the reference
rate for many onshore    loan agreements, floating rate notes and other

                                  9
 contracts as well as Euromarket loans.

     Over the years, because of its rapid growth and apparent lack of

 regulation, the Euromarket has been feared by some as a source of
 macroeconomic instability or as a wobbly pyramid prone to crisis.

 Nearly all Eurocurrency banks are major players in their parent's
 domestic market and could be subject to regulation via this angle. In
 1974, central bankers from the Group of Ten issued a general statement

 of responsibility (the Basle Concordant) indicating that countries
would extend lender—of—last—resort facilities for the solvency of
their Eurobanks.5 The motivation here may have been to encourage
national banking authorities to pay closer attention to their members

Eurobanking operations and to reduce the public's fear of an

international banking panic. In 1980, the BIS announced another

agreement requiring banks to produce consolidated statements of their
worldwide activities, including offshore assets and liabilities. This
consolidation would enable bank examiners to monitor the quality of
offshore lending on the same basis as domestic offices.

    Eurocurrency markets and Eurobanking operations have become a
commonplace feature in international finance. In 1981, the United
States acknowledged the importance of these new offshore markets and
authorized the establishment of International Banking Facilities

within existing u.s. banking institutions. IBF5 are not subject to the
regulations that apply to domestic banking activity (reserve

requirements and deposit insurance, in particular) and are free to
engage in many offshore banking arrangements with non—residents.6
    The Eurobond market developed at approximately the same time as

the market for Eurocurrency deposits. Again, differential regulation


                               10
  between offshore and onshore securities
                                            activities played a key role
  in stimulating the development of the market. In 1963, the United
 States adopted the so—called Interest Equalization Tax, effectively
                                                                     an
 excise tax on American purchases of
                                     new or outstanding foreign stocks
 and bonds. To no one's surprise, the lET
                                          effectively closed foreigners
 access to the U.S. bond market; to the surprise of some, the market
 simply migrated offshore to London and Luxembourg. Other costly u.s.
 regulations    (further international capital controls and a 30%
 withholding tax on interest payments to foreigners) nurtured the
 environment for the Eurobond market.

       The remarkable growth record of the Eurobond market is presented
 in Table 3. From the first Eurobond floated in 1957, the volume of
                                                                    new
 offerings reached $6.3 billion in 1972. Two years later, the United
 States abolished the lET and its capital control program. Eurobond

 underwritings plunged to $2.1 billion in 1974 and the financial press
 was anticipating the death of the market. But Eurobonds and U.S. bonds
 continued to differ in several important ways ——   investors   in
Eurobonds paid no withholding tax and held bearer securities, and
issuers of Eurobonds avoided costly and time consuming SEC disclosure

requirements. These differences proved to be substantial and the
Eurobond market expanded sixty-fold in the next eleven years.

                            Insert Table 3 here

       New offerings in the U.S. dollar segment of the market now exceed
the volume of new corporate bond issues in the United States.

Treasurers of major corporations are now geared to conduct bond issues
either of fshore or onshore depending on market conditions. Even the
U.S.   Treasury has joined the parade to the Eurobond market with
                                 11
 several so—called "Targeted Treasury Issues," in an attempt to lower
 the Treasury's funding costs.

     B. Measures of Securitization
     The increase in securitization, the tendency for an economy to
have a greater proportion of its assets in the form of marketable
 securities and bearing market—determined prices, can be seen from a
variety of indicators. The par value of outstanding publicly traded
bonds, as shown in Table 4, totaled roughly $7.8 trillion at the end
of 1986, reflecting a 25% increase over 1985. Salomon Brothers (1986)
estimates that about half of this increase is the result of the
dollar's depreciation. But the nearly five—fold increase in the market
value of bonds relative to 1975 makes the long—term trend toward

securitization apparent. The ratio of the market value of bonds to GDP
has risen from 50% in 1980 to 71% in 1985, showing another measure of

increasing securitization.


                         Insert Table 4 here

    Another measure of securitization and its implications is
presented in Table 5. Net borrowings by U.S. non—financial

corporations have traditionally relied heavily on bank loans,
traditionally a non-traded asset. In 1981 and 1982, bank loans and

securitized financing were roughly equal in magnitude; by 1986, more
than three—quarters of net new financings were in a securitized form.
One explanation for this phenomenon is that for a variety of reasons
(but primarily a deterioration in the quality of bank loan portfolios)
the credit ratings of banks have fallen relative to their best


                              12
 customers. Corporations have observed that funding costs could be
 reduced by going directly to the market. As the most credit—worthy
 customers are removed from a bank's portfolio, this trend is
 reinforced. The trend toward securitization is also reinforced to the
 extent that investors value liquidity and are willing to purchase

 marketable securities at lower yields than a bank might charge on
 loans.


                         Insert Table 5 here

    The trend toward securitizatjon in preference to traditional bank
lending is also visible in the international markets. As shown in

Figure 1, syndicated bank loans captured nearly 60% of this market in
1982. In the years since, there has been a steady reduction in

syndicated bank lending, along with a steady increase in international
bond issues and Note Issuance Facilities. The preference for borrowing

through marketable securities seems to be firmly established.


                         Insert Figure 1 here

    The market value of equity capital and its annual turnover provide
further evidence on the securitization of international financial

markets. The market value of equity shares reached $5.3 trillion at
the end of 1986, up by 25% from 1985 and nearly five—fold from 1975,
as reported in Table 6. The U.S. share of the world   market has fallen
substantially since 1975, with Japan's share rising by a nearly
offsetting amount. The extent of securitization, as measured by the
ratio of market value of shares to GDP shows considerable dispersion,
from 13% in France to 77% in Switzerland. The recent trend toward

privitization, the sale of state—owned assets to private investors,

                               13
 is helping to increase these measures of securitization. Plans to

 denationalize industries are in progress around the world. More than
 $19 billion was raised through equity sales of state—owned enterprises
 in 1986, roughly 25% of total new equity issues world—wide.,7


                             Insert Table 6 here

    The final innovative trend that enhances securitization is the

transformation of formerly illiquid pools of assets into tradeable
securities, using pass—through certificates or collateralized
obligations as a structure. GNMA (Government National Mortgage

Association) pass—through certificates representing claims on a pool
of GNMA—insured mortgages are perhaps the most well—known example, but

other federal and private financial institutions began to issue
similar certificates in the l970s. New issues of asset—backed

securities reached $269.0 billion in 1986, as reported in Table       7.

Residential mortgages remain the dominate component of this market.
Securities representing commercial mortgages are now available, as
well as securities backed by automobile and credit card receivables at
the shorter end of the maturity spectrum.


                             Insert Table 7 here


    C. New Risk Management and Funding Vehicles

    The extent of financial innovation is perhaps best reflected in a
set of new risk management and funding vehicles ——     futures,   options,
and swaps ——   that   came into existence in the early 1970s and have
experienced extraordinary growth, and importance beyond what the
numerical entries nay suggest. The aggregate open interest in
                                  14
 financial futures and options, a measure of the speculative Capital at
 risk in the market, rose to $680 billion at the end of September 1986,
 an increase of nearly 75% over the year—end 1985 figure. Open

 interest, as reported in Table 8, is split roughly two—to—one between
 futures contracts and option contracts. Futures and options written
 against contracts on interest bearing securities account for by far

the greatest open interest, 94% in the case of futures nd 67% in the
case of options.                       -




                           Insert   Table 8 here

      Daily trading volume for futures and options contracts, reported
in Table 10, mirrors the above findings. The dominate share of trading
volume is in interest rate contracts, more so in the case of futures
than in options. And among contracts on interest bearing securities,
the 3—month Eurodollar futures contract is by far the most popular,
accowiting for about 75% of all activity. The 3-month Eurodollar
futures contract currently trades roughly 50,000 —
                                                   75,000 contracts
per day, representing an aggregate face value of $50—75 billion. The
Eurodollar contract is useful for hedging LIBOR interest rate
exposure, which as we noted earlier, has become the major reference
rate for pricing variable rate bank lending and floating rate note
(nil) securities.


                           Insert Table 9 here

      Another indicator of the potential impact of financial futures
markets on trading behavior is illustrated in Figure 2, which graphs

the daily volume of treasury bond futures trading and the volume of


                                15
 trading in the underlying cash market. The data clearly show that the
 volume of trading in futures contracts now swamps the volume in the
 cash market by a factor of four. A similar ratio maintains between
 trading volume in stock index futures and underlying equity shares.
                           Insert Figure 2 here
    This   development has raised fears that the heightened activity in
financial futures markets may be contributing to volatility in

underlying cash markets. In particular "program trading," transactions
executed to remove arbitrage profits between futures and cash prices,
and "witching—hour effects," related to the convergence of futures and
cash prices on the expiration day of the contracts, have been cited as
examples of the disruptive power of the new financial futures and
options markets. Careful studies need to be carried out to examine
these claims. Financial futures and options markets offer investors a

combination of leverage and liquidity at exceedingly low transaction
costs. When news occurs and expectations change, investors may feel

that it is preferable to trade first in the futures market, leaving
the cash market to adjust somewhat later in response.8 Other evidence
suggests that the addition of the futures markets has raised the pool
of speculative capital in the market and that bid—offer spreads are
lower in the cash market when the futures market is open.9

    Interest rate and currency swaps, the final products in this
overview, may be thought of as either risk management or funding

vehicles. As part of a financing plan, a swap enables the borrower to
unbundle the terms (currency, fixed—rate, variable—rate, and
so forth) under which he initially raises funds from the financing

terms he is ultimately seeking. For example, it is not obvious that a

                                16
 corporation seeking variable—rate dollar financing ought to borrow in
 the variable—rate dollar market)-0 If the corporation has a
 comparative advantage or a window of opportunity in the fixed—rate DX
 bond market, it might obtain a lower cost of funds by borrowing in
 this   segment and swapping the proceeds into fixed—rate dollar funds.
 The new financing alternative might be presented to the corporation as

 a package, allowing a comparison between it and a straightforward
 issue of variable—rate dollar bonds. The alternatives could be
                                        -




 identical in all respects, except that the package containing the swap
 carries the risk of default on the swap.

     Swaps can also be used as risk management tools to alter the

currency of denomination and interest rate structure of assets and
liabilities. If the above corporation decides that variable—rate

dollar financing is no longer in its best interest, and it prefers
fixed—rate DX financing or fixed rate Canadian dollar financing, the
corporation can sell its swap or purchase other swaps to alter its

position. This would very likely be cheaper than redeeming its
previous bond issue and incurring additional floatation costs?1

                           Insert Table 10 here

    The limited information available on swap activity is reported in
Table 10. Information is incomplete because swaps are carried as off-
balance   sheet entries and no formal reporting is now required.
The volume of interest rate swaps outstanding is estimated to be $300
billion. Currency swaps associated with primary bond issues (so—called
swap—driven bond issues) were estimated at $38 billion in 1986, or
about 20% of new Eurobond issues. Other asset or liability based

currency swaps were estimated to be as large as $76 in 1986.

                                 17
III.Characteristjcs of Recent Financial Innovations
    A. Functions of International Financial Markets and Alternative
       Taxonom i es

    Innovation takes place when it becomes profitable to better
fulfill any of the major functions of the international financial
sector. These functions include Ci)    providing   appropriate instruments
for making payments, (ii) facilitating monetary exchange between
currencies, (iii) facilitating the flow of savings towards investments
across national boundaries, and (iv) providing mechanisms for
allocating, diversifying and compensating for risk. A partial list of
new financial products, classified by their intermediation function is
presented in Table 11. It may be useful to explore these innovation
further using several alternative taxonoinies.


                          Insert Table 11 here


    Dufey and Giddy (1981) have argued that most financial innovations
are aimed at either circumventing government regulations or are taken
in response to perceived relative price or relative risk changes.
Government policies ——   in   particular, regulations that are not applied
uniformly across all parties or countries, and tax rates that are not
uniform across different sources and uses of income —— provide a
fertile ground for the innovative process. Financial theory suggests
that securities can be used to transform income from higher taxed into
lower taxed forms, but the transformation is costly)2 Individuals
monitor the implied burden of differential taxation and regulation,
and shift their activities when the cost-benefit ratio is favorable.
Dufey and Giddy argue that in the l960s, the regulatory burden of the

U.S. financial system became too costly, providing the incentive for


                                  18
 the development of the Eurocurrency and Eurobond markets. In the
 1970s, macroeconomic volatility increased the cost of carrying
 exposure, leading to a dramatic increase in the demand for risk
 management vehicles.
      Anotherwell—known taxonomy is the distinction between "product"
 and "process" innovations. The modern tradition of financial product
 innovation might begin with the Negotiable Time Certificates of
 Deposit introduced in the l960s and include exchange traded foreign

 currency futures contracts and equity option contracts introduced in
 1972 and 1973 respectively. The innovative process has exploded since

then. Exchange traded financial futures and options contracts, which
were virtually non—existent in 1970, now cover dozens of securities
and synthetic instruments (e.g. the S & P index) and are traded in at
least nine countries on four continents. Active
                                                      over—the—counter or
inter—bank markets exist for other products. Some products are generic
and   fairly standardized (e.g.   a spot DM   contract or a fixed rate
currency   swap). Other products have taken on proprietary names (e.g.
CARS, Certificates on Automobile Receivables, from Salomon Brothers)
to afford some differentiated characteristics to products that can be
imitated fairly easily. This kind of product differentiation may
enable   the innovating firm to appropriate a larger share of the
returns from innovation, but it also may require the firm to invest
heavily in a secondary market for its differentiated securities.

      Modern examples of process innovations include the SWIFT (Society
for Worldwide Interbanic Financial Transfers) network for foreign

exchange payments, the grey market (or pre-market) in Eurobond
trading, the Euro—clear and Cedel systems for clearing Eurobonds, the

MESA network for clearing ECU transactions, and the establishment of

                                  19
 formal linkages and dual listings between U.S. and foreign stock and

 commodity exchanges. The European Monetary System (EMS) might be
viewed as a process innovation intended to stabilize European exchange
rates and, in turn, facilitate the use of the ECU.

       The Black-Scholes option pricing model and other related models
might also be thought     of   as process innovations. This line of
theoretical research (i) provided a scientific underpinning for option
pricing, (ii) indicated how option writers might manage their risks by
'delta hedging,' (iii) helped to popularize a technique for pricing

synthetic contracts (i.e. the replicating portfolio approach), and
(iv)    alerted analysts to the   fact    that Eany common financial contracts
could be     usefully viewed as embodying option—like features (that might
be priced "scientifically") ——      all   of which encouraged the development
of new products and market—making activity. To take one example, Dufey
and    Giddy (1981) noted that despite articles describing the benefits
of foreign exchange options, the market appeared to be failing because
the contracts were too specialized and too difficult to hedge. Since
banks    will generally be selling call options to corporate customers,
there    is no obvious place for banks to buy options to mechanically
square their books. The 'delta hedging' procedure offered a reasonable
alternative for risk management, which has enabled the inter—bank
foreign exchange option market to develop)3
        theory of finance suggests another approach for understanding
       The

the recent wave of financial innovations. Investors and borrowers are
typically characterized as risk-averse welfare maximizers. In this
setting, we expect that individuals will desire the flexibility to
hedge against any contingent risk. If the available set of financial

                                    20
 assets do not "span" all possible contingencies, then individuals
 might be better of f having access to additional securities whose

 payoffs depend on these contingencies. The introduction of interest
 rate futures, heating oil and crude oil futures, and mOrtgage—bac
 securities might be seen as products that help complete the menu of

 financial products thus allowing individuals to reach their desired
 exposure to particular risks. Some of these innovations represent an

"unbundling" of existing financial products.14 Other new products,
such as pass—through certificates, are simply tradeable claims

collateralized by previously existing financial positions, a process
of financial dis intermediation that closes the gap between ultimate
borrowers and lenders.

    Conditional on their exposure to risk, individuals also seek to
maximize their expected investment returns, taking into account taxes
and the transaction costs of managing their positions. Many new
financial products (e.g. money market mutual funds, stock index

options and convertible bonds) represent a composition or "bundling"
of more elementary financial instruments. Small investors have
historically been attracted to mutual funds as a way to attain
diversification and   scale economies, which lower the cost of financial
services, including professional management expertise. But now large,
institutional investors have become attracted to composite products
because they dramatically lower the cost of establishing and

maintaining a leveraged position, or acting upon fast—breaking news.15
    A single innovation could draw on many of the characteristics just
enumerated. The evolution of zero—coupon securities provides a good
case in point.16   Zero—coupon securities had existed for some time
(e.g. Treasury bills and U.S. Savings Bonds). In the 1970s, aggressive

                                21
reading of the Federal tax code (regulatory channel) encouraged

dealers and investors to separate (unbundle) the principal and coupon
components of Treasury securities as distinct products. By selling the
corpus at a deep discount, the dealer might recognize a capital loss;
by purchasing this instrument, an investor might delay paying taxes
until the security had matured or was sold. Taxable corporations also

had an incentive to issue long—term zero—coupon bonds because of the

Treasury's method of computing implicit interest expense. Even after
the Treasury plugged these loopholes, demand for zero—coupon
instruments persisted from foreign investors, who faced more favorable
capital gains tax treatment on zeros, and from domestic investors, who
used zeros to match future liabilities, eliminate reinvestment risk

(hedging motives) and avoid bothering with coupons (convenience
motive). The securities industry responded to this demand by stripping

the coupons from existing securities, creating synthetic zeros
(unbundling), some with exotic (and proprietary) names. In January
1985   the U.S. Treasury responded with its own innovation by announcing
that all future issues with a maturity of greater than ten years would
be   transferable in their component pieces. The new product, STRIPS

(Separate Trading of Registered Interest and Principal Securities),
has been readily accepted with more than $90 billion of securities

outstanding.




                                22
     B. Engineering Innovative Financial Instruments
            1. Swaps and Comparative Advantage
     To set the stage for our later analysis, it will be useful to
 point put the reciprocal nature of demand for swaps and other hedging
 instruments. This is clear from the typical diagrams used to

 illustrate the flows of funds in a swap transaction.         For example,


    (i)       tiard   for 5-year sterlirg <> Suly of 5-year dollars,
    (ii)     Dnrd for fixel rate furx2s c=> Sugply of floatirg rate ftuds,
    (iii)   Daisni for IIfl basis tunis c Suply of NY Prime basis tunis.

The above situations are analogous to commodity trade in the sense
that one country's demand for wheat is equivalent to its supply
of cloth under the presumption that trade balances. A stylized result
from classical trade theory is that countries are endowed with

differential supplies of (immobile) capital and labor which gives rise
to production cost differentials. To take advantage of the situation,
countries tend to specialize in the production of their comparative

advantage goods which they then trade, capturing the gains from trade.
    The principles underlying a financial swap bear a strong
relationship to those of commodity trade and comparative advantage
theory.17 The feasibility of a swap (such as in cases i, ii and iii
above) between parties A and B hinges on the possibility that they
face different relative costs on the two pieces of the swap. The
following example uses an interest rate swap but the same principle
would apply to a currency swap. Suppose that company A desires to
borrow fixed—rate funds while company ! desires floating-rate funds.
Suppose further that the companies can borrow on the following tents:

                                   23
                              COMPANY A                COMPANY B           DIFFERENTIAL
            Fixed   rate:       11 %                    9 1/2 %               1 1/2 %
            Floating rate: LIBOR +          1/2   %    LIBOR + 1/4%             1/4 !
                                                                              1 1/4 %
            Comparative         Floating-rate          Fixed—rate
              advantage           funds                  funds
            Objective:         Fixed—rate              Floating—rate
                                 funds                    funds




    Company B borrows at a lower rate in either case (it has an

absolute advantage in both markets), but its relative or comparative
advantage lies in the fixed—rate market. (A's comparative advantage is

in the floating—rate market.) It can be easily shown that if A borrows
at floating—rate terms and B borrows at fixed—rate terms and the
companies then swap, there will be a 1 1/4% interest rate savings to
divide between the two firms and any financial intermediaries who
assist them.

    What is the source of B's comparative advantage? A number of

reasons might explain it:


       1. Certain lerders (e.g. insurax rpanies) are
          tstraThat to lerd to companies like B. Therefore, there
          is an ess sup1y of furds thasirg fine like B.
       2. Fixed-rate lerders are segmented hau floatirg-nte
          lerders, aid they have formel different expectations
            regardinj A ax
       3. The assets aid     receivables of! are      predominantly   in
            fixed-rate terms. arisequently, lerders perceive lower
            risk associated with fixed-rate lerding to



                                       24
    It could be argued that if explanations #1 or #2 are behind B's

    comparative advantage, then for "small transactions," a may
                                                                exploit
    its comparative advantage without losing it, much the same as
    commodity trade. In the aggregate, however, large—scale
                                                               transacting
    would remove the   segmentation   barrier which is at the heart of this
 swap transaction. On the other hand, if explanation 413 is valid, the

 market may be signalling its preference to provide fixed—rate terms.
 If company B borrows at fixed—rate terms and swaps, the market may
perceive that B is in a riskier position and turn its relative

(fixed/floating) borrowing terms against it. In this case, ! has
traded away or reduced its comparative borrowing advantage.

Explanation 413 clearly shows the need for disclosure of information on
swap transactions so that the market can offer relative financing
terms that are consistent with a fin's financial risks.
       Several related issues can be raised by examining a currency swap.
In the l960s and lS7Os, back—to—back loans and parallel loans (with
cash flows essentially the same as a currency swap) were conducted to
avoid the United Kingdom's investment sterling market or Latin

American capital controls. Many observers point to the World Bank/IBM
swap in August 1981 as the beginning of the modern currency swap

market. The funding and risk management strategy of the World Bank at
that time called for borrowing in DM, Swiss franc and other low
interest rate currencies. In these smaller markets, repeated bond
issues can cause lending tens to deteriorate as domestic buyers reach
a   saturation point (sometimes the result of prudential regulation) in
their portfolios.
      In the   August 1981 deal, IBM borrowed DM and Swiss francs at
preferential rates (because of IBM's credit rating and scarcity

                                      25
 value), the World Bank borrowed dollars (without concern over market
 saturation), and the   two   parties then swapped the proceeds and the
 future obligations to make payments.18 Each company exploited its

 comparative borrowing advantage and shared the gains from trade to
produce a lower all—in cost of funds. The World Bank has continued to

use currency swaps aggressively as an integral part of its funding
 strategy.

             2. Building Synthetic SecurIties
     Two further examples will illustrate other aspects of the
 innovation process. Suppose that a market for short—term, unsecured
borrowing similar to the U.S. Commercial Paper market, but denominated
in DM, does not exist. Absent this market, companies can instead issue

U.S. dollar commercial paper, sell the proceeds for DM, and cover by
selling DM forward in exchange for dollars. The T—account in Figure 3a
demonstrates how these two transactions approximate a DM commercial

paper instrument. The cost of funding in DM terms would be
approximately the actual U.S. dollar commercial paper rate (for a
particular maturity and credit risk) plus the forward premium on
foreign exchange 19

                     Insert Figure 3 and Figure 4 here

    The gain from "constructing" DM commercial paper in this fashion

might be measured by comparing the synthetic rate with the best
alternative DM rate, perhaps a short—term Euro—DM loan. Synthetic ON
commercial paper appears to offer a perfect substitute for "actual" DM
commercial paper. Figure 4 shows that the savings from issuing
constructed DM commercial paper were in the 30—90 basis point range


                                  26
 during the early 19805. An actual market for DX Commercial paper will
 develop only if savings on transaction costs
                                              (including liquidity
 factors) warrant. If, in fact, a DM commercial paper market develops,
 actual prices must be set close to synthetic values so as to preclude

 arbitrage. Similarities between actual and synthetic commercial paper
 prices will not indicate that the gains from financial trade have
 vanished --   only
                  that the gains are now embodied directly in the
 interest rates themselves. Using
                                  synthetic commercial paper helps to
 secure these gains from financial trade permanently.

     A related example is the Eurobond market for DX, Swiss francs and
 other currencies which at times in the recent past has been subject to
 queuing restrictions by national officials. Queuing imposes costs on a
 fin by   restricting their ability to access the bond market at times
whenterms may be particularly favorable. The T—accounts in Figure 3b
demonstrate how the proceeds from a Eurodollar bond can be swapped for
DX (or other currencies) to create a long-ten DM obligation that
approximates a Euro—DI.! bond. The cost of the constructed Euro—DM bond
would be approximately the U.S. dollar Eurobond rate (for a particular
maturity and risk class)   plus the applicable forward premium on
foreign exchange2°
    The gain from constructing a Euro-Dpi bond in this fashion could be
measured by comparing the constructed rate with the rate that might be
obtained once the fin was allowed access to the actual Euro-DM bond
market at some time in the future. If the synthetic Euro-DM bond

approach offers a liquid market, then queuing restrictions lose their
force and countries would be inclined to drop these restrictions.
Arbitrage would then insure that the current actual Euro—Dpi bond rate

approximates the synthetic Euro—DM bond rate. By forcing these two

                                27
 rates toward equality, borrowers would enjoy permanent relief from
 queuing costs and other market access barriers.
           3.   Contract Innovation

    A final area of financial innovation worth noting is in the design
of futures contracts. Black (1986) has modeled the success and failure
of futures contracts based on their commodity characteristics, their

contract characteristics, and the interaction of these two variables.
Commodity characteristics include the durability, storability, and
homogeneity of the commodity as well as characteristics of the spot
market. Contract characteristics refer to contract size, delivery

dates, delivery locations, acceptable commodity grades for delivery,
and so forth. Delivery conditions play a large role in contract
specifications because even though most short contract positions are

liquidated by offset, some physical delivery of the underlying
commodity does take place.

    The most important change in contract specification to effect
futures trading has been to allow for cash settlement of futures
contracts upon their expiration, rather than to require costly
delivery of physicals. This innovation might have been adopted years
ago except that a contract which could be settled only in cash was
considered a wager, and specifically outlawed in those states with
major futures markets. In 1974, futures trading came under federal

control (via the Commodity Futures Trading Commission), where no such
rules regarding gambling were in effect. By 1981, all the   regulatory
channels had been cleared, and financial futures contracts specifying
cash settlement began trading. The vast appeal of these new contracts
is evident from the data on trading volume and open interest reviewed
earlier.


                                 28
       C. Design and Evolution of Innovative Financial Instruments

       cooper (1986) has recently argued that in most new financial
instruments, the underlying financial claims embodied in the contract
are largely the same as in the past; what has changed is the packaging
of the instruments as well as the speed, scope and other aspects of

the trading arrangements. As we have illustrated in the      above
examples, new financial contracts are often a transformation of
existing financial instruments. This technique, the "replicating
portfolio" approach, is central to the design of new financial
instruments      and to their pricing. Examination of many new instruments
reveals that     they reflect a bundling or unbundling of existing
securities that allows them to replicate something which already
exists at lower transaction costs.

    Our examples demonstrate that new instruments may also replicate
                            but which the market may welcome (e.g.
securities which do not exist,
DM commercial paper or DM bonds without queuing restrictions). In
principle, a security could be indexed to     any contingent outcome in
order to replicate any desired financial contract, although in
practice it might have to issued offshore to avoid prohibitive
regulations •2l

    Once the general principle behind a financial innovation is well-
known (either its transaction costs savings or its risk reducing
properties), the possibility exists to move the product from a custom-
design, small volume market to a standardized product with high volume
and lower transaction costs. This has been the evolution in several
cases, as illustrated in Table 12 for the currency and interest rate

swap   market.


                                   29
                          Insert Table 12 here


    It is important to point out that product innovation is not a one-
way street. There are numerous examples of failure among exchange
traded futures contracts which illustrates that these products, like

consumer goods, must meet the market test.22 Product innovation is
costly and because financial firms value their reputations and intend
to be infinite—lived, we expect that new products will offer value-
added, at least in the short run. But because financial innovations

are likely to incorporate increasing complexity, it is essential for
non—financial firms to gain the necessary expertise in order to
evaluate the new products. And   for   these non—financial firms (as for
regulatory authorities) it is essential that the evaluation be
conducted on the basis of economic, risk—return criteria rather than
accounting conventions.




                                 30
 IV. Causes of Financial Market Innovation
       A. Financial Services Under Perfect Capital Markets
       To better understand the role of swaps and other new financial
 instruments in the real world, it will be useful to outline the nature
 offinancial services that would exist in a "perfect" capital market.
 We will then argue that departures from "perfect" capital markets
 provide the necessary conditions for the development of new financial
 products such as swaps, options and so forth.
       For our purposes, the essential elements of a perfect capital
 market are:

                    (i) no transaction costs
                   (ii) no taxes
                  (iii) no regulatory barriers or restraints
                         (but enforceable contracts)
                   (iv) a large number of small participants.

Uncertainty regarding future economic outcomes is present, but
investors view the future similarly.23 The absence of transaction
costs insures that all investors share the same information base and
that they will agree on a fair valuation of securities. No
transaction    costs also implies that borrowers and lenders can act
directly in the market without depending on agents or intermediaries.
Finally, no transaction costs implies that securities are completely
divisible and may be issued in arbitrarily small units.
      To complete the story, we assume that investors are risk—averse and
attempting to maximize their expected utility from lifetime

consumption. Two questions are of interest: What financial instruments
will be offered in the market and how will individuals and firms
utilize these instruments?
      In this stylized setting, investors will desire the flexibility to
hedge against any contingent risk. It can be shown that if there are !2


                                 31
 independent sources of risk, then n financial instruments related to
 these sources of risk are sufficient for agents to form any portfolio

 of their choosing.24 There could be more than n financial instruments
 in the market, but these would represent combinations of the original
 n and would therefore be redundant. The financial market could be

 labelled "complete" in the sense that investors could hedge against
 any contingent risk and form a portfolio with any risk—return pattern.
     In a perfect and complete market, any borrower or issuer could

 enter the market and directly sell financial instruments (i.e. a loan,

option or some other well—defined contract) for fair value. A lender

or investor, on the other hand, could expect to find financial
instruments capable of hedging any risk and enabling him to achieve
any desired risk—return pattern. In a perfect and complete market, the
menu of financial instruments allows everyone complete flexibility to
meet their desired financial objectives.

    B. Financial Services with Imperfect Capital Markets

    The assumptions of perfect capital markets are substantially at
odds with the real world. A variety of barriers exist which

potentially might lead to departures from the various arbitrage and
parity conditions applicable for international capital markets under
perfect capital market assumptions. The most basic such parity
condition is a variant of the "Law of One Price" applied to the
financial market ——   similar   securities (or combinations of securities)
representing similar exposures to risk ought to sell for the same
price regardless of the point of sale. This law predicts, for example,

that an IBM seven-year straight U.S. dollar bond floated in London
ought to command the same price as a similar security floated in New


                                  32
 York or Tokyo. A financial market law of one price is, in essence, a
 statement about the integration of international capital markets and
 that     capital flows (i.e. arbitrage) will take place to equalize
 currency—adjusted and risk—adjusted rates of return everywhere.
     Real world market imperfections can be divided into two groups:
 policy—related     (or man-made) and behavioral (natural) barriers.
 Policy—related imperfections include taxes, rules regarding
information disclosure or accounting conventions, and other regulatory
barriers. The latter includes factors such as reserve requirements in

banking,interest rate ceilings, market access flies (e.g. queuing),
ownership restrictions on shares, legality of a monetary unit and
other financial instruments (e.g. ECU—denominated debts and bearer
securities) and rules regarding market entry and permissible
activities (e.g. the Glass—Steagall Act). These national regulations
are promulgated with diverse objectives in mind —— domestic monetary
control, the safety and soundness of the banking system, prudential
management of pension and mutual funds, and desired competitive
conditions     in the financial services industry. The critical point here
is   that the incidence of the policy—related barriers is not similar
across the     world's   capital markets, or even within a single capital
market. Consequently these barriers lead to segmentation effects both
between national capital market and within individual markets.
     Other capital market barriers are more a function of the natural
economic environment or human behavioral patterns. Transaction costs
——   of   bringing a new security to market, of discovering and verifying
information regarding an issuer, of enforcing contracts —— are an
obvious natural barrier to complete integration of international

capital markets. Perhaps as a result of different information sets,

                                    33
 investors in different national markets may hold different expectations,
resulting in different assessments of securities prices. And investors
in different countries might have different age and income profiles,

leading to different consumption/investment/risk preferences and,
therefore, to different prices of similar securities across countries.
    All of these barriers, whether policy—related or natural,

encourage the segmentation of international capital markets and the
possibility that returns on similar securities (or portfolios of
securities) may not equalize across countries. As a result, profit
opportunities present themselves for borrowers and lenders who can
circumvent barriers at low cost.25 In addition, barriers also reduce
the number and variety of securities below the level observed in

perfect and complete markets. Profit opportunities also exist for
agents who can create new instruments at low cost for hedging
otherwise exposed risks.26

    The above line of reasoning suggests that as long as investors are
risk—averse utility maximizers, they will continue to search out
arbitrage profit opportunities and to demand more complete financial
markets. Demand for financial vehicles is always present, but with the

existence of costly barriers, demand will be scaled by price and only
a subset of of financial vehicles will exist. What Ian Cooper (1986)

called the proximate causes of financial innovation (i.e. the search
for lower transaction costs, funding costs, new risk transferring
vehicles, and so forth) are always lurking. Why then has there been a
surge in financial innovation over the last several years?

   The simple answer to this question is that a set of factors (what
Cooper labels as the ultimate causes of innovation) have led to a


                              34
 substantial outward shift in both the demand and supply schedules for

 new financial products and processes. On the demand side, rising
nominal and real funding costs in the late 197 Os and early 198 Os

 increased the willingness of borrowers to search out lower cost

funding. Volatility of asset prices, exchange rates and inflation
rates increased the price that investors and borrowers would pay for
protection against these risks. Changing world-wide wealth patterns
and the globalization of industrial markets increased the demand for

global asset portfolios or funding strategies. Demand was also
probably heightened by user education and advances such as option
pricing models.

      On the supply side, advances in telecommunications and computer
technology, increasing competition among financial intermediaries, and
regulatory changes all combined to reduce the transaction costs of
creating   new financial instruments and offering market—making
services. The impact of regulatory change cuts in two ways: permission
to begin trading in financial futures and options clearly helped these
instruments to develop, but persistence of other regulatory barriers
most likely encouraged the search for close substitutes or parallel

markets in order to overcome these barriers. Regulatory encouragement
to increase the capital adequacy of banks and their return on assets
is   also credited as promoting the securitization of existing bank
assets and the shift into new financial products that lead to off—
balance sheet exposures.

     Distinguishing between demand and supply factors may be somewhat
artificial because of the reciprocal nature of financial products ——
one side of the transaction cannot proceed without the other. The

globalization of industrial activity suggests that it should be more

                                35
common to find borrowers from around the world raising funds in
diverse markets, units of account and under diverse terms. The market

for financial intermediary services has been responsive to link

together the demand and supply for particular products. As we noted
earlier, the supply of intermediary services itself has followed an

evolutionary process from specialty deals, to brokering, and finally
market—making in standardized products. The financial services

industry appears particularly well-suited to overcome some of the
unique barriers (such as default risk, see footnote 25) that are
present in international capital markets.




                              36
V. Implications of Innovation on Financial Market Prices
    and Market Behavior

    The process of financial market innovation that we have been
describing leads directly to a number of imponant economic
consequences. In this section, we outline the major effects on
financial asset prices, international price relationships and market
behavior that we would expect to observe as a result of the innovative

process.   Then we review the empirical evidence on internationalization
and integration of markets.

    Given the steady financial innovation over the last two decades
and the substantial amount of activity in these new markets, we should
be able to observe and measure the following major economic
differences:


    1) Financial Market Behavior

           a. lower transactions costs, greater liquidity, greater
              substitutability between domestic financial products
           b. wider array of financial products giving improved
              opportunities for transfer of risks and risk optimization
              within investor portfolios

           c. securitization of assets as investors value liquidity,
              financial disintermediation

           d. improved opportunities for funding riskier credits
           e. greater competition for financial services business
   2) International Financial Market Relationships

           a. greater international capital mobility, existing barriers
              removed or more easily circumvented

           b. greater integration of international capital markets, less
              segmentation
           c. greater similarity between cost of funds (currency and
              risk adjusted) in alternative capital market locations




                                 37
       3) Macroeconomic Effects

           a. fewer opportunities for pursuing national monetary and
              policies using quantitative controls on credit
              availability or interest rate levels

           b. greater impact of monetary policy on exchange rates and
              exchange rate variability


Central to the above hypotheses are the reduction in transaction costs

because of supply side factors (e.g. technological and regulatory
change) and demand factors (e.g. scale economies and the development

of secondary markets for new products). Arbitrage plays a key role in
the process. As both borrowers and lenders monitor the risk/return

properties of their portfolios in the face of a new menu of
securities, expected rates of return on securities (adjusted for
currency and risk factors) should be brought into closer conformity ——
i.e.   market integration. Arbitrage, as well as the creation of new
synthetic securities, acts to reduce the burden of market

imperfections. The greater similarity of capital market products
across countries and their greater integration implies reduced scope
for pursuing monetary and credit policies based on quantitative
restrictions on credit or interest rate ceilings. It also suggests

that as monetary policies differ across countries, exchange rate
volatility will increase in response to capital mobility and portfolio
rebalancing by borrowers and investors.
       As these financial market transactions are completely voluntary,

all those who directly participate should be better of f as a result.
These transactions enable borrowers and lenders to hold more desirable
portfolios, given that they face lower transaction costs and an

expanded opportunity set of financial instruments. For these players,


                                  38
 capital allocations will be more in line with economic risk/return
 criteria. This should be a force tending to increase economic

 (allocational) efficiency, but other factors (discussed in the next
 section) may act in the opposite direction.

        In his analysis of recent innovation in Japanese financial

 markets, Feldman (1986) suggests three approaches for measuring the
 degree of internationalization of a financial market. The legal
 approach focuses on the extent to which the law provides the right and
 opportunity for cross-border capital flows. The quantity approach
 posits that a larger volume of cross—border transactions is associated
 with greater internationalization. The price approach is the most
 exacting. It posits that the internationalization of a market is
 complete when its prices are brought into an international
equilibrium. Feldman takes the interest rate parity relationship as
his standard; when deviations from covered interest parity are small,
markets are assumed to be integrated under the price approach.
      What evidence is available to observe whether these financial

market and macroeconomic effects listed earlier
                                                   are actually taking
place? The most obvious piece of evidence comes from the scope of new
financial instruments and their trading activity outlined in Section
II. The legal framework has been built to permit trading in a wide
variety of financial futures and options contracts. The legal
framework for swap transactions is still developing, but substantial
progress has been made to standardize various provisions and wordings
of   swap arrangements.27 And many   transactions have moved offshore,
where the legal impediments to contract design and market entry are
less severe. Using quantity as a criteria, it is clear that these new
securities   play an important role in investors' portfolios.

                                39
    On the international side, we also observe legal or institutional

agreements that promote international linkages. Some companies have
listed their securities on several exchanges around the world for

years. Recent evidence suggests that this practice may be especially
beneficial for firms from smaller countries who list their shares in
the United States. Alexander and Eun (1985) conclude that the effect

of dual—listing on share price is greater for firms from smaller
countries   (e.g. Australia) which were more segmented from the U.S.
capital market. As these dual—listed firms experience a price effect,
arbitrage pricing suggests that other non-dual—listed fins may show a
sympathetic price response, further integrating the international
markets.

    A variation on this theme is the recent agreement linking the

Chicago Mercantile Exchange (CME) and the Singapore International
Monetary Exchange (SIMEX). A futures   position established on one
exchange   may be offset and closed with transactions on the other
exchange. This linkage expands the number of hours of trading per day
which can be useful when prices are extremely volatile.28

    Two kinds of evidence concern the integration of prices in
international markets. The first addresses the "Law   of One Price" for
international securities. The dramatic growth of the Eurobond market

suggests that many companies (as Well as the United States Treasury)
are "arbitraging" the funding differences between the offshore and

onshore markets. The funding advantage of Eurobonds, which was
estimated by Kidwel]. (et. al.) to be in the 70-140 basis point range
in the 1977-81 period, declined to the 30-60 basis point range by

1983. A later study by Mahajan and Fraser (1986) examined 92 matched


                                40
pairs of offerings in the Eurobond and U.S. bond markets between 1975
and 1983. Mahajan and Fraser concluded that once they had standardized
for issuer, maturity, rating and coupon, they could not reject the

hypothesis that yield were similar in the two markets. This suggests
an integration and harmonization of terms between the two markets.29
    The second source of evidence on the integration of international
prices comes from tests of the interest rate parity condition and the

existence of covered interest arbitrage profits. It has long been
understood that covered interest arbitrage integrates the short—term
Eurocurrency markets.3° But it   is   now becoming more apparent that
longer—term  Eurocurrency markets, commercial paper markets (recall
Figure 4), and onshore short—term financial markets are also being
integrated by actual or potential arbitrage.31 Feldman's     (1986)
analysis of the Japanese market is a good example. Figure 5 shows the
incentives for covered interest arbitrage between Eurodollar and
Gensakis instruments over the 197 7-1984 period.32 Feldman argues that
the deviation became insignificant in mid- to late-198l, suggesting a
rise in internationalization. In addition, market professionals
suggest that gains from interest rate and currency swaps are now

relatively small, indicating that these markets provide for a high
degree of integration in international capital markets.33

                        Insert Figure 5 here




                              41
 VI. Policy Implications of Financial Market Innovation
     The picture being painted sounds rosy, and this should not be very
 surprising. If we begin with a market paradigm and open up more
 possibilities of choice and freedom fat borrowers and lenders, in a

potential sense, the world economy stands to be better off. Financial
 innovations act to overcome many of the natural barriers that divide
and segment markets, and lead to allocationa]. inefficiencies. But

innovations also overcome many of the policy—related regulatory
barriers that were put in place as safeguards or for particular policy
objectives.

    Concern about the recent wave of financial innovation centers
around two themes. First, that increased reliance on the market
mechanism —— and the possibility of asset price overshooting,

excessive competition among financial players, increased credit
linkages between financial intermediaries and anonymous market
linkages between ultimate borrowers and lenders —— may expose the

financial system to additional risk in the aggregate. Second, that the

greater integration of international capital markets alters the
channels through which traditional policy tools work ——   reducing the
effectiveness of quantitative controls on credit availability and
interest rates and increasing the impact of monetary policy on the
external sector of the economy. At the theoretical extreme, a small,

open economy subject to a high degree of capital mobility would find
it difficult to follow a monetary policy independent of those being

followed abroad. Innovation has made the financial markets of all

countries more open and subject to greater capital mobility.
   The first policy theme centers on the relationship between

innovation and financial stability. Regulation of financial markets

                              42
and institutions is intended to promote the safety and soundness of
this sector of the economy and thereby enhance the economy's overall

allocational efficiency. Existing regulations are designed to deal
with a variety of problems that may adversely effect economic

performance. The key objective is to protect the integrity of the
payments system, as this represents the life—blood of business

activity.
    Financial institutions are known to be subject to agency problems,
as shareholders and depositors may find it difficult to monitor the
behavior  of bank managers. Consequently, regulations to constrain or
rule out certain kinds of activities may be warranted. Financial
institutions may also be subject to so—called insurance or moral
hazard problems, whereby managers feel the incentive to take excessive
risks   (given that the Federal government is insuring them) or add to
their off—balance sheet positions. Financial institutions might also
be subject to conflict of interest problems if they increased their
activities to include lending and underwriting for nonfinancial firms,
as well as brokerage sales and trust advisory services.
    Financial innovation could clearly fuel additional fears over
these kinds of problems. Requiring financial institutions to disclose
their off—balance sheet positions would be an obvious first step.
Calculating insurance rates and capital adequacy requirements on the
basis of risk—adjusted measures also makes sense but might present

operational difficulties.
   A related concern is whether financial innovation leads to an
increase in aggregate financial risk. A review of the risk attribute5

of the new financial instruments is presented in Table 13. These


                                43
 include market risk (the risk of moment—by—moment price fluctuations),
 credit risk (the risk of default by one counterparty in a

 transaction), settlement risk (the risk of default on the day of
 contract delivery or settlement), and liquidity risk (the risk of not
 being able to trade immediately). What is the overall impact of these
 new instruments on risk?


                          Insert Table 13 here


    Financial instruments which transfer price risk do not create
additional price risk. And to the extent that a more desirable
distribution of risk is achieved (from the standpoint of each

individual), the economy may be better able to withstand certain
stressful periods. However, the transfer of risk through
intermediaries creates additional linkages in the financial system      and
may raise its vulnerability to default, particularly in a period of
financial stress. In addition, as more players are brought into the

system, to carry individualized risks associated with unbundled
securities, more players need to make credit and pricing assessments.
And, there is no established track record to guide the market for

making these assessments. Innovations may increase the availability of
debt financing in the economy, raising the aggregate debt level, and
making it more vulnerable to shocks.

    Another line of argument concerns the behavior of financial
markets and unbridled competitive behavior. It is often argued that
asset  prices move quickly and they may, in the short—run, overshoot
their long—run equilibrium value. If new financial instruments are
subject to this sort of price behavior, a considerable risk could be
added to the economy. Related   to this concern is the possibility of

                                44
excessive competition or excessive risk-taking within financial
institutions, perhaps related to the belief that behavior in these
institutions may be guided by perverse incentives (e.g. compensation
related to the volume of new business regardless of its risk). These
concerns are enhanced because many of the new financial instruments

lead to off—balance sheet exposures which may or may not be adequately

captured by existing accounting conventions and regulatory guidelines.
    Dealing with the above concerns is possible, but obviously easier
said than done. The general point to be made is that a market system,
to the extent that information is made available, has many built—in
checks and balances that govern the behavior of market participants.
To work in a stable and orderly manner, market participants need to
make effective use of market information for decision making and

performance evaluation. "Narket information" implies accounting
systems based on a continuous revaluation or "marking—to—market" of

all financial positions (whether on the balance sheet or off) and
assessment of risks on a portfolio basis. It may be the case that
utilization of new financial instruments (interest rate swaps, for

example) have actually lowered the exposure of their portfolio
positions to interest rate risk, thereby reducing their capital needs.
    Concern about mis—pricing of new financial instruments seems
exaggerated, since it   calls   into question the ability of banks to make

pricing and credit assessments of "traditional" instruments. The new
instruments require an assessment of liquidity risks, traditionally
represented by the bid/ask spread, and default risks, which until
recently were the normal task of bank lending (credit) officers.
   Excessive   competition may be a concern associated with a new set


                                   45
of financial products, a scramble for an early dominant market

position,   and the inevitable shake—out. However, some observers have
argued that regulatory groundrules (e.g. constant premium deposit
insurance and historical cost accounting systems) build in incentives
for managers to engage in excessive risk—taking. A market—based
regulatory system incorporating risk—adjusted insurance premia and
risk—adjusted capital adequacy requirements could put a natural brake
on excessive behavior.
    Given the mobility of capital, any regulatory response to
financial innovation would need to be coordinated among national

regulatory bodies. Otherwise, the markets will continue to engage in a
kind of "regulatory arbitrage," seeking the lowest level of
constraints in which to operate. National regulatory bodies may add to
this problem if they compete with each other in terms of regulatory
laxity in order to protect the market share of their domestic
financial institutions. The recent accord between U.S.   and   British

bank regulatory authorities announcing risk—based capital adequacy
standards within a highly similar set of rules is a welcome first step
toward international coordination.
    The second, and final, policy theme concerns the impact of
financial innovation on domestic monetary policy. Financial innovation
has lowered transaction costs, increased the menu of available assets,
and increased the ease of substitution among assets. As a result, the
ability of authorities to measure and control the money supply has
been reduced. Individuals and firms also have increased their access

to variable rate financing and numerous risk hedging instruments. The
availability of variable rate financing may reduce the sting of
contractionary monetary policy as borrowers still have access to


                                46
funds, for which they may be willing temporarily to pay a higher rate.
Lenders receive higher interest income during these periods which
tends to increase aggregate spending.

    The greater concern is that because of the
                                                 increasing
international mobility of capital, the dominant channel through which
monetary policy is now felt may be the exchange rate. If countries
are unable to coordinate their monetary policies
                                                   effectively, then
large exchange rate swings are more likely to develop. Countries then
run the danger that protectionist
                                  pressures will mount, prducing a
contraction in international trade and reducing the gains from trade.




                              47
VII. Summary and Conclusions

    This paper has offered an overview of some of the financial market
innovations we have seen over the last few years, the causes of
innovation, and the implications of both in terms of economic effects
and policy responses. The incentives for financial innovation are
strong and at the foundation of a market system. Self—interest,

profit—maximization, risk optimization and technological change are
guiding the process. Benefits clearly accrue to those directly

involved in the innovating and trading process. Natural barriers that
segment world capital markets are under pressure resulting in a
tendency toward greater economic efficiency.

    The transition from a segmented international capital market to
one that is more integrated will also impose some costs. There will be
greater demands for information and measures of the risk and return of
the new financial instruments. Policy—related barriers (taxes,

regulations, and so forth) will also lose some of their force, and to
the extent that these were used for prudential control, other policies

will have to take their place. The need to coordinate regulatory

policies will increase. Monetary policy is more likely to effect the
external sector of the economy via exchange rates, potentially raising
the demand for trade protection. This prospect heightens the need for
macroeconomic policy coordination.

    In a potential sense, the world economy stands to benefit from the
financial innovative process. But the process is not without its
risks and not without increasing demands for policy coordination.




                               48
                                    FOOTNOTES
     1. Assessments of the recent experience have
                                                    been prepared by the
        Bank of England (1983), the OECD (1984) and Germany and Morton
        (1985). By far the most comprehensive report describing recent
        innovations and their possible welfare and policy implications is

        that of the Study Group of the Group of Ten Countries (referred to
       in this paper as the G-lO report) published by the Bank for

       International Settlements in April 1986.
2.    Art interesting and potentially highly important area of financial
       innovation is that dealing with the European Currency Unit (ECU).
      Since the introduction of the European Monetary System in March
      1979, the the ECU has been propelled to greater importance as a

      legal parallel currency for transactions throughout most of
      Europe. An array of innovative ECU products (e.g. ECU—denominated

      deposits,  loans, swaps, bonds, futures, options and numerous
      variations on these themes), applications (e.g. ECU invoicing) and
      institutions (e.g. the Mutual ECU Settlement Association for
      clearing transactions) have quickly developed. It is beyond the
      scope   of this paper to discuss these developments in detail. The
      reader is referred to Levich (1987a, l987b), Levich and Sominariva
      (1987) and the references cited therein for further discussion.
3.    Informal estimates of the volume of foreign exchange trading in

      various centers are reported in Group of Thirty (1985, p.11).
4. The bank, Banque Commerciale pour l'Europe dii Nord, carried the
      cable address EUROBANK, which latter became synonymous with the

      general activity of accepting deposits offshore. See Kvasnicka

      (1969).

5. See Dam (1982, pp. 322—6).

                                  49
6. For a further description of International Banking Facilities, see

    Chrystal (1984).
7. Salomon Brothers (1986, p. 24).
8. When asked whether the impact of Chicago's futures markets on the
    underlying asset markets wasn't an example of "the tail wagging
    the dog," Richard Sandor replied that the questioner was mistaken
    ——   "the   dog had moved to Chicago." Proceedings of the Conference
    on Hedging with Financial Futures for Institutional Investors,
    Salomon Brothers Center, New York University.

9. Miller (1986, p.15).

10. More complex strategies are possible. For example, a corporation

    seeking 5—year funds might borrow for 10-years, and sell the final
    years proceeds forward.
11. Gaz de France represents an interesting case study. Between 1983
    and 1985 the company entered into 102 swap transactions totalling
    $7.4 billion to completely transform the currency profile of their
    financing away from U.S. dollars and toward European currencies
    including the ECU. See Reboul (1987) for details.
12. See Miller (1977) for a discussion of the use of securities
    markets for tax shifting.

13. A thorough discussion of foreign exchange option pricing and
   market characteristics is presented in Grabbe (1986, Chapter 6).
14. For example, a forward contract might be split into the
   combination     of a put and call option. A U.S. Treasury security
   might be split into its principal and interest components.




                                  50
15. Figlewski (1986) presents a thorough analysis of the use of
    financial futures for hedging portfolios of money market
    instruments.

16. For further details, see First Boston (1986, pp. 218—22).

17. See Giddy and Hekman (1984) for a formal demonstration.
18. For further details, see Bock        (1983).
19. The cost is approximate because we ignore (i) interest

    compounding,   (ii)   U.S.   commercial   paper is sold for same day
    delivery   while foreign exchange quotations are for two day
    delivery, and (iii) transactions costs in the commercial paper
    program and forward contracts. See Kreiner (1986) for a thorough
    analysis of these costs.
20. Alternative approaches for computing the cost of a long—term
    forward  contract are reviewed in Antl (1983).
21. A good example are the so—called "bull and bear" bonds, which are
    Eurobonds with payoffs index-linked to the performance of the West
    German or Japanese stock markets. These instruments are a close
    substitute for actual stock index options on these markets that
    are currently outlawed. National regulators could attempt to
    impose   sanctions on buyers or sellers of these offshore
    securities, but this form of control is untested.
22. Futures contracts were traded on over 128 products during the last

   century. Recently, only 45 commodities were actively traded on
   futures markets, including just 8 of the 23 commodities traded in
   1929. See, Deborah Black (1986) for a model of success and failure
   of futures contracts based on commodity and contract
   characteristics.




                                    51
23. Classic definitions of perfect capital markets (for example,

    Fan and Miller [1972, pp. 20-22]) often begin with the case of
    certainty. In the certainty case, all individuals necessarily
    share the   same information and expectations. Individuals still
    require financial markets under certainty to smooth their lifetime
    consumption to its desired path.
24. For a formal proof, see Cox and Rubinstein (1985, Chapter   8)

    and the references cited therein.

25. A barrier that applies more in the case of international capital
    markets is the absence of a clear mechanism for enforcing legal

    contracts across borders. The possibility of debt repudiation may
    be a significant factor leading to reduced international capital
    flows and the existence of apparent arbitrage profits. Dumas

    (1986) argues that financial service firms may be in a position to
   bridge this gap. Unlike the occasional borrower, the penalty for
   repudiation would be high; a major financial firm cannot afford to
   lose its reputation and so the chance of repudiation on their part
   is slim. In this way, financial services firm substitute for the
   non—existence of a contract enforcement mechanism.

26. Black's (1986) model incorporates this result, predicting that
   futures contract are more likely to be successful in the

   marketplace if they increase the ability of people to hedge their
   risks (i.e. if the increase the hedging effectiveness offered in
   the market). The presence of transaction costs might increase the
   number of useful hedging vehicles. For example, even if options
   contracts were traded on all 500 securities of the Standard and
   Poor's 500 index, an S & P 500 index option would still be a

   cheaper way to take a position on all securities simultaneously.

                                52
 27. The International Swap Dealers Association (1986) has promulgated
     a Code intended to standardize and simplify swap documentation.

    Parties to a swap agreement may adopt the Code in its entirety or
    selectively. Express provisions in a swap contract always override
    anything   to tht contrary in the Code.
28. Other formal linkages exist between the New York Commodities
    Exchange (CONEX) and the Sydney Futures Exchange (SFE), the
    Chicago Board of Trade (CBT) and the London International
    Financial Futures Exchange   (LIFFE), and the SFE and LIFFE. The
    National   Association of Security Dealers and the London Stock
    Exchange are conducting a pilot project for the exchange of stock
    price quotations, also aimed at expanding international trading
    opportunities.

29. Somewhat contrary evidence comes from the United State Treasury
    issues targeted to the Eurobond market. These data suggest that

    targetted Euro—U.S. Treasuries yield about 30 basis points less
    than comparable Treasury issues in the United States. By
    implication, the Treasury could increase the supply of offerings
    in the Eurobond market before interest rates would equalize with
    onshore Treasury issues.
30. See, for example, Aliber (1973) and Frenkel and Levich (1975).
31. See Dooley and Isard (1980) and Frenkel and Levich (1981).
32. Feldman's analysis on this point leaves some ambiguity. Re
    discusses the interest rate parity relationship as the criteria
    for market integration, but then uses the expected rate of

    exchange rate change rather than the forward premium in his
    formulation.

33. See Morgan Guaranty Trust (1986, p. 3)

                                53
34. See Nash, "Similar Standards for Banks are Set by U.S. and

   Britain," New York Times, January 9, 1987, Section A, page 1.




                              54
                                   ThBIE 1.
                 Average Eily Threign Extharqe Pradixg Volume
                          by Iccatia ant Qirrency


                                      Iakjal    New York        New York(1977)


iily Volune, Mart 1986       $48       $90          $50            $ 5
   (Billicns of US $)
Percentage Share
   Sterling                             30           19            17
                                        28           34            27
   Yen                        82        14           23             5
   Swiss franc                             9         10            14
   flitthfrarc                             4          4             6
   Italian lire                            2                        1
   Canadian dollar                         2          6            19
   Cross—an-rercy aid FflJ                 4                        —
   Dtdi Guilder                                       1             6
   Other                      18           7          3             5
  'Ibtal                     100       100          100           100
San'ces: Press releases of the Bank of Thkyo, Bank of England,
         aid the Federal Reserve Bank of New York.




                                      55
                                   Thble 2.
                Disersicr of the Da-ocurrency Deposit Market
                           (Billin of U.S. Ibliars)



                                            flirodollars       U.S. Money
Year             Gross Size      Net Size as % of Gross        Stock (M2)
1973                315             160         74%               861
1974                395             220         76                908
1975                485             255         78               1023
1976                595             320         80               1164
1977                740             390         76               1287
1978                950             495         74               1389
1979               1235             590         72               1498
1980               1525             730         75               1631
1981               1954            1018         79               1794
1982               2168            1152         80               1955
1983               2278            1237         81               2189
1984               2386            1277         82               2372
1985               2846            1480         75               2564
1986 (Jwe)         3059            1584         72               N.A.

Qznird Growth      19.9%           20.1%                          9.5%
Scnross: Morgan Qaranty Trust Cb., World Financial Markets,
          varicas issues.
         Econanic Iort of the President, 1986, Table B—64.




                                          56
                                         TABLE 3.

                           Dinensicrs of the flirthax Market
                                (Bihin of U.S. Ibilars)


Year
                          ___
             Tbtal $-denatdnated Bads
                                     Foreign    Ibtal Internatiaal US Cbrporate
                                                    Bad Issues       Bad Issues
1970           3.0        —             1.6             4.6                29.0
1971           3.6        —             2.6             6.3                30.1
1972           6.3       3.9            3.4             9.7                25.6
1973           4.2       2.4            3.6             7.8                20.7
1974           2.1       1.0            4.7             6.9                31.5
1975           8.6       3.7          11.3             19.9                42.8
1976          14.3       9.1          18.2             32.5                42.2
1977          17.7      11.6          14.5             32.2                42.3
1978          14.1       7.3          20.2            34.3                 20.5
1979          18.7      12.6         22.3             41.0                 26.5
1980          24.0      16.4         17.9             41.9                 44.6
1981          31.6      26.8         21.4             53.0                 38.2
1982          51.6      44.0         26.4             78.0                 45.4
1983          48.5      38.4         27.8             76.3                 50.2
1984          79.5      63.6         28.0            107.4                 59.6
1985         136.7      97.8         31.0            167.8
1986(Oct)b   163.4     102.7         30.7            194.1                 N.A.


OrpouM        29.0%     28.1%        21.9%             27.1%
  gratif
         a - first three quarters at annual rate
         b -
             thrwgh erri of Octcber, itt anruialized
         c — througheM of 1985
Sances: )brgan Guaranty Trust, World Finarcial Markets, varictis issues.
         Eaanttic ort of t1 President, 1986, Table B—90.




                                          57
                                            TABlE 4.

                      Par   Value of   C*itstanfla Publicly Issued   Bonis
                                  (Bilhicr of U.S.    Lbllars)

                                                          Ainual
                                                          Grwth
                    ________Year—md___________    Rate   % of Total                  Ratio to
                    1975     1980   1985   1986! 1975—85 1975   1985                 1985 GDP

U.S. Ibilar        $786       $1,473 $3,119 $3,660        14.8%    48.1%     50.4%    79%
Japanese Yen        130         577     1,081     1,530   23.6      7.9      17.5     68
Daztsdienark        212         505       639       849   11.6     13.0      10.3     86
Italian Lira        106         166       275       382   10.0      6.5       4.4     76
Frendi Pratt         51         110       173       245   13.0      3.1       2.8     28
U.K. Sterlin         85         212       211       232    9.5      5.2       3.4     42
Datthaiilder         41          86       123       161   11.6      2.5       2.0     83
Belgian   flair      46         105       111       150    9.2      2.8       1.8    117
cnadian DDllar 57                 91      131       146    8.6      3.5       2.1     39
tanithxraie           32          71      102       135   12.2      2.0       1.6    151
Swedish cma       38              77      101       126   10.3      2.3       1.6     89
Swiss flair       25              54       77       106   12.0      1.5       1.2     70
Australian DDllar 27              41       50       55     6.6      1.6       0.8     33


Total             $1,636      $3,566 $6,192 $7,776        14.2%                      71%

Sc*xr:    Salaniri Brothers, lit. (1986)
Notes: a — Estünate as of      September   30, 1986




                                             58
                                      ThBT.E 5.

                   Net Borrowirq by U.S. Naifinarcial Ct)rponti(xls
                             (Bihiais of U.S. Ebilars)

                              1981    1982    1983       1984   1985   1986
S.iritiz Financjn             45.0    37.7    27.2       78.4
    rporate      s            28.1    44.2    24.6 55.3
                                                                90.5
                                                                77.0
                                                                       98.6
                                                                       90.5
    Cpen Market Papár         16.9    -6.5        2.6 23.1      13.5    8.1
nk loans                      435     39.7    18.0       77.0   35.5   27.1
Ratio of Seairitiz
  Finarcirg to Bank Loans      1.03    0.95       1.51   1.02   2.55   3.64


Sair: Salcaini Brothers, lit. (1986, p.55)




                                      59
                                              TABlE 6.
                  Stock Market Value of     Lctarqe-Listed DzrEstjc      Ozipanies
                                   (Bilhia,s of    U.S.   I11ars)

                                                               At
                                                               Grafth
                      ___________Year—Enl__________             Rate      % of Tbtal Ratio to
                        1975       1980       1985        1986 1975—85    1975   1985 1985 GDP
U.S. Dallar           $704     $1,237     $2,014     $2,202    11.1%     61.2% 49.5%    51%
Japanese Yen           142        380        948      1,783    20.9      12.3  23.3     60
U.K. Sterlirq           86        205        354        384    15.2       7.5   8.7     70
Dwtsthenark             51         72        178        217    13.2       4.5   4.4     24
canadian Dallar         5].       117        157        163    12.0       4.4   3.9     47
FreixtiFranc            35         55        79         128     8.4       3.1   1.9     13
Italian Lira            11         25        58         112    18.3       0.9   1.4     15
Swisspraxc              17         43        84          97    17.7       1.4   2.1     77
Ditch Guilder           18         29        59          77    12.5       1.6   1.5     40
Australian Dallar       20         60        60           69 U.6          1.7   1.5     39
Swedishxrcria            2         13        37           57   32.7       0.2   0.9     33
Belgian Franc            9         10        21           32    8.8       0.8   0.5     22
tanishxrone              4          6        15           15   13.9       0.4   0.4     22

 Ittal              $1,150     $2,251     $4,065     $5,335    13.5%    100.0 100.0     46%

Saute: Sa]atap Brothers, Inc. (1986)

Notes: a - Estimate as of Septaiber 30, 1986




                                            60
                                               TABLE 7.

                           Gross Nw Issues     of Asset—Backed    Seairities
                                    (Billions of U.S. D1lars)


                               1980     1982      1984    1985      1986a      1987a

Residential )brtgage           22.0     55.0      66.7    114.0     253.3      217.0
iitnrcia1  )brtgage             —        —         1.3      6.0       5.6       7.0

Autatile Iivab1es
trit     rd Reivab1es
                                —        ———                         10.0      15.0
                                                                       .05      1.0



            TOtal              22.0     55.0      67.0    120.0      269.0 240.0
Notes:    a -   Estimate
          I, - Forecast
Sante:    Salcnon Brothers, Inc. (1986)




                                                 61
                                           TABLE 8.

                                   Aqgreate cen Interest
                   in   Major World Financial flithres ard Ctions ntncts
                                  (Bihin of U.S. Ibllars)


                                 1975   1980        1984    1985    1986:3

FUtures                          0.2    81.0        190.7   253.7   439.9
Intent Rate Q,ntracts            0.0    78.8        182.1   236.0   412.4
  Bas                            0.0    35.9         25.0    49.5   104.3
  )bney Market                   0.0    42.9        157.1   186.5   308.1
Statk Irder contracts            0.0     0.0          4.6     9.7    18.1
Qirrercies                       0.2     2.2          4.0     8.0     9.4
cptia,s                          0.0     0.0         40.3   138.2   239.6
Interest Rate     contracts      0.0     0.0         21.5    88.8   161.9
  Bords                          0.0     0.0         21.5    41.4    45.8
          Market                 0.0     0.0          0.0    47.4   116.1
Stodc   Iniex contracts          0.0     0.0         14.7    37.1    38.9
currercjes                       0.0     0.0          4.1    12.3    38.8
/iggre3ate cpen    Interesta     0.2    81.0        231.0   391.9   679.5




Notes: a - Measurel ) dollar par or iixlex value of cutstardin positions
             on the last thy    of the penaL
Scxiroe: Salarn Brothers, Inc. (1986,     p. 23)




                                               62
                                          TA&E 9.
                           ggreate tily Pralizg Volume
                in Major World Finarxia1 Futhres azt Cptiais Cbntracts
                                 (Bihin of U.S. llars)


                                1975   1980   1984     1985    1986:3
Ptzthres                        0.0    25.3   55.1     86.0    134.6
Interest Rate itracts           0.0    24.2   46.7     73.4    115.9
  Bcnis                         0.0     6.0   11.9     25.7     57.9
  )tneyMarkst                   0.0    18.2   34.8     47.7     58.0
Stack Irriex tracts             0.0     0.0    5.5      8.9     14.4
Qirrerties                      0.0     1.1    2.9      3.7      4.3

cptiais                         0.0     0.0    8.2     24.5        34.4
Interest Rate tncts             0.0     0.0    1.9     11.5        16.3
  Bas                           0.0     0.0    1.9      6.5        6.7
  l'tney Martet                 0.0     0.0    0.0      5.0         9.6
Stock Irriex Itncts             0.0     0.0    6.0     12.3        15.6
Qirrercies                      0.0     0.0    0.3      0.7         2.5

Aqreate Tradirq Voltmea         0.0    25.4   63.2   110.5    169.0




Notes: a -   tuily average of   the dollar par or inlex value of   transactions
Sante: Sa1cca Brothers, Dc. (1986, p. 23)




                                         63
                                         Th&E 10.
                        Interest te aid Oarrercy Swap Activity


                                                                           0-
            -  Interest Rate Swars                        Qirrency Swajc
Period      knint       No. of cbntractsb           Prinary Boid Related Other
1982                                                        2.3
1983                                                        5.0
1984                                                       11.0
1985:1
1985:2      109.9
1985:3      134.7                 1055
1985:4      170.2                 1621                     18.0
1986:1                            1744
1986:2                            2209
1986:3
1986:4      aoo.cP                                         38.0                 3&.76c
Notes:   a - total annzt c*itstarxlin at erd of period in bihiais of U.S.
             dollars.
         b - Nuiter of critracts ccwluial durirq period
         C - Fstinted
Sair: ?trgan Guaranty Trust O., World Financial Markets, Decerter 1986.
          Salcaini Brothers, lit. (1986, p. 23)




                                   64
                                                 Table 11.

                                   A Classification of Innovations
                                 By Financial Intermediation Function




                                                                           Function

                                            Price—risk—     Credit—risk—     Liquidity—    Credit—      Equity
                                            transferring    transferring     enhancing    generating   generating

  Innovation

  A. On—balance—sheet

     Adjustable rate mortgages                   x
     Floating rate loans                         x
     Sack—to—back loans                          x
    Asset sales without recourse                                 x
    Ioan swaps                                                   'C
    Securitised assets                                           'C               'C
    Transferable loan contracts                                  'C               'C


     Sweep accounts and other cash
      management techniques                                                       'C


    Negotiable money—market inatruments..                                        'C

    Koney—market mutual funds                                                    'C



    Zero coupon bonds                                                                         'C

     "Junk'    bonds                                                                          'C


    Equity     participation financing                                                        'C



    Mandatory convertible debentures                                                                      'C



  3. Off—balance—sheet

     Futures                                     'C

     Options     and loan caps                   'C

      Swaps                                      'C                                           'C

      Forward rate agreements                    'C



     tatters of credit                                           'C

     Note     issuance facilities                'C              'C              'C

     Credit—enhancing guarantees on
      securities                                                 'C              'C




Source: Bank for International Settlements, Recent Innovations in
        International Banking, 1986.




                                                       65
                                TABlE 12.


         Evolution of the Qirrercy aid Interest Rate Swap Market


rate             Thase                      Tndin Arrargenent         Volume

1970's          Arbitrage of                Parallel loans            Small
                regulation
1980—81         Arbitrage of market      Inten&iated agreements Small
                ananalies (1)
1982—83         Arbitrage of market         Inteunediatal with bank   $20 Billion
                anomalies (2)               inventories
1984             StM)JBnjIZ&1 traded     Market makinj an stardard $100 Billion
                 swaps                   contracts
1985—            rivative agreements     Mar]cet-'makirg on stardard $2 00—300
                 on swats (forward          itracts                    Billion
                 swaps, swap tin)



Sairce: Adapted fran Ian Qier (1986).




                                       66
                                                             Table 13.

                       Comparative Risks of New Financial Market Instruments


          lnstrunsnt
 Djney options
                            t      Credit risk
                            Writer for prei.
                                  until paid, buyer
                            for cost of r.place.nt
                            until exercised.
                                                              Market risk
                                                        Limited for buyer,
                                                        unlimited for writer,
                                                                                         Settienc risk
                                                                                   Praniun sent on pay—
                                                                                   sent date, principal
                                                                                   atuot for bocb parties
                                                                                   if exercised. (&se party
                                                                                   pays currency A, one pays
                                                                                   currency 3.)
                                                                                                                  Market liquidity riak
                                                                                                                cbange and GTC options
                                                                                                                new, liquidity of arkats
                                                                                                                ,sntastad uSsr stress,
                                                                                                                Liquidity of exchanges
                                                                                                                superior to QIC sarkets,
                                                                                                                also partially dependent
                                                                                                                on liquidtty of sarket for
                                                                                                                underlying.
 Interest rate option.      See as above.               See as above.              See ss shove except one      See   as above.
                                                                                   party deiivers cash, the
                                                                                   other securities, if
                                                                                   exercised. (Could be net
                                                                                      tat if cash settled.)
 C'srrency swaps           Default cancels future       Iqual to rate change on    Contractual snt on           All Cit contracts: flatted
                           obligationa. flak            principal and interest     successive paysent dstea.    liquidity.
                           limited to replacestt        slat.
                           cost. Hay be principal
                           flak if sgreed in
                           original contract.
 Interest rate swaps       Default cancels future       Clex: equivalent to        Interest payment Omt         All arc contracts: limited
                           obligations, risk            bond ol equsl security     only on successive           liquidity.
                           limited to replecs-ent       on fixed aide. Risk to     paynent dates.
                           cost. Mo principal risk.     fixed payer in avap if
                                                        rates have fellen, to
                                                        fixed receiver if rates
                                                        riae. 5s11 on basis
                                                        swap. No sarket risk on
                                                       principal sunt.
tilt. Allis                Principal notsat for        Writers of atsndbys fact   Principal s-cent on pay-     Liquidity of paper largely
                           holders of paper, sans sa   risk they will be calls    ment date for borrower.      untested.
                           other gusrstses for         oe to lend at below—
                           writers of scandbya.        asrket spreads if market
                                                       condition, change.

Forward rate agreeents     Mostly cash settled,        Equal to arkst risk on     Limited to ssount of         Sall market • limited
                           credit risk limited to      deposit.                   market risk if cash          liquidity.
                           sunc of market risk.                                   settled.
fssrrbonds                 Saae as onshore bond.       S.sme ss onshore fixed     Largely cane as onshore      Market. well developed,
                                                       rate bond.                 market.                      but secondary market less
                                                                                                               developed than .aJor
                                                                                                               onshore narkets.
Fills                      See as bond.                See as on short—term       Largely sea as onshore       Relatively new market,
                                                       paper.                     market.                      liquidity untested, thin
                                                                                                               secoodsry market.
Securitised credits        Derivative Iron credit      Sans se conventional       Generally aquel to           Markets well developed for
                           risk of underlying asset,   instnent of slailsr        similar conventional         tong—s Landing ins tr,t5,
                           seti.es with explicit       maturity.                  inatnants, although           less clear for new
                           insurance bscksp.                                      sat han payment date         inatnents. Thin ascondary
                                                                                  concentration.,              sarkats.
Asset sale, (with          Squal to credit risk of     Fired by ter.. of sale.    l.imiead.                    Limited liquidity.
recourse)                  selling institution.
Asset salea (without       Iuyer cake, credit risk     Set by terms of under—     Limited.                     Limited liquidity.
recourse)                  of underlying debtor,       tying credit.




  Source: Bank for International Settlements, Recent Innovations in
          International Banking, 1986.

                                                                       67
                                                FIGURE 1
     International         Borrowing Through Syndicated Bank Loans Versus
                              Tradeable Bonds and Notes




                                                                        U   ha

                                                                 2337
     —
           Syndicated bank loin,
              of which: Ollicielly sponsored loans
           International bonds and notes
     —
                of which; FIoalin9 rite notes
           Note issuanco fecilitios


                                                              0




           1902'                      1983             1304   1385




Source: Bank for International Settlements, Annual Report, 1986.




                                                 68
                               FIGURE 2



        Average Daily Trading Volume in Treasury Bond Futures
                      and Underlying Cash Bonds
                      (Billions of U.S. Dollars)




                               $61    $62   $13   $14   1165




Source: First Boston Corporation, Handbook of Securities of the United
      States Government and Federal Agencies, 1986, p. 225.




                                 69
                                   FIGURE 3

                    Construction of Synthetic Securities:
               Euro—DM Commercial Paper and Euro—DM Bonds



3A.   Euro—D!1 Commercial Paper


             Assets                       Liabilities
                ($ Cash}           I   A/P:   $      Commercial Paper
                DN Cash            I



             A/R:   $   forward    I   A/P:   D?'l    forward sale
                    purchase       I




3B.   Euro-Die! Bonds


             Assets                       Liabilities
       A/fl: $ long-term           I   A/?: Euro-$ Bond
             forward purchase
                                       A/P: D1! long—term
                                   I        forward sale




                                  70
                                   FIGURE 4

                      Comparative Spread Relationship:
          Euro—DM Rate minus Constructed DM Commercial Paper Rate
                   (90—day term at percentage per annum)




           Leo
           160
           140
           1.20
           100
            60
            60
            40
            20
    I.
    C

           —20
           —40
           —6O

           —80
          —100
          —120
                  1981      1982        1983      1984       1965




Source:    Irene Ereiner, "Short—Term Multicurrency Funding Via the U.S.
           Commercial Paper Market," 1986.


                                         71
                                            FIGURE 5
                  Deviations
                          from Covered Interest Parity:
         Eurodollar versus Japanese Gensakis, 3—month rates.




                         j'f•
                   3.0


                   2.0


                   1.0


                   0.0
             C
             LI
             a.   —1.0


                  —2.0


                  —3.0


                  —4.0
                         1977   1978    1979   1950    1981   ¶982   1983   1954




Source: Robert Feldman, Japanese Financial Markets, 1986, p. 182.




                                       72
                                 REFERENCES
Alexander, Gordon J. and Cheol S. Eun. "International Listings, Stock
    Prices and Capital Market Integration," Working Paper, University
    of Maryland, 1985.
Aliber, Robert Z. "The Interest Rate Parity Theory: A
    Reinterpretation," Journal of Political Economy, (December 1973):
    1451—59.

Anti, Boris. "Long—Term Forward Contracts." in B. Antl (ed.), Swap
    Financing Techniques, London: Euromoney Publications, 1983.
Bank for International Settlements, Annual Report, various years.
Bank of England, "The Nature and Implications of Financial
    Innovation," Bank of England Quarterly Bulletin, September 1983.
Black, Deborah C. "Success and Failure of Futures Contracts: Theory
    and Empirical Evidence," Monograph Series in Finance and
    Economics, New York: New York University Salomon Brothers Center
    for the Study of Financial Institutions, No. 1986-1, 1986.
Bock, David. "Exchanges of Borrowings," in B. Anti (ed.), !2
    Financing Techniques, London: Euromoney publications, 1983.
Chrystal, K. Alec. "International Banking Facilities," Monthly Review,
    Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis, (April 1984): 5—11.
Cooper, Ian. "Innovations: New Market Instruments," Oxford Review of
    Economic Policy, 2, No. 4 (winter 1986): 1—17.

Cox,   John C. and Mark Rubinstein. Options    Markets. Englewood
       Cliffs, NJ: prentice—Hall, 1985.
Dam, Kenneth w. The Rules of the Game, Chicago: University of Chicago
       Press,   1982.
Dooley,    Michael P. and Peter Isard. "Capital Controls, Political Risk,
       and Deviations from Interest Rate Parity," Journal of Political
       Economy, (1980): 370—384.
Dufey, Gunter and Ian Giddy. "Innovation in the International
    Financial Markets," Journal of International Business Studies,
    (Fall 1981): 33—51.
Dumas, Bernard. "On the Microeconomics of Swaps and Hedges: Comment",
    presented at the conference on Swaps and Hedges, New York
    University Salonon Brothers Center, March 14, 1986.

Edwards, Franklin. "Some Regulatory Implications of Swaps: Comment",
    presented at the conference on Swaps and Hedges, New York
    University Salomon Brothers Center, March 14, 1986.



                                          73
    New York: Holt, Rinehart and Winston, 1972.
                                                 —
Fama, Eugene F. and Merton H. Miller, The Theory of Finance.
                                                    _______

Feldman, Robert Alan. Japanese Financial Markets, Cambridge, Mass.:
    MIT Press, 1986.

Figlewski, Stephen. Hedging with Financial Futures for
    Institutional Investors. Cambridge, MA: Ballinger Press, 1986.
First Boston Corporation, Handbook of Securities of the United States
    Government and Federal Agencies, New York, 1986.
Frenkel, Jacob A. and Richard M. Levich. tuCovered Interest Arbitrage:
    Unexploited Profits?" Journal of Political Economy, (April 1975):
    325—338 -

___________ "Covered Interest Arbitrage in the 1970s," Economic
    Letters, (June 1981): 267—274.
Germany, J. David and John E. Morton. "Financial Innovation and
   Deregulation in Foreign Industrial Countries." Federal Reserve
    Bulletin,   (October 1985): 743—53.
Giddy, Ian and Christine Hekman. "A Theory of Swaps." Unpublished
    manuscript, New York University, October 16, 1984.
Grabbe, J. Orlin. International Financial Markets, New York: Elsevier
    Publishing, 1986.
Group of Thirty. "The Foreign Exchange Market in the 19805," New York,
    1985.

International Swap Dealers Association, "Code of Standard Wording,
    Assumptions and Provisions for Swaps, New York, 1986.
Kidwell, David S., M. Wayne Marr, and John L. Trimble. "Domestic
    versus Euromarket Bond Sale: A Case of Issuing Arbitrage,"
    mimeographed, Tulane University, August 1986.
Ereiner, Irene J. "Short—Term Multicurrency Funding Via The U.S.
    Commercial Paper Market." NYU MBA Applied Business Project,
    January 1986.
Kvasnicka, Joseph C. "Eurodollars -- An Important Source of FUnds for
    American Banks," Business Condition, Federal Reservce Bank of
    Chicago, June 1969.
Levich, Richard M. "A View from the International Capital Markets," in
    I. Walter (ed.), Deregulating Wall Street, New York: John Wiley,
    1985.

___________ "On the Microeconomics of Swaps and Hedges,"
    presented at the conference on Swaps and Hedges, New York
    University Salomon Brothers Center, March 14, 1986.


                                          74
    _______• (ed.) The Ecu Market, London: Euromoney
    Publications, 1987a.

    ______• "Developing the ECU Markets: Perspectives on Financial
    Innovation," in R. Levich and A. Soinmariva (eds.), The ECU Market:
    Current Developments and Future Prospects, Lexington, Mass.: D.C.
    Heath and Co., 1987b. (forthcoming)

Levich, Richard M. and Andrea Sommariva (eds.). The ECU Market:
    Current Developments and Future Prospects, Lexington, Mass.: D.C.
    Heath and Co., 1987. (forthcoming)
MacDougall, G.D.A. "The Benefits and Costs of Private Investment
    Abroad: A Theoretical Approach," Economic Record, (March 1960):
    13—35.                          -




Mahajan, Arvind and Donald R. Fraser. "Dollar Eurobond and U.S. Bond
    Pricing," Journal of International Business Studies, (Summer
    1986): 21—36.

Miller, Merton H. "Debt and Taxes," Journal of Finance, 32 (May 1977):
    261—75.

___________ "Financial Innovation: the Last Twenty Years and the
    Next," University of Chicago Graduate School of Business, Selected
    Paper Number 63, October 1986.

Morgan Guaranty Trust Co., World Financial Markets, various issues.
Nash, Nathaniel C. "Similar Standards for Banks are Set by U.S. and
    Britain," New York Times, January 9, 1987.
Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development, "The Impact of
    New Assets and Intermediation Techniques on the Functioning of
    Financial Markets," Financial Market Trends, (June 1984): 12—24.
Reboul, Jean. "Gaz de France and the Ecu," in R. Levich (ed.), 2!!!
    Market, London: Euromoney Publications, 1987.
Salomon Brothers, Inc. "Prospects for Financial Markets in 1987," New
    York, December 1986.
Study Group of the Group of Ten Countries, Recent Innovations in
    International Banking, Basle: Bank for International Settlements,
    April 1986.




                                        75
