                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




 BUSINESS INCOME AND BUSINESS TAXATION IN THE UNITED STATES SINCE THE
                                1950s

                                        Conor Clarke
                                       Wojciech Kopczuk

                                      Working Paper 22778
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w22778


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    October 2016




We benefited from comments of participants in the 2016 NBER Tax Policy and the Economy
meeting in DC. We gratefully acknowledge financial support from the Research Council of
Norway, grant 239225/H20, and the Oscar M. Ruebhausen Fund at Yale Law School. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2016 by Conor Clarke and Wojciech Kopczuk. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Business Income and Business Taxation in the United States Since the 1950s
Conor Clarke and Wojciech Kopczuk
NBER Working Paper No. 22778
October 2016
JEL No. D31,H25

                                          ABSTRACT

In theory, the U.S. tax system aims to attribute and tax all business income to individuals. But the
tax treatment of this income varies. Pass-through income is taxed when earned; capital-gains
income is taxed when realized; dividends when distributed; other forms of business income may
escape taxation entirely. Business owners often have control over the timing and character of
their income: They can often choose, for example, between reporting business income or
deducting it as wages or fringe benefits. And laws change, changing the incentive and ability to
shift income between the individual and corporate sectors.

We integrate a wide variety of tax data to document the large long-run changes in the structure of
business income and business taxation in the United States. These changes include the degree to
which business incomes are taxed on a realization versus an accrual basis, the extent to which
taxation is deferred, and the share of business income that is ultimately subject to taxation. We
highlight the evolving relevance of retained earnings in the changing corporate sector and their
relationship to equity values and unrealized capital gains. We also document the evolution of
individual income components — profits of pass-through entities, dividends, and capital gains
(both taxable gains and those escaping taxation through step-up). As a result of these changes,
business incomes are increasingly taxed through personal income taxes instead of a combination
of corporate and personal taxes. In particular, this implies that the observability of business
incomes on personal income tax returns has improved over time, a fact that has implications for
measuring and understanding the income distribution.


Conor Clarke
Yale Law School
127 Wall Street
New Haven, CT 06511
conor.clarke@yale.edu
conorjclarke@gmail.com

Wojciech Kopczuk
Columbia University
420 West 118th Street, Rm. 1022 IAB
MC 3323
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
wk2110@columbia.edu
1    Introduction

Most economic activity is organized through businesses. As a result, the compensation of

business owners — whether they are entrepreneurs or other equity holders — is a major part

of national income. But businesses can be organized and can compensate their owners in a

variety of complex and shifting ways. In particular, the structure of business organizations

and the style of owner compensation are sensitive to tax incentives. In this paper, we

document long-term trends in the structure and composition of business income in the

United States. Many of these trends are shaped by tax law. We highlight the shift from

corporate to pass-through taxation that started with legal changes in the second half of

the twentieth century, was fueled by tax incentives embedded in the Tax Reform Act of

1986 (which encouraged a shift from C- to S-corporations), and has continued unabated

since then — with partnerships growing considerably in importance since the 1990s. As a

result of these changes, “business incomes” are increasingly taxed through personal income

taxes rather than through a combination of corporate and personal taxes. This shift from

corporations to passthroughs also suggests changes in the timing of business taxation —

and, in particular, a shift towards taxation based on accrual rather than realization.

    These broad shifts have wide implications for how tax data is used in economics research.

For example, tax data is a natural starting point for studying the income distribution. But

tax concepts are not the same as economic concepts. The sheer multitude of business forms

available — and the availability of alternative ways of compensating investors — puts

researchers in a bind. Researchers must either engage in the daunting task of identifying

the underlying economic (rather than tax) income characteristics they want to study —

and then try to tease those characteristics out of the data — or they must rely on a broad

definition of income that combines all tax categories. The latter path is followed by Piketty

and Saez (2003) and many others. But this path is still riddled with difficulties.

    Indeed, by focusing on the shifting composition of business income, we highlight three

difficulties of using tax data to study economic income concepts. The first problem is



                                              1
timing. Large shifts in how firms are organized, in how capital gains are realized, and

in which firms pay dividends have produced substantial changes in the timing of taxable

income. A second problem is the rise of non-taxable or tax-advantaged owners. Tax-exempt

institutions, tax-advantaged retirement accounts, and foreign individuals have generally

grown in importance — and this secular growth has challenged the comprehensiveness of

the tax base. On the other hand, we also document a major shift away from the retention of

earnings in the corporate sector; this shift may suggest that personal income taxation better

targets business income than it used to. A third problem is international comparisons. As

figure 1 below points out, trends in business taxation vary across countries — and, indeed,

the United States may be distinct in the magnitude and direction of several important

trends. These challenges and others make the measurement and interpretation of inequality

data difficult. Our ongoing work (Clarke and Kopczuk, 2016) and work in other countries

(Alstadsæter at al, 2016; Fairfield and Jorratt, 2016; Wolfson et al., 2016) explores the

implications of these changes for the measurement of income and income inequality.

      We are by no means the first to notice these broad trends in business income and busi-

ness taxation.1 But we attempt to systematically document the magnitude and importance

of these issues in one place, and over a relatively long time period, using a variety of aggre-

gate and micro data. We offer a systematic account of the ways in which the organizational

structure and tax status of the business sector has changed over the second half of the

twentieth century and the start of the twenty-first. Understanding these changes matters

for many reasons — among them, understanding important tax-policy changes of the last

several decades, and informing policy debates concerning business taxation that are around

the corner. And they matter for understanding the individual income distribution. Large

changes in U.S. business taxation have occurred alongside major changes in America’s in-

dividual income distribution. But changes in the structure and tax status of the corporate

sector interact with the taxation and visibility of incomes that appear on individual tax re-

turns. As the result, understanding the nature and distribution of income requires a careful
  1
    See, for example, Gordon and MacKie-Mason (1994), MacKie-Mason and Gordon (1997) and Gordon
and Slemrod (2000) for existing work on tax changes through the 1980s.


                                              2
exploration of changes in business taxation.

    We proceed as follows. In section 2, we provide a short historical and conceptual

overview of business taxation in the U.S. After discussing our data sources in Section 3, we

document organizational trends in Section 4, highlighting the shift to S-corporations after

1986, the growth of partnerships since the early 1990s, and changes in the relative sizes of

various types of firm. Then, in Section 5, we document the extent to which various types

of business income (dividends, partnership income, and S-corporation profits) are visible

on personal income tax returns. In Section 6, we focus on the timing of corporate income:

the magnitude of (and changes over time in) retained earnings, the relationship between re-

tained earnings and equity value, and the importance of unrealized capital gains. In Section

7 we briefly comment on the role of tax-exempt and tax-advantaged entities. We conclude

in Section 8 by highlighting the potential implications of these trends for the measurement

of inequality.



2    A rough guide to business taxation in the U.S.

Businesses can be organized in many different ways: as sole proprietorships, as partner-

ships with or without limited liability, as closely-held corporations, or as publicly traded

corporations with several different classes of shareholders. Many factors influence the choice

of organizational form, including liability, financing, and managerial decision-making. But

taxation is also crucial, for the obvious reason that different organizational forms are taxed

in different ways.

    Broadly speaking, there are two main approaches to taxing business incomes. One is to

impose an entity-level tax, like the U.S. corporate tax, that takes a bite out of firm-level

income as it is earned. These entity-level taxes are usually combined with a system of

taxing income as it is distributed to owners. The second approach is to allocate income

to shareholders as it is earned. This approach — which integrates business taxation with

personal income taxation — is commonly referred to as “pass-through” taxation, and we



                                               3
follow that convention here.

       Both systems of business taxation can be seen as responses to the same dilemma. Most

jurisdictions tax income when realized, presumably as a reasonable and administratively

convenient way of getting at individual increases in wealth or ability to consume. But

we also allow individuals to start separate, fictive legal entities (firms), which can also

earn income. If we taxed income only when dollars entered individual bank accounts, it

would be too easy for individuals to defer taxation2 or avoid it entirely by keeping their

income inside firms (Schizer 2016, Graetz 2008). As a result, shareholder-level taxation is

supplemented by a separate entity-level tax — a tax that is an administratively blunt and

distributively ambiguous tool. On the other hand, treating all entities as pass-throughs

would raise problems of its own: We would face the invidious task of allocating firm-level

income in large, complex entities to many dispersed owners.3 And so, in countries like

the United States, the system is mixed: Some firms are treated more like separate taxable

entities, and others are treated more like aggregations of taxable individuals.

       A corporate tax is an entity-level tax imposed on (appropriately defined) profits. In the

U.S., the corporate tax applies almost exclusively to a particular form of corporation —

an entity called the C-corporation because it is taxed under subchapter C of the Internal

Revenue Code. Shareholders of these corporations are then additionally taxed either when

money leaves the firm through dividends, or when the shareholders sell their equity stake and

are subject to capital gains taxation. Blurring the line between dividends and capital gains

are share repurchases, which give shareholders cash that is taxable as a capital gain. And

these instruments do not, by any stretch of a tax planner’s imagination, exhaust all possible

channels for getting money out of a firm. Businesses may be financed through debt; interest
   2
     There are many reasons why deferring taxation can be advantageous. A non-exhaustive list might
include: the non-neutral treatment of compounding, arbitrage across rates over time, option value due to
idiosyncratic risk or policy uncertainty (changes in tax law, tax holidays, etc.), the availability of future tax
preferences or deductible losses, or the ability to convert future income realizations to a different tax regime
(e.g., capital gains). The incentive to defer is further strengthened by the “step-up” exemption of unrealized
capital gains at death present in the U.S. tax code.
   3
     One option (not in use in the U.S.) would be a corporate tax integration that would provide dividend
recipients with a credit for corporate taxes paid. While this approach could in principle effectively eliminate
“double taxation” of dividend income, it would still raise complicated deferral problems and other issues.



                                                       4
expenses can thus be an alternate way of compensating owners. Instruments that blur the

line between equity and debt can allow businesses to achieve both tax efficient and profitable

objectives, and are subject to a bewildering variety of legal rules. Active shareholders may

also simply be compensated as employees through wages or through other instruments,

including incentive pay, fringe benefits, and rents. Finally, abusing tax law may allow for

consumption within a firm: owners can try to deduct their private consumption expenses

as legitimate business costs. And, even when such moves aren’t illegal, they point toward

the conceptual difficulty of distinguishing between consumption and expenses.

    Pass-through treatment applies to a wide variety of organizational forms, including sole

proprietorships, partnerships, limited liability companies, and corporations taxed under

subchapter S of the Code (“S-corporations”). Income of each of these types of firms is

typically not taxed at all at the entity level; instead, profits are allocated to owners as they

are earned.

    This distinction — between pass-throughs and C-corporations — has two noteworthy

implications.4 First, different forms of entity taxation suggest that businesses may choose

an organizational form to minimize the tax consequences. While there are, as mentioned

above, other considerations in play in the choice of the organizational form, differently taxed

organizational forms are often close substitutes. In particular, for firms with a small but

still sizable (up to 100) number of common shareholders, there are few differences between

S- and C-corporate form, other than tax treatment. Second, at least on the surface, pass-

through entities are taxed on an accrual basis, while C-corporations are only partially taxed

on accrual through the corporate tax — and, especially in international context, deferral

possibilities loom large — and then taxed again at a future time that is often up to the

discretion of the owners. Indeed, the owners of small firms often have complete control over

the timing of profit distributions or capital gains realizations.

    The mix of incentives to pick different entities for tax reasons has varied immensely over
   4
     There are of course other tax considerations that may influence decisions. For example, income of
partnerships is treated as self-employment compensation with Social Security/Medicare self-employment
tax implications, while income of S-corporations is not. The ability to deduct particular kinds of expenses
and take advantage of tax credits may vary with the organizational form.


                                                    5
the last 60 years. Two big things have changed. The first is the combination of corporate

and individual rates. Before the Tax Reform Act (TRA) of 1986, the top corporate tax rate

was considerably lower than the top individual tax rate. This meant that individuals in a

high bracket had an incentive to use C-corporations to defer individual taxes: Firms could

be used to earn and reinvest money without paying the high individual rate (Warren 1981).

The tax reform changed these incentives by inverting the individual and corporate rates:

For the first time in modern U.S. tax history, the top individual rate fell below the top

corporate rate. This gave those same investors an incentive to switch out of C-corporations

and into pass-through entities, which they did in droves. C-corporations have diminished

in importance since then; now, the great bulk of C-corporate income is earned by a very

small number of large publicly traded firms, which cannot convert to S corporate status

because S-corporation stock cannot be listed on a public exchange. For this reason, it it

sometimes said that the modern corporate tax can be conceptualized as a tax on firms that

are publicly traded.

   The second important change is less remarked upon, but perhaps equally important to

the trajectory of modern U.S. business taxation: Other legal changes, beyond TRA 1986,

that made differently taxed legal entities closer economic substitutes. An important early

change, was the Subchapter S Revision Act of 1982, which made S-corporations a more

plausible substitute for a much wider swath of existing C-corporations — and thus enabled

the great migration from C to S that occurred after TRA 1986. The original S-corporation

was restrictive entity, designed to spare only the smallest business entities from double

taxation: It could have a maximum of ten shareholders, for example (Coven and Hess

1983). The Revision Act expanded this cap to 35, which was expanded once again to 100

in 1996. A second change was the creation of the modern LLC, a state law entity that is

taxed like a partnership but reaps the benefits of limited liability (Hamill 2005). The first

LLC statute was passed in the state of Wyoming in 1977, but it would take eleven years

for the IRS to issue a stable Revenue Ruling stating that such entities would be entitled

to partnership tax treatment despite their limited liability. A third important change was


                                             6
the rise of so-called “check the box” rules, which, starting in 1997, allowed entities to elect

whether they would be taxed as partnerships or corporations. These three changes made

the relatively rapid and large-scale shifting between entities a reality.



3    Data and coverage

We start many of our data series in 1958. The choice of a starting point will always be

a little arbitrary. For many of the issues we study, the available data extend back farther

in time — in some cases to the beginning of the Twentieth Century, if not earlier. But

our choice isn’t random. The S-corporation — a pass-through entity that is now the most

common business organization in the United States, and that now accounts for a fifth of all

business-level income — first debuted in 1958. Subchapter K — the portion of the internal

revenue code that governs partnership taxation — was adopted in 1954 after a prolonged

debate. The IRS began publishing its annual Corporation Income Tax Return Report the

same year. And many of the other data series on which rely also begin in the 1950s and

60s. In short, many of the tax changes we study —tax changes that found their crucible in

the reforms of the 1980s —have roots that extend back to the 1950s. A minor revolution

in tax data began around the same time. These features make the 1950s the natural place

to begin our story of broad changes in business structure and taxation.

    In what follows, we rely largely on publicly available IRS reports, NIPA tables, and

public use individual tax return micro data to collect and illustrate trends in business

incomes and the corresponding tax base. While almost all of the data we use is publicly

available, much of what we describe is assembled here for the first time. We provide a fuller

description of this data in a short appendix. We also make a limited use of the SOI micro

data that starts in 1960 and continues until 2010. Finally, we will also take advantage of

the Survey of Consumer Finances between 1989 and 2013 to study unrealized capital gains.




                                               7
                      Figure 1: Share of business income subject to entity-level tax
         0.9

                    ●
         0.8    ●
                        ●       ●
                            ●       ●
                                        ●
         0.7
                                            ●
                                                ●

         0.6                                        ●
 Share




                                                                          ●
                                                        ●           ● ●       ●
                                                            ●                     ●                             ●
                                                                ●
         0.5                                                                          ●                             ●
                                                                                          ●
                                                                                              ●             ●           ●

         0.4                                                                                                                        ●       ●
                                                                                                        ●                               ●
                ●
                        US                                                                                                      ●
         0.3            UK                                                                        ● ●
                                                                                                                            ●
                        Canada
                        Australia
         0.2
               1980             1985                1990              1995                2000              2005                2010
                                                                          Year
Note: Share of business income subject to entity-level taxation as reported to individual
governments. See Appendix for details.


4        Trends in organizational form

To set the stage, Figure 1 shows a comparison of the share of the overall business income

that is subject to entity-level taxation in the U.S., UK, Australia and Canada. Several

features are immediately obvious. First, the corporate tax today applies to a much smaller

share of income in the United States than in the other three countries. (Although the U.S. is

not necessarily an outlier in a broader set of economies — the Joint Committee on Taxation

(2013) notes that Japan and Germany have an even smaller corporate tax, at least in the

small number of years studied in that report.) Second, the U.S. has undergone a massive

change between the early 1980s, when the majority of all business income was in C-corporate

form, and 2012, when a majority of business income is earned by pass-through entities.5
    5
   Much ink can be spilled over how to define “business income” and make it comparable across countries.
We hope to avoid this inky quagmire by following (without defending at depth) the methodology of the


                                                                      8
                                                 Figure 2: Number of active business entities
                      5m
                                ●
                                      C−corporations
                                      S−corporations
                                      Partnerships
                      4m
 Number of entities




                      3m
                                                                                                     ●●●
                                                                                                 ●
                                                                                            ●●             ●              ●●●●●
                                                                                        ●                      ●●                 ●●●
                                                                                    ●                               ●●●                 ●●●
                      2m                                                        ●                                                             ●●
                                                                            ●                                                                      ●
                                                                        ●                                                                              ●●
                                                               ●●   ●                                                                                       ●●●
                                                            ●●
                                                      ●●●
                                                 ●●
                                            ●●
                                  ●   ●●●
                      1m   ●   ●●




                      0m
                           1960                   1970                      1980                           1990               2000                     2010
                                                                                                Year
Note: Number of active business entities. See Appendix for details.


This shift is large and, when compared to the other industrialized English-speaking countries

in the figure, distinctive.

                      The magnitude and distinctiveness of these trends in U.S. business taxation is the pri-

mary focus of what follows. In Figure 2 and Table A.1, we document basic facts about the

number and income of various types of business entities (other than sole proprietorships)
JCT’s 2013 report on comparative pass-through treatment, which offers a definition of business income and
a snapshot of comparative data for one year (and in some cases two). We adopt the JCT’s definition and
extend their series back to the 1970s for all of the countries for which historical data is readily available.
The JCT defines business income as follows: “The amount of business income shown as being received by
individuals and corporations includes the allocable share of the business income of passthrough entities that
they own. Moreover, all income, including interest income and capital gains, of corporations is deemed to be
business income for purpose of the tables. Because rental income (largely from real estate) is a significant
portion of corporations’ income, rental income is also included in individuals’ business income. Individuals’
business income, however, does not include interest and capital gains, since a substantial portion of such
income are received from passive investments” (3). The report further notes: “because available data do
not allow interest and capital gains income to be separated into business and non-business components, and
because a small portion of this income arises directly from business activity, the tables exclude all interest
and capital gains income of individuals.” (12).




                                                                                            9
over time. Interestingly, the number of partnerships and C-corporations were actually about

the same in 1958. But the growth of partnerships did not keep pace with C-corporations in

the decades that followed: while the number of both types of entity grew, by the mid-1980s

there were 50% more C-corporations than partnerships. At the same time, the number of

S-corporations increased from non-existent before 1958 to 800,000 in 1986. As the result of

this rise, the number of C-corporations and the combined number of pass-through entities

(S corps or partnership) was about the same by the time of the 1986 Tax Reform Act. But,

in the aftermath of TRA 1986, the number of S-corporations increased by over 35% while

the number of C-corporations declined for the first time. That initial decline has continued.

By 2012, the number of C-corporations was down to 1.6 million from the peak of 2.6 million

in 1986, while the number of S-corporations has quintupled since 1986, and is now over 4

million. The consistent growth in S-corporations after 1986 was at first accompanied by

a slight decline in the number of partnerships, but since the mid-1990s their ranks have

increased steadily — doubling to over 3 million by 2012. As mentioned above, the rise of

partnerships is partly a consequence of the introduction of Limited Liability Partnership

(and Limited Liability Corporation) statues in almost all states. In particular, in 1993 (the

first year in which IRS reports the number of LLCs), there were just 17,000 LLCs consti-

tuting less than 2% of total partnerships. By 2012, the number of LLCs increased to 2.2

million, or about 2/3 of all partnerships (and the number of all other types of partnerships

has declined). As a result of these changes — and in stark contrast to the lay of the land

in the pre-1986 era — there were by 2012 over four times as many pass-through entities as

C-corporations.

   Before 1987, tax incentives for successful firms tilted toward organizing a firm as C-

corporation and this is reflected in net income data presented in Table A.2 and Figure

3 which shows the composition of income from C- and S-corporations and partnerships.

We also singled out Regulated Investment Companies (RICs) and Real Estate Investment

Trusts (REITs).

   RICs and REITs are harder to categorize. The primary distinguishing feature of these


                                             10
                    Figure 3: Share of business income accounted for by different types of entities
                    1
                                                                                                                              ●
                                                                                                                                   C−corporations
                                                       ●●●●●●●
                                                   ●             ●                                                                 S−corporations
                               ●●●●●          ●●                          ●
                        ●●●●           ●●●●                          ●●       ●                                                    Partnerships
                  0.8                                                             ●
                                                                                      ●●                                           RICs and REITs
                                                                                           ●
                                                                                               ●
                                                                                                   ●●●
                                                                                                         ●●
Share of income




                  0.6                                                                                         ●
                                                                                                                  ●                            ●
                                                                                                                      ●
                                                                                                                                           ●       ●
                                                                                                                          ●
                                                                                                                              ●        ●
                  0.4                                                                                                                                  ●           ●
                                                                                                                                                                       ●
                                                                                                                                                                           ●
                                                                                                                                                               ●
                                                                                                                                  ●●
                                                                                                                                                           ●
                  0.2


                    0


            −0.2
                        1960            1970               1980                        1990                           2000                                 2010
                                                                          Year
Note: Share of income from C-corporations, S-corporations and partnerships as reported in
Table A.2. See Appendix for details.


entities is that they are exempt from corporate income taxation to the extent that they

distribute their current profits to shareholders. Entities can elect this tax treatment as long

as they earn at least 90% of their income from certain qualifying sources — broadly, invest-

ment income — and also meet certain reporting requirements, diversification requirements,

and distribution requirements.

                  RICs, in particular, have grown rapidly over the last 30 years. Most mutual funds

are regulated investment companies, and the growth of RICs is intertwined with the rapid

growth in mutual funds. In the 1990s, U.S. households increasingly selected diversified and

indirect investments through such funds, a trend that has been examined (and critiqued)

exhaustively elsewhere (Malkiel 2013, Greenwood & Scharfstein 2013).

                  Before TRA’86, the net income of C-corporations was much larger than that of pass-

through entities, despite the fact that there were a similar number of C-corps and pass-

                                                                     11
throughs. All C-corporations combined had $200 billion profits in 1986, compared to just

$8 billion for S-corporations, negative net income for all partnerships and $60 billion for

REITs and RICs. The net income of S-corporations more than tripled from 1986 to 1987

and partnership net income began to rise in the aftermath of the reform as well. By the

late 1990s, the net income of pass-through entities matched that of C-corporations;today,

pass-through income is larger.

      Partnerships and S-corporations tend to be smaller on average than C-corporations.

Figure 4 shows the average receipts of different types of entities (using a log scale to increase

transparency). Beside the fairly obvious difference in the scale of C-corporations compared

to other types of entities — large publicly traded firms are predominantly C-corporations,

after all — two other observations jump out. First, TRA 1986 created a significant change

not in the number but also in the composition of S-corporations: The average receipts per

firm nearly doubled after the Act. Second, the shift toward partnerships since the 1980s

also corresponds to a massive increase in their size, largely as a result of more private equity

firms organizing as partnerships in the last several decades. Nowadays S-corporations and

partnerships have similar per-firm receipts. Relative to the average size of a business in the

U.S. — an average that also includes sole-proprietors — each of these three categories is

large.

      While receipts are one useful way of comparing the scale of firms —comparing receipts

may create fewer worries about income allocation and shifting6 — an alternative is to look

directly at firms’ income, which we do in Figure 5. Here we see much larger fluctuations over

time, especially in the C-corporate sector. These changes are both cyclical and reflective of

changing tax incentives, such as the 2004 tax holiday that allowed for the repatriation of

foreign profits of multinationals. But strong trends can also be seen in partnerships. The

trend in the size of partnership income is very strong starting in the 1990s; in fact, the

average partnership today has a higher net income than the average S-corporation. Even

this simple approach of looking at firm income shows an impact of the 1986 reform: The
  6
      This is because much income shifting occurs through deductions.



                                                    12
                                          Figure 4: Average receipts by entity type

                               ●
                                   S corporations
                     20000         Partnerships
                                   C corporations
                                   All firms
                     10000
Thousands of 2012$




                      5000


                      2000                         ● ● ●                               ● ● ●
                                               ●         ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●             ● ●
                                                                                               ● ●
                                       ● ● ●
                      1000   ● ● ● ●



                       500


                         1980          1985          1990      1995       2000        2005     2010


                                                                   Year
Note: Receipts by firm from SOI corporate data. See Appendix for details.


average profits of both C- and S-corporations increase in the aftermath of reform. This

is because smaller C-corporations become S-corporations, but these relatively small former

C-corporations are still large enough to bring up the S-corporation average.



5                    The taxability of business incomes

In Table A.3 and in Figure 6 we compare IRS reports of the net income from pass-through

entities’ business tax returns with reports on personal income tax returns. These two sources

of information need not match, and indeed do not match, for three possible reasons. First,

some pass-through income may flow to non-taxable investors. Second, losses are fully re-

ported on business tax returns but not necessarily fully deductible on personal income tax

returns. Third, the net income of pass-through entities includes portfolio income that may

pass-through to partners/shareholders but appears on individual income tax returns as part


                                                              13
                                         Figure 5: Average net income by entity type
                        800
                                ●
                                    S corporations
                                    Partnerships
                                    C corporations
                        600         All firms
Thousands of 2012$




                        400


                        200
                                                                                       ● ● ●             ●
                                                                   ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●             ● ● ● ●
                                                             ● ● ●
                                               ● ● ● ● ● ● ●
                              ● ● ● ● ● ● ●
                          0


                      −200
                         1980          1985          1990    1995        2000      2005          2010


                                                                  Year
Note: Data from SOI integrated business statistics. See Appendix for details.


of a different income category (like dividends or capital gains) rather than as partnership

income. The top panel of Figure 6 shows changes since early 1960s and reveals wild fluc-

tuations (which we explain below), while the lower panel shows the data since 1990s with

some additional decomposition.

                     We can generally observe about 70% of S-corporation income on individual tax returns,

with the exception of the late 1970s and early 1980s when losses were unusually important.

                     Until 1991, the partnership income appearing on individual tax returns actually ex-

ceeded overall partnership net income reported at the entity level, with large fluctuations

in the 1980s that were driven by aggregate reported losses. Unsurprisingly, this indicates

the importance of non-deductible losses. Since 1991, partnership income showing up on

Schedule E has become a much smaller share of the total entity-level income reported by

the partnerships themselves. The primary reason for this is the increase in the importance



                                                             14
Figure 6: Share of dividends and income from partnerships and S-corporations reported on
personal income tax returns
                         2.5
                                                                                                                             ●
                                                                                                                                  Dividends
                                                                                                                                  S−corporations
                                                                                                                                  Partnerships
                             2
Share reported on 1040




                         1.5


                             1
                                 ●●●●●               ●●●
                                              ●●●●           ●●●●●●●●          ●              ●                         ●●
                                                                         ●●●             ●●                                  ●
                                                                                                                                                     ●
                                                                                   ●●●            ●●
                                                                                                       ●●●         ●●                            ●       ●●
                         0.5                                                                                 ●●●                 ●●●
                                                                                                                                       ●●●
                                                                                                                                             ●




                             0


                  −0.5
                                 1960                   1970            1980                  1990                  2000                     2010
                                                                                    Year


                         1.2


                             1
Share reported on 1040




                         0.8
                                                                        ●
                                                                   ●                                                                    ●
                                                                              ●
                         0.6                                   ●
●                        ●                     ●         ●                                              ●                         ●                       ●
                                 ●                  ●                                                               ●                            ●
                                         ●                                               ●                    ●
                                                                                    ●                                    ●
                                                                                                  ●
                         0.4

                                     ●
                                             Dividends
                         0.2                 S−corporations
                                             Partnerships
                                             Partnerships − ordinary income
                             0
                                             1995                      2000                            2005                            2010
                                                                                    Year
Note: These tables combine SOI corporate aggregates and personal income categories in
the SOI micro data. See Appendix for details.
                                          15
of pass-through portfolio income, which now actually constitutes the bulk of partnership

net income.

       We can decompose partnership income more precisely starting in 1993.7 However, the

portfolio income of partnerships is much harder to track on individual income tax returns

because it is (mostly) not reported on separate schedules. Cooper et al. (2016) were able

to do so at a point in time using IRS administrative data, but no systematic time series

exists. We document the relative importance of different components of partnership income

in Table A.4 and Figure 7, without being able to track them all in detail to individual tax

returns. Ordinary income has been a decreasing part of the overall partnership income since

the early 1990s — when we have data that allows us to decompose partnership income —

such that ordinary income now constitutes only about 30% of total partnership income.

Long term capital gains, interest income and dividends are the largest components, with

royalties and (net) short term capital gains generally constituting a small share. This

general pattern is broken during cyclical downturns, when capital gains turn low (or even

negative), and the role of dividends, interest income and royalties rises in relative terms,

reflecting the smaller overall pie.

       Because Schedule E of form 1040 does not generally reflect partnership portfolio income

— that income is instead reported separately and not identifiable in publicly available

SOI data — taxable partnership income on individual tax returns should be compared to

ordinary firm-level partnership income rather thantotal partnership income. We show this

comparison as one of the series in the lower panel of Figure 6., As with S-corporations,

personal income tax returns used to capture about 70 to 80% of ordinary partnership

income, although the share has been smaller after 2000 and larger in 2008 (which may

reflect individuals’ inability to fully deduct losses).

       On both panels of Figure 6, we also document changes in the effective taxation of

dividend income — the canonical way of compensating shareholders of C-corporations.

The share of corporate dividends that are taxable on personal income tax returns has
   7
    Following the SOI reporting conventions, firm-level partnership income in Table A.3 consists of ordinary
business income and portfolio income without capital gains.


                                                    16
                                                           Figure 7: Composition of partnership income
                               1

                              0.8
Share of partnership income




                              0.6           ●
                                    ●                                                  ●

                                                  ●    ●                                      ●
                                                                                  ●
                              0.4                            ●
                                                                 ●                                ●    ●                 ●
                                                                      ●                                      ●
                                                                            ●                                                 ●         ●
                                                                                                                                    ●
                                                                                                                 ●   ●
                              0.2

                               0

                      −0.2
                                        ●
                                                Ordinary business income
                                                Portfolio
                      −0.4
                                                1995                       2000                       2005                   2010
                                                                                           Year
                              0.6
Share of partnership income




                              0.4                                           ●
                                                                                                                 ●                      ●
                                                                 ●                                           ●                      ●
                                                                      ●                           ●    ●
                                                             ●
                                                       ●                                                             ●
                                                  ●                                                                           ●
                              0.2   ●       ●
                                                                                  ●
                                                                                              ●


                                                                                       ●
                               0


                                        ●
                                                Long term capital gains
                      −0.2                      Short term capital gains
                                                Interest income
                                                Royalties                                                                ●
                                                Dividend Income
                      −0.4
                                                1995                       2000                       2005                   2010
                                                                                           Year
Note: See Appendix for details.

                                                                                      17
been trending downwards over time from about 80% in the late 1950s to about 50% more

recently. This is due in large part to changes in the characteristics of owners. Ownership of

U.S. equities of all kinds by foreigners (as measured by the Federal Reserve) has increased

from about 2% in 1960 to over 16% in 2014. Another category of investors that are not

subject to personal income taxation are tax exempt or advantaged ones — which we discuss

in the next section.

    Hence, it is clear that the importance of pass-through income has increased significantly

over time and that, furthermore, the remaining C-corporate income distributed to share-

holders is taxed to a lesser extent through personal income taxation. TRA 1986 was a

turning point, but the changes we describe here are not a one-time level shift. Instead,

there has been a long-term shift away from C-corporate form and toward pass-through

income.



6    The timing of taxation

The taxation of pass-through entities is — at least on the surface — pretty straightforward

in terms of timing: income is supposed to be taxed when it accrues. (Although, of course,

this still depends on the nature of the income; capital gains, for example, continue to

be taxed at realization.) This is not the case with C-corporations. In particular, a C-

corporation can retain its earnings instead of distributing them to shareholders. Figure 8

shows the aggregate importance of dividends for corporations (other than S-corporations),

expressed as a share of their current net income. Normalization by net income induces

strong counter-cyclicality due to the well-known smoothness of dividend distributions over

time, but nevertheless there is a marked increase in the level of dividends starting in the

early 1980s. Prior to the 1980s, dividends were of the order of 20% of net profits, and rarely

exceeded 30%. Afterwards, they rarely fall under 40%. One important reason for this, of

course, is the rise of RICs, which have distribution requirements, and thus are more likely

to distribute their profits than other large corporations. But the SOI data do not allow us



                                             18
         Figure 8: Share of non-pass-through corporate net income paid out in dividends
                                                                                                                                                           ●
        1.2    ●
                    Share of non−S corporate dividends in net income



          1

                                                                                                                                   ●
        0.8
                                                                                                                               ●
Share




                                                                                                                                                               ●

        0.6                                                    ●
                                                                                             ●
                                                                   ●                                                                   ●
                                                                                         ●       ●                                                                     ●
                                                                                                                                           ●
                                                                       ●●●           ●                                                                 ●                   ●
                                                                                                     ●
        0.4                                                ●                 ●                           ●         ●       ●
                              ●
                                                                                 ●                           ●●●       ●
                                                                                                                                                   ●               ●
                                  ●
              ●●
                   ●●●   ●●           ●                ●
                                          ●                                                                                                    ●
                                              ●●●●●●
        0.2


          0
                         1970                     1980                           1990                              2000                                    2010
                                                                            Year
Note: Corporations other than S-corps. See Appendix for details.


to decompose annual dividends in this level of detail.

        Profitable corporations that do not pay out dividends need to retain their income instead.

Figure 9 shows the ratio of the stock of accumulated retained earnings to net income for C-

corporations (and RICs) and S-corporations separately and for the whole corporate sector.

This is one way of illustrating how the role of retained earnings changed over time. Overall,

the stock of retained earnings is nowadays much lower than it was in the 1970s. However,

this decrease followed a period of very tumultuous changes. The measure of normalized

aggregate earnings in 9 increased massively in the early 1980s and started falling (with

large fluctuations) afterwards. The pattern is about the same in aggregate and for C-

corporations alone. In contrast, for S-corporations — entities for which retained earnings

do not have first-order tax consequences — the level has been much lower and the pattern

has been much more stable.



                                                                       19
         Figure 9: The stock of retained earnings relative to net income of corporations
         10                                                                ●                           ●    Non−S corp retained earnings divided by net income
                                                                                                            S corp retained earnings divided by net income
                                                                                                            All corporations retained earnings by net income


          8                                                                    ●


                                                                                       ●
                                                                                           ●                                             ●
                                                                                   ●
          6                                                            ●                                                                     ●●
                                                                                                                                     ●
Ratio




                                    ●
                                                                                               ●            ●
                                        ●                                                                                                                          ●
                                                                                                       ●●                        ●
                                ●           ●                      ●                                            ●
          4   ●
                  ●
                           ●●                   ●
                                                        ●
                                                                                                   ●                ●       ●●                        ●●       ●
                      ●●                                                                                                                                                           ●●
                                                    ●                                                                   ●                                                      ●
                                                            ●●●●
                                                                                                                                                                           ●
                                                                                                                                                  ●        ●

          2


          0                                                                                                                                                            ●
                            1970                              1980                                 1990                              2000                              2010
                                                                                            Year
Note: Firm net income and the stock of retained income from SOI annual reports. See
Appendix for details.


        A different way of normalizing the level of retained earning is by comparing the stock

of such earnings to the total value of corporate equities, as we do in Figure 10. This figures

makes clear that the late 1970s and 1980s were a very unusual period in which retained

earnings corresponded to a massive share of the value of corporate equities. Since then, the

prominence of retained earnings has notably declined.

        Finally, yet another way of presenting the importance of retained earnings is to compare

them to household income rather than to corporate equities. This presentation abstracts

from the dynamics of the corporate sector and instead illustrates the potential quantitative

importance of retentions for thinking about the individual income distribution.

        Figure 11 shows much more dramatic evolution of the overall series since the 1990s.

While accumulated retentions became smaller relative to the aggregate value of corporate

equities, retentions remained large relative to household income, with a great deal of volatil-

                                                                                       20
        Figure 10: The stock of retained earnings relative to the value of corporate equity
          1
                                                                            ●
                                                                                    Retained earnings as a share of the total value of equities


                                                                    ●           ●
        0.8                                         ●                   ●
                                                                ●                   ●
                                                                            ●               ●
                                                                                        ●
                                                        ●
        0.6                                                 ●                                   ●
Share




                                                ●                                                   ●
                                                                                                        ●
                                                                                                            ●
                       ●           ●●
        0.4   ●                         ●                                                                           ●
                  ●●       ●                ●                                                                   ●
                               ●
                                                                                                                        ●
                                                                                                                            ●●●●●●
                                                                                                                                                               ●●
                                                                                                                                     ●●●
        0.2                                                                                                                                                ●
                                                                                                                                                                                 ●
                                                                                                                                                       ●
                                                                                                                                           ●       ●                        ●●
                                                                                                                                               ●                        ●
                                                                                                                                                                    ●
          0
                               1970                                 1980                                    1990                     2000                           2010
                                                                                                     Year
Note: Retained income from SOI annual reports. Equity value data taken from table L.223
of the Federal Reserve Z.1 release. See Appendix for details.


ity. However, even this normalization reveals some increase in the early 1980s and a rapid

decline until early 1990s, before the massive fluctuations of late 1990s and 2000s and the

secular growth of large corporate firms created sharp cyclical movements in this series.

        Taken together, these figures suggest that the important changes in the accumulation of

retained earnings actually precede the Tax Reform Act of 1986, and instead have their ori-

gins in the changes in incentives that began in the 1970s and early 1980s. These figures also

indicate the qualitatively different cyclical dynamics in the importance of retained earnings

since the 1990s, compared to earlier decades. Finally, these figures reveal that accumulated

retained earnings are large relative to both the value of equities and household income,

although the importance of accumulated retained income has declined over time. Because

retained earnings reflect income that is not directly paid to shareholders as dividends, they

are either missed on the individual side or (at least partially) accounted for through cap-

                                                                                                21
            Figure 11: The stock of retained earnings relative to total household income
         0.8
                                                                                                                                           ●
                                                                                                                                               ●
                                                                                                               ●

                                                  ●●                                                      ●●
                                              ●        ●●
         0.6        ●●●●●                ●●                                                                        ●                   ●
               ●●                                           ●
                               ●
                            ●●● ●   ●●                          ●                                     ●
                                                                    ●
                                                                                                  ●                                                             ●
                                                                        ●                                                          ●
                                                                            ●
 Share




                                                                                ●            ●●                                                            ●●
         0.4                                                                        ●●
                                                                                         ●
                                                                                                                               ●
                                                                                                                       ●


                                                                                                                                                       ●

         0.2
                                                                                                                           ●



                                                                                                                                                   ●
                ●
                     Retained earnings relative to income
           0
                        1970               1980                             1990                           2000                                    2010
                                                                     Year
Note: Retained income from SOI annual corporate reports. Household income from Piketty
and Saez (2003). See Appendix for details.


ital gains. We will discuss capital gains realizations and provide some information about

unrealized capital gains in what follows, but first we are going to document that retained

earnings are in fact relevant for equity values.

         If businesses retain rather than distribute earnings, those retentions should correspond

to changes in equity valuation. In Figures 12 and 13, we show that over a longer term

changes in equity values for the corporate sector as a whole actually follow reasonably well

trends in earnings retentions. For the purpose of these figures, we shift focus to the flow of

pretax retained earnings, constructed as the difference between corporate net income and

corporate distributions.8 Of course, this is a very simplistic way of thinking about equity

values that does not take into account the value of future profits. Naturally, it cannot also
   8
     This is not the same as changes in the accounting concept of accumulated retained earnings reported to
the IRS. The two series track each other closely until the 1990s but have diverged since.



                                                                22
                                  Figure 12: Changes in equity value and current retained earnings
           5000                                                                            ●        ●
                                                                                                                ●
                                                                                          ●●            ●
                                                                                                                 ● ●
                                                                                      ●
                                                                                                    ●
                                                                                 ●                      ●
                                                                                       ●
                                                                  ●   ●                                     ●
                                              ●●   ●
                                       ● ● ●●     ●   ●● ●● ● ●● ●   ●
                                    ●●  ●  ●                ●
                             ●●●●●●● ●● ● ●
 Billions of dollars




                                                         ●
                         0                   ●
                                                 ●
                                                        ●  ● ●
                                                                ●
                                                                   ●
                                                                       ●
                                                ●                                                                   ●
                                                    ●●

                                                                                               ●●


                                                                                                ●

−5000



                              ●
                                    Change in equity values
                                    Current retained earnings
−10000
                                                                                                            ●
                              1950          1960         1970     1980        1990         2000                 2010
                                                                      Year
Note: Change in equity value calculated using table L.223 of the Federal Reserve Z.1 release
and Current Retained Earnings. See Appendix for details.


explain the many large, short-term fluctuations in the equity market. Still, in the long

run, increases in equity values have to reflect either retentions or changes in the value of

future investment opportunities. For the economy as a whole, this latter component is not

necessarily large (or even positive). As the figure illustrates, changes in equity valuations

fluctuate around but do not deviate from the path of changes in retained earnings. Between

1945 and 2012, the value of corporate equities increased nominally by an average of about

$386 billion a year; corporations retained an average of about $294 a year.

                       When firms do not distribute their earnings, shareholders that want to cash out can do

so by realizing capital gains. As mentioned above, the value of those firms should correspond

to the stock of unrealized capital gains. We can assess the importance of unrealized capital

gains to households by relying on the Survey of Consumer Finances that allows us to

construct an estimate of unrealized capital gains every three years starting in 1989.

                                                                 23
Figure 13: Changes in equity value and current retained earnings, normalized by the total
value of equities
                                      0.4
                                                           ●                                                                         ●
                                                                                                                                             ●              ●
                                                                   ●
                                                                                                    ●                                            ●                      ●
Relative to total value of equities




                                                                                                              ●
                                                              ●                     ●                                    ●                         ●
                                                                          ●                  ●                                   ●
                                                     ●                                               ●                                            ●
                                      0.2                                           ●                                ●    ●
                                                                                            ●                ●                                                  ●        ●
                                                     ●                         ●                                                         ●                                   ●
                                                                                ●                                             ●               ●             ●
                                                                      ●                                           ●                   ●
                                             ●                                ●
                                                               ●                                                                                                ●
                                                                                                         ●                                                          ●
                                                         ●             ●                                                     ●            ●
                                        0   ●●            ●
                                                                                         ●
                                                                           ●                                          ●                                                     ●
                                                                                                                 ●                ●
                                                                  ●             ●                                                                     ●●
                                                                                                        ●
                                                                                        ●

                             −0.2                                                               ●                                                       ●


                                                                                                 ●
                                                 ●
                                                         Change in equity values
                                                         Current retained earnings
                                                                                                                                                                    ●
                             −0.4
                                             1950                     1960              1970                1980                 1990                2000               2010
                                                                                                             Year
Note: Change in equity value calculated using table L.223 of the Federal Reserve Z.1 release.
and Current Retained Earnings . See Appendix for details.


                                      Figure 14 shows the estimated stock of capital gains relative to the value of overall

equities. The SCF contains only limited details about the different categories of capital

gains, but it does distinguish between business, housing and stock/mutual fund capital

gains. Appreciation in the value of businesses is by far the largest component of these

gains; publicly traded stocks and mutual funds are only a small share. This suggests that

unrealized capital gains primarily reflect direct (private) ownership rather than ownership

through publicly traded equities. And, consistent with the pattern of retained earnings

in Figure 10, unrealized capital gains fell in importance (relative to equities) in the early

1990s.

                                      However, even though retained earnings and unrealized capital gains declined relative to

the aggregate value of equities, this pattern is misleading for thinking about the importance


                                                                                                        24
                 Figure 14: Unrealized capital gains relative to the aggregate value of equities
               1.2
                                                            ●
                                                                    Unrealized gains − all (excl. housing)
                     ●                                              Unrealized gains − business
                                                                    Unrealized gains − stocks and mutual funds
                 1


               0.8            ●
Equity share




                                                                                       ●

               0.6                                              ●
                                                                            ●
                                        ●                                                         ●
                                                 ●
               0.4                                                                                               ●




               0.2


                 0
                     1990            1995             2000                   2005               2010
                                                            Year
Note: Survey of Consumer Finances, 1989-2013. Unrealized capital gains as a share of the
aggregate value of U.S. equities.


of unrealized gains relative to household income: Over the period we study, equity values

have increased much faster than household incomes. As Figure 15 documents, unrealized

capital gains have actually become more important relative to household income during the

2000s.

               Figure 15 also compares the magnitude of retained earnings to unrealized capital gains.

The aggregate retained earnings measure cannot fully account for the stock of unrealized

gains, indicating that this is not the only source of appreciation of businesses. In fact,

because some capital gains are realized, one might expect that the remaining unrealized

gains could be actually smaller than the stock of retained earnings, but Figure 15 indicates

that this effect does not seem strong enough and that, in fact, unrealized capital gains

are even more important than retentions could have suggested. For practical purposes,

systematically observing the stock of unrealized capital gains is not possible beyond years

                                                       25
    Figure 15: Unrealized capital gains and retained earnings relative to household income
                                                                                       ●
                               ●
                                   Unrealized gains − business
                                   Unrealized gains − stocks and mutual funds
                                   Stock of retained earnings


                       1                                                        ●
Relative to income




                                                                                                 ●         ●
                                                                          ●


                                                              ●
                           ●           ●
                                                  ●


                     0.5




                       0
                           1990                 1995               2000         2005           2010
                                                                         Year
Note: Survey of Consumer Finances, 1989-2013. Unrealized capital gains as a share of the
value of aggregate equities.


covered by the SCF, so the stock of retained earnings can at least be a useful guidance for

the magnitudes involved.

                     Of course, some capital gains are realized. How large are capital gains realizations?

Figure 16 shows taxable capital gains realizations from the IRS data expressed as a share

of the aggregate value of equities. It also shows net capital gains realizations from the

IRS “Sales of Capital Assets Reported on Individual Tax Returns” studies that incorporate

losses without limiting them by the (net) $3000 deductibility limit. In normal years, that

distinction is not huge, but the deductibility of losses plays a large role in down-market

years (2001, 2002, 2008 and 2009).

                     The important point for our purposes is that capital gains realizations increased dramat-

ically in the early 1980s. This followed a period of significant increase in retained earnings

that we documented on Figures 10 and 11 and that coincides with the declining impor-

                                                                    26
                         Figure 16: Capital gains realizations as a share of household income

                         ●
                                     Net taxable capital gains                                                           ●
                                     Net capital gains

                                                                                                                                                                                                       ●
                                                                                                                                                                           ●                       ●
               0.1                                                                                                                                                     ●                       ●
Income share




                                                                                                                                                                   ●

                                                                                                                                                               ●
                                                                                                                     ●                                                                     ●                            ●
                                                             ●
                                                                                                                ●●                                                                                         ●
                                                                                                                                                           ●                                                                ●
                                                         ●                                                                                                                     ●
                                                                                                                             ●●
          0.05                   ●               ●
                                                                 ●
                                                                             ●
                                                                                                ●
                                                                                                    ●       ●                     ●
                                                                                                                                                                                       ●                           ●●
                                                     ●                                                  ●                                              ●                           ●
                         ●                   ●                           ●       ●                                                                ●●
                             ●           ●                                                ●●●                                         ●
                                     ●                                                                                                        ●                                                                ●
                     ●                                               ●               ●●                                                   ●




                 0
                     1960                                    1970                           1980                              1990                                 2000                                    2010
                                                                                                                 Year
Note: IRS “Sales of Capital Assets Reported on Individual Tax Returns” and Piketty-Saez
Table A6.

tance of retained earnings visible on these figures in the 1980s. This suggests that capital

gains realizations unlocked retained earnings, and also that these realizations reflected the

accumulated stock of earnings rather than current earnings. Hence, it seems likely that

increased capital-gains realizations in the early 1980s (at least partially) reflected income

that had been accruing over a number of previous years. If so, these realizations are likely

not best conceptualized as a single lump of income concentrated in a small number of years.

Ideally, one would allocate these gains over the previous years (and perhaps even decades)

during which they accrued.

               Of course, capital gains realizations do not correspond only to the sales of equities.

In Figure 17 we show, relying on Sales of Capital Assets reports, the role that different

categories of capital gains play. We focus on decomposing business-related assets. Corporate

stock (including non-bond mutual funds) has always accounted for about half of capital


                                                                                                            27
                              Figure 17: Composition of capital gains realizations
          0.12                                                                                         ●
                      ●
                          All gains
                          Pass−through                                                         ●
                          Corporate stock                                  ●                       ●
               0.1                                                     ●
                          Other business assets
                          Land and real estate
                                                                   ●
          0.08                                                ●                            ●
                                                                                                                           ●
Income share




                                ●

          0.06
                                                                                       ●
                                                                                                                   ●
                                                                                                                       ●
          0.04        ●
                                                                               ●

                                                                                   ●                       ●
          0.02

                                                                                                               ●
                 0

                 1980         1985         1990      1995              2000                2005                2010
                                                            Year
Note: Capital gains realizations from SOI data. Equity value data taken from table L.223
of the Federal Reserve Z.1 release.

gains realizations. The “other business-asset” categories include the sales of partnerships,

S-corporations, estate or trust interests, depreciable business property and capital gain

distributions. Capital gains that are passed through (and whose details are not known)

are an increasingly large share of total capital gains, and in recent years have been larger

than the gains from the direct sale of corporate stock. Taken together, these three business-

related categories of assets constitute the bulk of capital gains realizations. The main

remaining component is real estate (residential and rental) and land. This category is small

relative to the other business-related categories, but it is not as cyclical: It constitutes a

larger share of overall capital gains realizations when capital gains are otherwise small.

               As documented before, unrealized capital gains are very large relative to household

income, with unrealized business capital gains approximately as large as the aggregate

household income. Some of these capital gains are realized by taxpayers, but others can


                                                       28
                                    Figure 18: Capital gains realizations in life and at death
               0.12
                               ●
                                   Capital gains realizations in SCF
                                   Capital gains at death (last to die) in SCF
                                   Capital gains at death (head of household) in SCF
                     0.1

                                                                           ●
Relative to income




                                                                                              ●
               0.08
                           ●

               0.06                                                                                      ●
                                                              ●


               0.04                                                                    ●

                                                  ●
                                       ●
               0.02
                                                                                                   ●



                      0
                           1990                 1995               2000                2005       2010
                                                                          Year
Note: Survey of Consumer Finances, 1989-2013. Capital gains as a share of household
income. See the appendix and Kopczuk (2006) for the construction of the estimate of
capital gains at death.


benefit from step-up in basis and escape individual income taxation altogether. In Figure

18, we show the importance of unrealized capital gains at death. In order to do so, we follow

the approach of Poterba and Weisbenner (2001) and Kopczuk (2016), who construct such

estimates by applying mortality rates to the SCF sample in order to obtain the flow of capital

gains benefiting from step-up. Interestingly, despite the large magnitude of unrealized

gains, stepped-up gains appear to be smaller than actual taxable realizations. The precise

estimate will depend on the assumptions about the tax treatment of the first spouse to die.

Nevertheless, the flow of unrealized capital gains escaping taxation is still of the order of

one quarter or one half of actual realizations in most years.




                                                                     29
7    Tax-exempt entities and tax-advantaged accounts

If the personal income tax system is not capturing all of the income of business entities,

where does it go? One possibility is tax-advantaged investors. There are two kinds of owners

with a tax advantaged status: Tax-exempt entities and individual with tax-advantaged

retirement accounts. While we do not attempt to provide a comprehensive take on tax-

exempt and tax-advantaged owners here, we offer a general overview of some of the more

important issues.

    The modern structure governing tax exempt entities dates back to the Revenue Acts of

1950 and 1954, which narrowed the purposes for which tax-exempt entities could be formed

and established the first 501(c) tax exempt organizations. Most tax-exempt organizations

are now organized under section 501(c) of the Internal Revenue Code, which currently lists

29 categories of organization that are exempt from federal income taxation. The largest

and most common form of these organizations is the 501(c)(3), which exempts from income

taxation entities that are “organized and operated exclusively for religious, charitable, sci-

entific” and a variety of other purposes (e.g., “to foster national or international amateur

sports competition”).

    The IRS first started compiling asset data from tax-exempt entities in the mid-1970s,

and did so in a systematic fashion in the mid-1980s. These data show a large increase in the

assets held by tax exempt organizations (Column 2 of Table A.5). What’s less obvious from

the SOI data is whether these entities own an increasingly large share of total corporate

equity. In the second column of Table A.5, we report the share of assets of 501c(3) entities

that is held in the form of equities — that share has been relatively stable. However, despite

the large nominal growth, the size of the overall sector relative to the overall size of equities

does not appear to have increased over time.

    A more rapid and proportionally meaningful change seems to have occurred with the

assets in tax-advantaged accounts. The two most important categories here are IRAs and

401(k)s (and related) accounts. This doesn’t include all the categories of tax-advantaged



                                               30
             Figure 19: The potential role of retained earnings in top income shares

    0.30


    0.25


    0.20
                                                                                     ●
                                                                                ●
                                                                              ●● ● ●●
Share




                                                                         ●   ●    ●
                                                                        ● ●
                                                                       ●    ●
    0.15                                                             ●
                                                                      ●    ●
                                                             ● ● ●●●●
                                                              ● ●
             ●●●
                ●                                           ●
    0.10         ● ●
                  ● ●●●●●                         ●●
                         ●●●●●●●●●●            ●●●
                                   ●●●●●●●●●●●●

    0.05                                                       ●
                                                                    Piketty−Saez, no capital gains
                                                                    Piketty−Saez, capital gains
                                                                    All retained income to top
    0.00
             1950        1960        1970        1980        1990          2000          2010
                                                     Year
Note: See Appendix for details.


retirement savings, but it includes the major categories. Government pension funds that

cover many groups of federal, state and local employees are also exempt from taxation.

Assets controlled by these funds are nowadays of the same order of magnitude as those in

individual retirement accounts, but they have been growing somewhat more slowly. Taken

together, tax exempts and tax-advantaged accounts are an obviously important component

of equity ownership.



8        Conclusions and implications for inequality measurement

We document trends in composition of organizational forms of businesses in the United

States and changes in how entrepreneurs and investors are compensated, highlighting in

particular the role of tax incentives in shaping the trends.

        In the introduction, we noted the importance of the form of taxation for measurement of


                                                31
inequality. While tracing the full implications inequality is beyond the scope of this paper, in

Figure 19 we show the magnitude of the flow of retained earnings relative to the prominent

estimates of top income shares from Piketty and Saez (2003). This illustrate the potential

that allocating corporate income can have on the individual income distribution. Indeed,

because retentions in the U.S. corporate sector are very large, accounting for corporate

income can have a large effect on our understanding of the individual income distribution.9

We show the potential magnitude of the corporate sector by hypothetically allocating the

flow of retained earnings to the top 1% of the distribution. While this is not a realistic

allocation — it is obviously unlikely that all corporate retentions really correspond to the

very top of the income distribution — it shows an upper bound for the role of the corporate

sector.

       This upper bound allocation has a large effect on observed income inequality. Current

retained earnings can constitute as much as 13% of the combined household and corporate

income in a given year. This bound fluctuates a lot, and it also has changed over time.

Retained earnings were on average over 9% of combined household and corporate income

before 1987 and just 6.58% afterwards, although this share is volatile in both periods. And,

in contrast to the Piketty-Saez inequality series, the volatility of retained earnings is high

across all of the second half the twentieth century, and not the thirty years since 1986.

       The Piketty-Saez (2003) approach to to account for corporate income that does not give

rise to dividends is to rely on capital gains realizations.10 Figure 19 also shows the Piketty-

Saez (2003) series that includes capital gains. Two points are worth noting. First, starting

in the 1990s, the Piketty-Saez series including capital gains and our series with retained

income move together, although the level of capital gains series is of course much lower. (It

is worth underscoring again that we do not think assigning all of retained earnings to the

top is the right approach; it is an upper bound of what retained earnings may contribute.)
   9
     We construct the flow of retained earnings by taking net income of the corporate sector and eliminating
distributions. We do not adjust it for corporate taxation. This is consistent with the treatment of other
components of Piketty-Saez (2003) series that are also reported on pre-tax basis. See appendix for details.
  10
     As we discussed before, the large stock of unrealized capital gains and discretionary nature of the decision
to realize cast doubt on whether capital gains are an appropriate way of adjusting for unobserved accrual.



                                                       32
In fact, a simple correlation of the contribution of capital gains to top 1% and the flow of

retained earnings after 1987 is 0.58 — positive and large.

       In contrast, before 1987 — when retained earnings were even higher on average —

capital gains contributed almost nothing to the top income share, except for a few years

in the early 1980s. Retained earnings were volatile, but this volatility did not seem to

translate into any volatility in the Piketty-Saez estimate of the top 1%’s share of national

income, with or without capital gains. To underscore this point: a simple correlation of the

contribution of retained earnings and that of capital gains before 1987 is actually negative

and large at −0.56!11 Hence, these large changes in the volume and volatility of retained

earnings — and their wildly different correlations with capital gains before and after 1987

— suggest that personal income-tax data varies in its ability to account for non-realized

accrual. In particular, it raises the possibility that pre-1987 personal income-tax data may

not adequately reflect the annual accrual of income.




  11
    One should note though that the negative correlation is primarily driven by trends — that is, the slightly
increasing role of capital gains and slightly reduced role of retained income over the whole period. Beyond
that, capital gains contribution to the top 1% is just smooth and small, and did not closely track volatile
retained earnings series.


                                                     33
Alstadsæter Annette, Martin Jacob, Wojciech Kopczuk and Kjetil Telle (2016): Account-
    ing for Business Income in Measuring Top Income Shares: Integrated Accrual Approach
    Using Individual and Firm Data from Norway, Discussion Paper 837, Research Depart-
    ment, Statistics Norway.
BEA, NIPA table 7.16, “Relation of Corporate Profits Taxes and Dividends in the National
    Income and Product Accounts to Corresponding Measures as Published by the Internal
    Revenue Service”
Clarke, Conor and Wojciech Kopczuk (2016): Income Inequality and the Corporate Sector,
    Yale and Columbia, mimeo.
Michael Cooper, John McClelland, James Pearce, Richard Prisinzano, Joseph Sullivan,
    Danny Yagan, Owen Zidar, Eric Zwick. Business in the United States: Who Owns it
    and How Much Tax Do They Pay? in Tax Policy and the Economy, Volume 30, 2016.
Coven, Glenn and Amy Hess (1983): The Subchapter S Revision Act: An Analysis and
    Appraisal, Tennessee Law Review, 50:4, 569-742
Fairfield, Tasha and Jorratt De Luis, M. (2016): Top Income Shares, Business Profits,
    and Effective Tax Rates in Contemporary Chile. Review of Income and Wealth, 62:
    S120–S144.
Gordon, Roger H. and Joel Slemrod (2000): Are ’Real’ Responses to Taxes Simply In-
    come Shifting Between Corporate and Personal Tax Bases? in Does Atlas Shrug? The
    Economic Consequences of Taxing the Rich, J. Slemrod, ed., New York: Russell Sage
    Foundation, Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 2000, pp. 240-80.
Gordon, Roger H and Jeffrey Mackie-Mason (1994): Tax Distortions to the Choice of Or-
    ganizational Form, Journal of Public Economics, Vol. 55, no. 2, pp. 279-306.
Graetz, Michael (2008): 100 Million Unnecessary Returns: A Simple, Fair, and Competitive
    Tax Plan for the United States
Greenwood, Robin and David Scharfstein (2013): The Growth of Finance, Journal of Eco-
    nomic Perspectives, 27:2, 3-28
Hamill, Susan Pace (2005): The Story of LLCs: Combining the Best Features of a Flawed
    Business Tax Structure, in Business Tax Stories
IRS, Statistics of Income (various years), “Corporation Income Tax Return Reports”
IRS, Statistics of Income (various years), “Charities & Other Tax-Exempt Organizations
    Statistics”
IRS, Statistics of Income (various years), “Partnership Income Tax Return Reports”
IRS, Statistics of Income (various years), “Sales of Capital Assets Reported on Individual
    Income Tax Returns”
Joint Committee on Taxation (2013): Foreign Passthrough Entity Use in Five Selected
    Countries, Report prepared by the Staff of the Joint Commitee on Taxation, October.
Kopczuk, Wojciech (2016): U.S. capital gains and estate taxation: status report and direc-
    tions for reform, in Alan Auerbach and Kent Smetters (eds.), The Economics of Tax
    Policy, Oxford University Press, forthcoming.
Malkiel, Burton (2013): Asset Management Fees and the Growth of Finance, Journal of
    Economic Perspectives, 27:2, 97-108

                                           34
MacKie-Mason, Jason and Roger H. Gordon (1997): How Much Do Taxes Discourage
  Incorporation?, Journal of Finance, 52(2), pages 477-505.
Piketty, Thomas and Emmanuel Saez (2003): Income Inequality in the United States, 1913-
   1998, Quarterly Journal of Economics, 118:1, 1-39
Poterba, James M. and Scott Weisbenner (2001): The Distributional Burden of Taxing
   Estates and Unrealized Capital Gains at the Time of Death, in Gale, William G., James
   R. Hines, and Joel Slemrod (eds.) Rethinking Estate and Gift Taxation. Brookings
   Institution.
Schizer, David (2016): Between Scylla and Charybdis: Taxing Corporations or Shareholders
   (or Both), Working Paper
Warren, Alvin (1981): The Relation and Integration of Individual and Corporate Income
  Taxes, Harvard Law Review, 94:4, 717-800
Wolfson, Michael C., Michael R Veall, William Neil Brooks and Brian B. Murphy, Piercing
  the Veil: Private Corporations and the Income of the Affluent (2016): Canadian Tax
  Journal/Revue Fiscale Canadienne, Vol. 64, No. 1, 2016.




                                          35
A   Appendix — Tables




                        36
                        Table A.1: Number of active business entities
         Year                C               S    Partnerships          Self-
                  corporations    corporations                    proprietors
          1958         965,178          25,203          953,840    8,799,711
          1959       1,002,980          71,140          949,396    9,142,359
          1960       1,050,353          90,221          940,560    9,089,985
          1961       1,084,240         106,046          938,966    9,241,755
          1962       1,144,376         123,666          932,181    9,182,586
          1963       1,184,085         139,112          924,276    9,135,954
          1964       1,215,662         157,855          922,160    9,192,746
          1965       1,250,570         173,410          914,215    9,078,466
          1966       1,286,874         181,851          922,680    9,086,714
          1967       1,333,576         200,784          906,182    9,126,082
          1968       1,324,486         217,184          917,500    9,211,613
          1969       1,425,014         233,806          920,831    9,429,822
          1970       1,408,002         257,475          936,133    9,399,653
          1971       1,471,264         262,068          958,912    9,744,640
          1972       1,524,854         287,906          992,012   10,172,792
          1973       1,591,590         313,080        1,039,092   10,648,202
          1974       1,632,795         333,099        1,062,268   10,873,822
          1975       1,665,234         358,413        1,073,094   10,881,969
          1976       1,690,500         391,700        1,096,441   11,358,235
          1977       1,813,683         428,204        1,153,398   11,345,616
          1978       1,898,100         478,679        1,234,157   12,017,953
          1979       2,041,887         514,907        1,299,593   12,329,982
          1980       2,163,458         545,389        1,379,654    8,931,712
          1981       2,268,966         541,489        1,460,502    9,584,790
          1982       2,359,272         564,219        1,514,212   10,105,515
          1983       2,348,162         648,267        1,541,539   10,703,921
          1984       2,465,843         701,339        1,643,581   11,262,390
          1985       2,549,091         724,749        1,713,603   11,928,573
          1986       2,598,271         826,214        1,702,952   12,393,700
          1987       2,480,440       1,127,905        1,648,032   13,091,132
          1988       2,299,896       1,257,191        1,654,245   13,679,302
          1989       2,199,081       1,422,967        1,635,164   14,297,558
          1990       2,136,032       1,575,092        1,553,529   14,782,738
          1991       2,098,641       1,698,271        1,515,345   15,180,722
          1992       2,077,518       1,785,371        1,484,752   15,495,419
          1993       2,055,982       1,901,505        1,467,567   15,848,119
          1994       2,310,703       2,023,754        1,493,963   16,153,871
          1995       2,312,382       2,153,119        1,580,900   16,423,872
          1996       2,317,886       2,304,416        1,654,256   16,955,023
          1997       2,248,065       2,452,254        1,758,627   17,176,487
          1998       2,249,970       2,588,088        1,855,348   17,408,809
          1999       2,198,740       2,725,775        1,936,919   17,575,643
          2000       2,172,705       2,860,478        2,057,500   17,904,731
          2001       2,136,756       2,986,486        2,132,117   18,338,190
          2002       2,100,074       3,154,377        2,242,169   18,925,517
          2003       2,047,593       3,341,606        2,375,374   19,710,079
          2004       2,027,613       3,518,334        2,546,877   20,590,691
          2005       1,974,961       3,684,086        2,763,625   21,467,566
          2006       1,955,147       3,872,766        2,947,116   22,074,953
          2007       1,865,232       3,989,893        3,096,334   23,122,698
          2008       1,782,478       4,049,944        3,146,006   22,614,483
          2009       1,715,306       4,094,562        3,168,728   22,659,976
          2010       1,671,149       4,127,554        3,248,481   23,003,656
          2011       1,648,540       4,158,572        3,285,177   23,426,940
          2012       1,617,739       4,205,452        3,388,561   23,553,850
Notes: see notes to Figure 2 in Data appendix
                                                 37
                   Table A.2: Net income less deficit of business entities
         Year              C                S    Partnerships      RIC & REIT            Self-          Total
                 corporations    corporations                                      proprietors
         1958      39,200,000          88,890          8,116,274                   20,777,789       68,182,953
         1959      47,700,000         395,299          8,844,708                   21,516,876       78,456,883
         1960      44,500,000         382,479          8,360,373                   21,067,090       74,309,942
         1961      47,000,000         564,447          8,688,622                   22,696,990       78,950,059
         1962      50,800,000         681,950          8,531,019                   23,894,781       83,907,750
         1963      54,300,000         799,453          8,668,166      1,400,000    23,770,528       88,938,147
         1964      61,333,000       1,040,197          9,244,464      1,767,000    25,555,837       98,940,498
         1965      72,257,000       1,447,857          9,699,145      2,443,000    27,887,417      113,734,419
         1966      78,496,738       1,655,084         10,445,061      2,803,262    30,030,195      123,430,340
         1967      75,392,000       1,853,187         10,865,953      3,908,000    30,407,572      122,426,712
         1968      82,273,000       1,947,530         11,405,163      5,227,000    31,870,535      132,723,228
         1969      78,569,000       2,247,184         10,486,453      3,531,000    33,867,537      128,701,174
         1970      64,790,000       2,173,592          9,790,396      3,210,000    33,214,737      113,178,725
         1971      78,800,000       2,100,000          9,146,110      3,100,000    34,450,038      127,596,148
         1972      95,904,000       1,795,873          9,618,447      3,596,000    39,113,220      150,027,540
         1973     119,730,000       1,888,607          9,216,034      2,870,000    46,673,063      180,377,704
         1974     145,925,000       1,947,275          8,864,873      2,275,000    45,855,023      204,867,171
         1975     143,900,000       2,003,254          7,737,570      2,100,000    44,611,260      200,352,084
         1976     183,990,000       3,671,196         10,422,811      2,610,000    49,500,188      250,194,195
         1977     215,880,000       4,750,479         13,264,168      3,620,000    51,388,971      288,903,618
         1978     242,979,438       5,348,741         14,446,809      4,420,562    59,027,286      326,222,836
         1979     275,625,000       3,795,578         15,205,908      7,375,000    60,758,789      362,760,275
         1980     236,487,630       2,518,912          8,248,656     14,671,749    54,947,219      316,874,165
         1981     185,868,913       1,870,746         -2,734,897     25,909,303    53,071,628      263,985,693
         1982     120,180,204       3,047,943         -7,314,587     31,105,996    50,573,163      197,592,719
         1983     154,156,433       5,075,351         -2,610,041     29,082,144    60,359,153      246,063,040
         1984     196,435,483       6,906,667         -3,500,024     29,558,446    70,766,610      300,167,182
         1985     192,991,940       7,602,450         -8,883,674     39,524,630    78,772,578      310,007,924
         1986     203,018,630       8,293,241        -17,370,860     58,218,369    90,423,763      342,583,143
         1987     250,706,247      30,017,036         -5,419,105     53,365,950   105,460,627      434,130,755
         1988     327,131,666      43,536,518         14,493,114     52,447,631   126,323,251      563,932,180
         1989     289,721,555      44,779,347         14,099,275     66,819,244   132,737,680      548,157,101
         1990     270,925,138      44,831,241         16,609,540     67,457,384   141,430,193      541,253,496
         1991     248,113,316      44,745,093         21,406,607     67,671,565   141,515,783      523,452,364
         1992     291,866,888      58,329,739         42,916,649     63,933,826   153,960,246      611,007,348
         1993     368,912,105      66,233,497         66,652,288     75,113,178   156,458,803      733,369,871
         1994     426,082,290      91,676,443         82,183,076     77,243,699   166,798,668      843,984,176
         1995     514,751,182      99,128,672        106,829,196    122,543,160   169,262,336    1,012,514,546
         1996     574,553,924     125,245,496        145,218,248    138,792,224   176,755,693    1,160,565,585
         1997     607,541,446     153,063,011        168,240,726    196,132,514   186,643,910    1,311,621,607
         1998     532,246,228     181,788,303        186,704,627    181,117,938   202,274,720    1,284,131,816
         1999     535,289,061     193,756,411        228,438,105    256,317,862   207,946,977    1,421,748,416
         2000     517,937,235     198,535,888        268,990,758    270,479,156   214,715,298    1,470,658,335
         2001     270,774,336     187,686,917        276,334,824    190,296,836   217,385,116    1,142,478,029
         2002     258,673,938     183,478,933        270,667,169    154,371,152   221,113,286    1,088,304,478
         2003     455,433,845     213,681,780        301,398,218    152,980,175   230,308,100    1,353,802,117
         2004     709,985,922     275,398,651        384,738,394    184,327,903   247,567,189    1,802,018,058
         2005   1,380,200,460     361,042,566        546,210,103    285,551,163   269,919,995    2,842,924,288
         2006   1,247,874,961     386,202,310        666,718,610    389,570,016   278,032,643    2,968,398,540
         2007   1,060,790,902     400,730,264        683,367,402    488,793,640   280,557,010    2,914,239,219
         2008     388,739,523     317,090,536        458,185,323    355,576,129   264,508,362    1,784,099,872
         2009     443,166,636     272,466,326        409,878,549    254,897,611   244,821,815    1,625,230,937
         2010     800,837,632     334,093,927        593,727,733    286,646,613   267,699,702    2,283,005,607
         2011     737,025,579     375,437,189        580,896,723    293,475,191   282,649,926    2,269,484,608
         2012   1,051,906,039     475,998,050        777,924,476    344,010,230   304,895,911    2,954,734,706
Notes: see notes to Figure 3 in Data appendix
                                                38
   Table A.3: Firm tax returns vs personal income tax reports of pass-through income
         Year        S Corp -   S Corp - PIT           Share    Part. - Total   Part. - PIT        Share
                        Total
         1959         395,299                                      8,844,708
         1960         382,479                                      8,360,373
         1961         564,447                                      8,688,622
         1962         681,950                                      8,531,019       9,515,036      111.5%
         1963         799,453                                      8,668,166
         1964       1,040,197                                      9,244,464       9,646,222      104.3%
         1965       1,447,857                                      9,699,145
         1966       1,655,084       1,581,048          95.5%      10,445,061      10,822,635      103.6%
         1967       1,853,187       1,524,263          82.3%      10,865,953      12,036,145      110.8%
         1968       1,947,530                                     11,405,163      13,629,558      119.5%
         1969       2,247,184       1,819,254          81.0%      10,486,453      12,287,954      117.2%
         1970       2,173,592       1,689,522          77.7%       9,790,396      10,609,042      108.4%
         1971       2,100,000       1,979,080          94.2%       9,146,110      10,314,584      112.8%
         1972       1,795,873       2,220,079         123.6%       9,618,447      10,633,211      110.6%
         1973       1,888,607       2,212,917         117.2%       9,216,034      10,787,828      117.1%
         1974       1,947,275       2,712,006         139.3%       8,864,873      11,407,353      128.7%
         1975       2,003,254       2,023,950         101.0%       7,737,570      10,550,195      136.4%
         1976       3,671,196       1,875,725          51.1%      10,422,811      11,681,707      112.1%
         1977       4,750,479       1,974,025          41.6%      13,264,168      13,311,856      100.4%
         1978       5,348,741       2,284,272          42.7%      14,446,809      15,044,481      104.1%
         1979       3,795,578       2,230,700          58.8%      15,205,908      12,772,478       84.0%
         1980       2,518,912         670,167          26.6%       8,248,656       9,618,001      116.6%
         1981       1,870,746        -816,257         -43.6%      -2,734,897        -112,948
         1982       3,047,943        -854,479         -28.0%      -7,314,587        -731,790
         1983       5,075,351       2,089,095          41.2%      -2,610,041      -2,319,481
         1984       6,906,667       6,570,254          95.1%      -3,500,024      -7,777,096
         1985       7,602,450       6,624,897          87.1%      -8,883,674      -8,939,052
         1986       8,293,241       7,678,491          92.6%     -17,370,860     -12,492,759
         1987      30,017,036      18,354,700          61.1%      -5,419,105       8,465,251
         1988      43,536,518      35,331,569          81.2%      14,493,114      22,459,972      155.0%
         1989      44,779,347      36,801,499          82.2%      14,099,275      28,585,207      202.7%
         1990      44,831,241      36,999,266          82.5%      16,609,540      30,994,858      186.6%
         1991      44,745,093      32,248,009          72.1%      21,406,607      33,193,502      155.1%
         1992      58,329,739      49,411,635          84.7%      42,916,649      40,531,246       94.4%
         1993      66,233,497      50,233,285          75.8%      66,652,288      41,726,692       62.6%
         1994      91,676,443      71,869,598          78.4%      82,183,076      43,780,598       53.3%
         1995      99,128,672      78,102,196          78.8%     106,829,196      49,105,591       46.0%
         1996     125,245,496      88,092,104          70.3%     145,218,248      59,329,804       40.9%
         1997     153,063,011     102,583,171          67.0%     168,240,726      66,054,249       39.3%
         1998     181,788,303     114,472,839          63.0%     186,704,627      71,414,238       38.2%
         1999     193,756,411     124,986,203          64.5%     228,438,105      85,194,498       37.3%
         2000     198,535,888     128,349,218          64.6%     268,990,758      86,715,885       32.2%
         2001     187,686,917     130,049,750          69.3%     276,334,824      93,629,463       33.9%
         2002     183,478,933     139,000,444          75.8%     270,667,169     101,476,293       37.5%
         2003     213,681,780     148,667,629          69.6%     301,398,218     107,191,948       35.6%
         2004     275,398,651     193,824,854          70.4%     384,738,394     122,014,498       31.7%
         2005     361,042,566     243,003,818          67.3%     546,210,103     145,647,212       26.7%
         2006     386,202,310     270,514,591          70.0%     666,718,610     153,019,987       23.0%
         2007     400,730,264     258,088,167          64.4%     683,367,402     160,546,280       23.5%
         2008     317,090,536     238,299,123          75.2%     458,185,323     142,753,098       31.2%
         2009     272,466,326                                    409,878,549
         2010     334,093,927                                    593,727,733
         2011     375,437,189                                    580,896,723
         2012     475,998,050                                    777,924,476
Notes: see notes to Figure 6 in Data appendix. Taxable share omitted when the total is negative
                                                39
                       Table A.4: Composition of partnership income
         Year       Ordinary       PIT Share           Portfolio    Portfolio -     Short term      Long term
                                                                      non CG                CG             CG
         1993      51,418,125          81.2%          44,314,395    22,152,787        5,170,055     16,991,553
         1994      56,304,445          77.8%          45,105,521    26,895,306       -1,054,112     19,264,327
         1995      60,858,305          80.7%          77,342,327    40,135,924        4,495,804     32,710,599
         1996      89,857,772          66.0%         108,149,024    46,776,289        8,123,363     53,249,372
         1997      92,866,348          71.1%         140,336,774    57,508,865      12,518,579      70,309,330
         1998      88,767,531          80.5%         161,897,547    70,733,949        1,147,207     90,016,391
         1999     107,481,261          79.3%         206,713,189    85,641,114      18,891,946     102,180,129
         2000     119,168,367          72.8%         275,827,300   114,870,157      13,134,895     147,822,248
         2001     114,217,614          82.0%         152,983,983   118,901,383     -11,062,075      45,144,675
         2002     126,212,499          80.4%         110,667,014   106,280,157       -4,764,774      9,151,631
         2003     154,485,912          69.4%         188,901,446   116,698,706      22,681,210      49,521,530
         2004     206,502,522          59.1%         355,581,512   149,290,946      27,837,829     178,452,737
         2005     308,977,137          47.1%         535,267,067   215,051,948      42,563,416     277,651,703
         2006     357,055,417          42.9%         722,426,524   291,617,721      54,613,689     376,195,114
         2007     305,747,126          52.5%         980,860,693   382,248,320      87,431,982     511,180,391
         2008     110,805,898         128.8%         370,840,964   363,558,164    -125,438,062     132,720,862
         2009     137,813,309                        222,071,989   271,912,958      64,099,636    -113,940,605
         2010     254,553,535                        618,879,004   332,751,900      73,322,513     212,804,591
         2011     255,751,530                        665,684,115   314,788,089      17,653,581     333,242,445
         2012     392,228,047                        903,348,369   347,672,413      59,443,290     496,232,666
Notes: see notes to Figure 7 in Data appendix




                                                40
        Table A.5: The size of tax exempt sector relative to overall equity holdings
       Year    501(c)(3)      Share of    501(c)(3)         IRAs    Other tax    Government All tax
                    and       equities          and                  deferred        plans  exempts
                Founda-             in     Founda-                   accounts              and govt.
                   tions     501(c)(3)         tions                                           plans
                                            relative                                         relative
                                              to all                                           to all
                                           equities                                          equities
       1974
       1975                                                     3
       1976                                                     6
       1977                                                     9
       1978                                                    14
       1979                                                    20
       1980                                                    25
       1981                                                    38
       1982                                                    68
       1983                                                   107
       1984                                                   159
       1985                                                   241
       1986                                                   329
       1987                      0.3%                         404                     1,592
       1988          826         0.3%          0.3%           469                     1,702
       1989          923         0.3%          0.2%           546                     1,908
       1990          986         0.4%          0.3%           636                     2,041
       1991        1,102         0.4%          0.2%           776                     2,191
       1992        1,196         0.4%          0.2%           873                     2,471
       1993        1,297         0.4%          0.2%           993                     2,627
       1994        1,395         0.4%          0.2%         1,056          980        2,794         1.0%
       1995        1,609         0.5%          0.2%         1,288        1,224        2,996         0.8%
       1996        1,828         0.5%          0.2%         1,467        1,468        3,293         0.8%
       1997        2,052         0.3%          0.2%         1,728        1,762        3,519         0.7%
       1998        2,049         0.4%          0.1%         2,150        2,072        3,787         0.7%
       1999        2,370         0.4%          0.1%         2,651        2,433        4,072         0.6%
       2000        2,363         0.4%          0.1%         2,629        2,367        4,273         0.7%
       2001        2,418         0.4%          0.2%         2,619        2,255        4,511         0.8%
       2002        2,550         0.4%          0.2%         2,533        2,102        4,739         1.0%
       2003        2,765         0.4%          0.2%         2,993        2,589        5,107         0.8%
       2004        2,993         0.4%          0.2%         3,299        2,904        5,643         0.8%
       2005        3,223         0.4%          0.2%         3,652        3,162        5,973         0.8%
       2006        3,674         0.1%          0.2%         4,220        3,632        6,372         0.7%
       2007        3,770         0.3%          0.1%         4,736        3,892        6,672         0.8%
       2008        3,433         0.4%          0.2%         3,572        2,968        6,807         1.1%
       2009        3,748         0.5%          0.2%         4,363        3,616        7,204         1.0%
       2010        4,127         0.4%          0.2%         4,839        4,096        7,933         0.9%
       2011        4,220         0.5%          0.2%         4,872        4,144        8,190         1.0%
       2012        4,559                       0.2%         5,407        4,572        8,501         0.9%
Note: All numbers in billions of dollars. Total assets reported for each of the following categories: (1)
the sum of all assets from all 501(c) categories for which data is available plus private foundations,
(2) IRAs (Source: ICI, end of year data) and (3) 401(k), 403(b) and 457 plans. “All equities” are
from Federal Reserve L.223 line 10 (all equity holdings at market value).




                                                   41
B     Data appendix

This appendix provides an overview of our data sources. Much of our data is drawn from a variety
of sources within the IRS Statistics of Income and the National Income and Product Accounts. In
general, the most important source is the SOI’s archived statistics on businesses, available at
https://www.irs.gov/uac/soi-tax-stats-archive-1929-to-1999-tax-information-from-businesses

    Much of the data is assembled from PDFs of the annual Corporation Income Tax Return Reports,
which are available between 1954 and 1999 at
https://www.irs.gov/uac/soi-tax-stats-archive-1954-to-1999-corporation-income-tax-return-reports.

    In more recent years, we compile our data from annually published IRS tables. The SOI’s
"integrated business data," also includes many of the measures we use between 1980 and 2012, and
is available at
https://www.irs.gov/uac/soi-tax-stats-integrated-business-data

    We also rely on NIPA table 7.16, much of which is based on IRS data, for our measure of
net corporate dividends. We accept NIPA’s adjustment for IRS misreporting when calculating our
measures of total corporate income.
    A figure-by-figure accounting of our data sources is as follows:

      Figure 1: Share of business income subject to entity-level tax
      We start with the definitions and categories in the JCT’s 2013 report, "Foreign Passthrough
      Entity Use in Five Selected Countries." We extend that data for all of the English-speaking
      countries covered in the report. Data was obtained from the official taxation or statistics
      agencies of all respective countries.

      Figure 2: Number of active business entities
      We start with the SOI’s integrated business data, which includes data on the number of
      active entities going back to 1980. We supplement that data with data on the number of
      active entities drawn from the SOI’s annual corporate reports.

      Figure 3: Share of business income accounted for by different types of entities
      We start with "net income less deficit" by firm type in the IRS integrated business data, and
      supplement it with annual data drawn from the SOI’s annual corporate reports.

      Figure 4: Average receipts by entity type
      We obtain receipts by entity type from the SOI’s integrated business data.



                                                 42
Figure 5: Average net income by entity type
We obtain receipts by entity type from the SOI’s integrated business data.

Figures 6: Share of dividends and income from partnerships and S-corporations reported on
personal income tax returns
The firm-side data from the SOI’s integrated business data and the annual corporate reports.
The individual tax data is from the SOI’s public use microdata files.

Figure 7: Composition of partnership income
Our data is drawn from the SOI’s annual partnership returns, available at https://www.irs.
gov/uac/soi-tax-stats-partnership-returns-historical-and-projected-data

Figure 8: Share of non-pass-through corporate net income paid out in dividends
Our measures of corporate income starts with SOI "total receipts less deductions." We also
accept the NIPA adjust for misreporting, which is reported in NIPA table 7.16. Our measure
of corporate dividends starts with net corporate dividends reported in NIPA table 7.16. We
then subtract S-corporate income and S-corporate dividends (from SOI’s annual corporate
reports) from both categories.

Figure 9: Retained earnings relative to net income of corporations
Our measure of the stock of retained earnings is defined as the sum of unappropriated and
appropriated retained earnings from the SOI annual corporate reports. Net income is as for
figure 8.

Figure 10: Retained earnings relative to the value of corporate equity
Once again, our measure of the stock of retained earnings is defined as the sum of unappropri-
ated and appropriated retained earnings from the SOI annual corporate reports. For the total
value of equities, we use line 10 of table L.223 of the Federal Reserve’s Z.1 release. Historical
data is available here:
https://www.federalreserve.gov/releases/z1/current/data.htm

Figure 11: Retained earnings relative to total household income
Retained earnings is defined as above in the SOI annual corporate reports. Annual household
income is as defined in Piketty Saez (2003).

Figures 12 and 13: Changes in equity value and current retained earnings
Our measures of corporate income starts with SOI "total receipts less deductions." We also



                                           43
accept the NIPA adjust for misreporting, which is reported in NIPA table 7.16. We then
subtract net corporate dividends (also reported in NIPA table 7.16) and S-corporate income
(less dividends), which we obtain from the SOI’s annual corporate reports.
Change in the total value of equities is calculated using line 10 of table L.223 of the Federal
Reserve’s Z.1 release.

Figure 14: Unrealized capital gains
Calculations based on the Survey of Consumer Finances, 1989-2013.

Figure 15: Unrealized capital gains and retained earnings relative to household income
Stock of retained earnings is from the SOI annual corporate reports, as above. Unrealized
capital gains based on the Survey of Consumer Finances, 1989-2013.

Figure 16: Capital gains realizations as a share of household income
Net taxable capital gains are from Piketty-Saez, Table A6. Net capital gains are drawn from
the SOI’s sales of capital assets reports (see below)

Figure 17: Composition of capital gains realizations
The decomposition of capital gains realizations is assembled from the SOI bulletins on the
sales of capital assets, which are available at
https://www.irs.gov/uac/soi-tax-stats-sales-of-capital-assets-reported-on-individual-tax-returns

Earlier reports were published irregularly, but are available going back to 1959.

Figure 18: Capital gains realizations in life and at death
See Kopczuk (2016) for the precise description of methodology. The approach makes socio-
economic adjustments of mortality rates for high net worth individuals based on actuarial
tables for annuitants. The two realizations-at-death series correspond to measuring realiza-
tions corresponding to death of the last spouse to die (mimicking the effective estate tax
treatment in practice) or to death of household head.

Figure 19: The potential role of retained earnings in top income shares
As in figures 12 and 13, our measure of corporate income starts with SOI "total receipts less
deductions," accepts the NIPA adjust for misreporting, and subtracts net corporate dividends
(also reported in NIPA table 7.16) and S-corporate income (less dividends). Income inequality
series are from Piketty-Saez (2003, updated to 2012). Modified income shares calculated as
the share of the sum of corporate retained income and household income.


                                            44
