                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




     RACIAL AND GENDER DISCRIMINATION IN TRANSPORTATION NETWORK
                              COMPANIES

                                          Yanbo Ge
                                    Christopher R. Knittel
                                      Don MacKenzie
                                       Stephen Zoepf

                                     Working Paper 22776
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w22776


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   October 2016




We thank generous financial support from the University of Washington Royalty Research Fund.
This paper has benefited from seminar participants at University of Washington and MIT. We
also thank 16 anonymous research assistants that served as confederates in the experiment. The
views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2016 by Yanbo Ge, Christopher R. Knittel, Don MacKenzie, and Stephen Zoepf. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Racial and Gender Discrimination in Transportation Network Companies
Yanbo Ge, Christopher R. Knittel, Don MacKenzie, and Stephen Zoepf
NBER Working Paper No. 22776
October 2016
JEL No. J15,J16,R4

                                          ABSTRACT

Passengers have faced a history of discrimination in transportation systems. Peer transportation
companies such as Uber and Lyft present the opportunity to rectify long-standing discrimination
or worsen it. We sent passengers in Seattle, WA and Boston, MA to hail nearly 1,500 rides on
controlled routes and recorded key performance metrics. Results indicated a pattern of
discrimination, which we observed in Seattle through longer waiting times for African American
passengers—as much as a 35 percent increase. In Boston, we observed discrimination by Uber
drivers via more frequent cancellations against passengers when they used African American-
sounding names. Across all trips, the cancellation rate for African American sounding names was
more than twice as frequent compared to white sounding names. Male passengers requesting a
ride in low-density areas were more than three times as likely to have their trip canceled when
they used a African American-sounding name than when they used a white-sounding name. We
also find evidence that drivers took female passengers for longer, more expensive, rides in
Boston. We observe that removing names from trip booking may alleviate the immediate problem
but could introduce other pathways for unequal treatment of passengers.

Yanbo Ge                                         Don MacKenzie
University of Washington                         University of Washington
Department of Civil and                          Department of Civil and
 Environmental Engineering                        Environmental Engineering
yanboge@uw.edu                                   dwhm@uw.edu

Christopher R. Knittel                           Stephen Zoepf
MIT Sloan School of Management                   Stanford University
100 Main Street, E62-513                         Center for Automotive Research
Cambridge, MA 02142                                         at Stanford (CARS) szoepf@stanford.edu
and NBER
knittel@mit.edu




A randomized controlled trials registry entry is available at https://www.socialscienceregistry.org/trials/1689
1     Introduction
As technological and market advances of the peer economy continue to outpace regulation,
enforcement of responsible behavior within peer economies has been left to internal feedback
mechanisms and, occasionally, to the courts. One area of behavior with important social
equity implications is that of discrimination in the provision of services. In the transportation
sector, Transportation Network Companies (TNCs, also referred to as “ride sourcing” or “e-
hailing” companies), such as Uber and Lyft, match individual travelers with drivers in real
time.
    Discrimination by taxi drivers has long been an acknowledged social issue, providing
plenty of pop-culture fodder. Taxi drivers in most cities are required to pick up any passenger
while on duty, and taxi drivers are reminded of this obligation (Harshbarger (2015)). Despite
periodic high-profile incidents of taxi discrimination (e.g., Donnelly (2015); Gonen (2015);
Glanville (2015)), equal-service provisions are difficult to enforce.
    The relationship between TNCs and discrimination is a complex one. At a high level,
a study funded by Uber (Smart et al. (2015)) found that UberX provided lower fares and
shorter waits than taxis in areas of Los Angeles with below-average incomes. Hughes and
MacKenzie (2016) found that expected waiting times for an UberX ride were shorter in
Seattle-area neighborhoods that had lower average incomes and more minorities, even after
adjusting for di↵erences in residential and employment density. While Uber’s advertising
certainly includes minority customers (e.g., Figure 1), popular press articles (e.g., Nicholson
(2013)) have noted that TNC services are unavailable to customers without access to a credit
card, who are more likely to be lower-income and members of minorities.
    While these systemic concerns may be valid, decisions about where to drive and who to
pickup are choices made by drivers—not by the TNCs themselves. Drivers are required to
maintain high overall measures of performance including a high star rating from passengers,
high ride acceptance rate, and low cancellation rate. However, even these driver-specific
performance measures may not detect whether a driver behaves di↵erently to passengers
based on their race or gender.
    In this paper, we test for discrimination in the peer-to-peer transportation domain. The
primary question we seek to answer is whether the rapidly-growing TNC market treats
customers of all races and genders equally. Plainly put, is a taxi driver’s decision, made
in public view, not to stop for a African American passenger being eliminated? Or is it
just being replaced by a TNC driver’s screen swipe, made in private, that has the same
e↵ect? To do this, we undertook two large-scale randomized control trials in Boston, MA
and Seattle, WA. We had research assistants (RAs) serve as confederates, summoning rides
in both regions. In the Seattle experiment, we hired RAs of di↵erent racial backgrounds.
Each RA requested rides along pre-determined routes where the assignment to those routes
was randomized across racial backgrounds. In the Boston experiment, each RA requested
rides under two di↵erent names: using the nomenclature of Fryer and Levitt (2004), one



                                               1
name was “white sounding” while the other was a “distinctively black name.”1
    For each trip, the RAs gathered data using four screenshots per trip: (i) just before
requesting a trip (with expected wait time), (ii) just after a trip is accepted by a driver (with
a new wait time), (iii) when a driver arrives for pickup, and (iv) when the vehicle stops at
the end of the trip. Using the data gathered from these screenshots, we evaluate waiting
times, travel times, drivers’ cancellation rates, costs, and (where applicable) ratings awarded
by drivers to the travelers.
    We find significant evidence of racial discrimination in both experiments. In the Seattle
experiment trip requests coming from African American riders take between 16 to 28 percent
longer to be accepted for both UberX and Lyft services. For UberX this translates into
African American riders waiting between 29 and 35 percent longer for a ride; the e↵ect of
race for Lyft is too imprecise to draw any conclusions. Interestingly, the timing of information
available to drivers di↵ers across UberX and Lyft. A Lyft driver sees both the name and
a photo of the passenger prior to accepting or denying a ride, while UberX drivers see this
information only after accepting a request.
    In the Boston experiment, we leverage the variation in information timing and collected
data on acceptance times, wait times, and driver cancellations. We find that the proba-
bility a driver accepts a ride, but then subsequently cancels the ride, more than doubles
for African American riders of UberX. As expected, we find no e↵ect on cancellations for
African American riders of Lyft because, we surmise, that given that names and photos are
visible to the driver prior to acceptance, any discrimination occurs prior to accepting the
initial request. We also show that this increase in the rate of cancellations is concentrated
among African American males; their cancellation rates are three times that of white males.
Furthermore this cancellation e↵ect is concentrated in low population density areas, perhaps
because drivers in those areas self select to reduce their interaction with African Americans.
We do not, however, find that the increase in cancellation rates manifests itself into increases
in wait times, presumably because of the denser network of drivers in the Boston area. While
our estimates of the time it takes for the request to be initially accepted are imprecise, we
find that acceptance times for African American males on Lyft are longer. This is consis-
tent with some Lyft drivers passing up requests from African American males, while UberX
drivers are forced to accept and then cancel these requests.
    Discrimination by TNC drivers may occur in at least four primary ways, highlighted
in Figure 2: (i) drivers could elect not to drive in or near certain types of neighborhoods,
(ii) drivers could decline to accept reservations from certain types of passengers or could
cancel a pickup once the passenger’s identity becomes revealed, (iii) drivers could leave low
ratings for passengers based on race, gender, or perceived socioeconomic status, (iv) drivers
could choose non-ideal routes based on the same factors, increasing costs and/or travel time.
Our analysis focuses on the second, fourth, and to a lesser extent the third, of these channels.
  1
    Bertrand and Mullainathan (2004) found that when stereotypically white names and stereotypically
African American names were randomly assigned to job applications, those with the white names received
50% more callbacks for interviews.


                                                  2
    Our results fit within existing work that has demonstrated evidence of profound dis-
crimination in the peer economy. Pope and Sydnor (2011) showed that loan requests were
significantly less likely to be successful when associated with a African American person than
when associated with a white person of comparable credit history. Discrimination can occur
even without seeing a person. Ongoing work by researchers at Harvard Business School
has demonstrated racial discrimination on both sides of a peer-to-peer transaction on the
AirBnB platform. (Edelman and Luca (2014); Edelman et al. (2016)).
    Our work also fits within an existing literature that has identified discrimination in the
transportation sector. For example, Goddard et al. (2015) finds discrimination behavior
of drivers toward pedestrians of di↵erent races, with African American pedestrians at a
crosswalk being passed by twice as many cars and waiting 30% longer for a car to stop
than white pedestrians. Other research has shown that perceived di↵erences in social class
a↵ected vehicle-vehicle and vehicle-pedestrian yielding behavior (Pi↵ et al. (2012)). Given
the presence of discrimination in more traditional parts of the transportation network, we
do not claim that TNC networks are “worse” than the status quo. In fact, in the Seattle
experiment we had RAs hail taxis and count the the number of empty taxis passing them by.
There is a clear di↵erence in the acceptance rate of traditional taxes. The first taxi stopped
nearly 60% of the time for white RAs, but less than 20% of the time for African American
RAs. The white RAs never had more than four taxis pass them before one stopped, but the
African American RAs watched six or seven taxis pass them by in 20% of cases.
    Our work highlights several options for reducing discrimination within TNCs. For ex-
ample, TNC networks could omit personal information about potential riders completely.
Names and photos of both passengers and drivers could be replaced with user-specific num-
bers. Confirmation of these numbers by the driver and passenger could then occur prior
to the trip. While this would reduce the type of discrimination found in this paper, other
channels of discrimination would remain. Most notably, it would not eliminate the ability of
drivers to discriminate in where they choose to drive.
    The paper unfolds as follows: In section 2 we describe the set up and results of the Seattle
experiment. In section 3, we do the same for the Boston experiment. Section 4 concludes
the paper.


2    Experiment 1: Seattle
Our first study tested for di↵erences in the quality of services received by African American
and white passengers using TNCs and taxis in Seattle, Washington. African American and
white research assistants (RAs) used UberX, Lyft, Flywheel (app-based taxi hailing), and
taxis hailed from the curb to traverse assigned routes within the city of Seattle over six
weeks in August – September, 2015. We tested for di↵erences between races and sexes in
several measures that could indicate discrimination. These included measures of the speed
of service, the directness of the route taken by the driver, and the cumulative “star ratings”


                                               3
received by the passengers.


2.1    Experimental Design
We designed seven tours around the city of Seattle, each starting and ending at the University
of Washington’s Seattle campus and comprising a sequence of pre-determined stop locations
linked by individual trips. The stops were located to generate variability in neighborhood
characteristics (population density, percentage of residents who are African American, in-
come level), while limiting the individual trips to roughly the distance corresponding to the
UberX and Lyft minimum fares. The routes are mapped in Appendix Figure A.1, which
also shows selected socioeconomic characteristics at the census block group level. The tours
generally took between one and three hours, and were completed following the evening rush
hours on Monday through Thursday evenings.
    In the first four weeks of the study, we assigned the RAs to rotate between services in
the general order UberX-Lyft-Flywheel, after starting each tour with a randomly specified
service. At selected stops in downtown Seattle, they were directed to hail a passing taxi
from the curb (hailing a taxi from the curb is not feasible in other areas of Seattle, due to
a low density of taxis). In the final two weeks of the study, we stopped collecting data on
Flywheel, and the RAs alternated between UberX and Lyft (while still hailing taxis from
the curb at specified downtown stops).
    To avoid confounding the e↵ects of race, sex, and other variables, we generated a frac-
tional factorial experimental design. The variables and levels used in the experimental design
are summarized in Table 1. In this way, we produced a list of tours to be completed on spe-
cific days of the week, by travelers of a particular race and sex, beginning with a specified
service.


2.2    Data Collection
We began data collection with eight RAs: two African American females, two African Amer-
ican males, two white females, and two white males. All of the RAs were University of
Washington undergraduate students. We presented the RAs with a list of dates on which
the experimental design dictated that a traveler of their race and sex should travel, and they
signed up for specific travel days. Each RA completed no more than one tour in a day.
    The RAs used smartphones to request rides from UberX, Lyft, and Flywheel, and to
log data. We issued each RA an identical smartphone using the same mobile carrier and
data plan to minimize variation in factors such as communication latency. The RAs set
up passenger accounts with Uber, Lyft, and Flywheel on these smartphones, and included
their name and a profile photo with each account (Flywheel did not support profile photos).
Profile photos were taken during the RA training session, and consisted of a headshot of
each RA with a neutral facial expression, in front of a plain white background.
    The RAs logged key information by taking screenshots on their smartphones. We installed


                                              4
an app on each smartphone that displayed the time including seconds, so we could easily
read the precise time in each screenshot. For each trip, we instructed them to take four
screenshots:

  1. Immediately before requesting a trip. This captures the time when a trip was requested,
     and the estimated waiting time for the passenger to be picked up (displayed in the TNC
     app).

  2. Immediately after a trip request was accepted by a driver. This captures the time
     when the trip was accepted and a revised estimated waiting time for the passenger to
     be picked up.

  3. When the driver arrives to pick up the RA. This provides the actual pickup time.

  4. When the car stops to drop the RA o↵ at the requested destination. This captures the
     actual dropo↵ time.

    The RAs took notes on additional relevant information that arose in the course of their
tours, such as deviations from the prescribed experimental plan, cancellations by drivers,
problems with data collection, or practical challenges with the prescribed stop locations.
For taxis hailed from the curb, the RAs took screenshots when they began trying to hail a
cab and when a cab stopped for them. They also kept a count of how many taxis passed by
them before one stopped and took a note of this on their phone.
    The RAs transcribed key data from their smartphones into a spreadsheet at the end of
each tour. The screenshots were deleted from the smartphones after transcription because
some of them contained personally identifiable information (names and photos) of the drivers.
In addition, we obtained the price and distance traveled for each trip from receipts that were
automatically emailed to the research team at the end of each trip. We also deleted the
emails containing driver names and photos.
    To minimize di↵erences in how the RAs conducted the data collection, we conducted a
two hour group training session the week before data collection began. The RAs familiarized
themselves with the smartphones and the Uber, Lyft, and Flywheel apps. We provided
instructions on the data collection process and on how to interact with drivers. We instructed
the RAs to sit in the back seat, minimize their interactions with the drivers, and not indicate
that they were collecting data. We also instructed them to enter their destination information
via the apps after the driver arrived to pick them up, and if asked, to request that the driver
simply follow the navigation app linked to their TNC platform.
    There were nevertheless some sources of variability and deviations from the original
experimental design. First, due to the RAs’ scheduling constraints, we allowed the them
to complete some tours on di↵erent days than originally prescribed (e.g., a day earlier or
later), but all the trips were completed between Monday and Thursday. Second, we asked
the RAs to begin their tours at approximately 6:30 PM each day, but allowed them flexibility


                                              5
to start 30 minutes before or after this time. Third, we gave the RAs some latitude to adapt
their data collection on the fly. For example, if dynamic pricing (“surge pricing” for Uber or
“primetime” for Lyft) increased TNC fares to more than 2.5 times their base rate, we asked
the RAs to switch to another service for that trip. The RAs also switched modes if they
faced repeated cancellations or were otherwise unable to complete a trip by the prescribed
service. Finally, approximately three weeks into the study, one of the African American male
RAs was unable to continue with the project. We hired another African American male RA
to take over his smartphone and TNC accounts (after replacing the profile photo with a
photo of the new RA) and complete his remaining trips.


2.3    Empirical Strategy
Our empirical strategy focused on identifying di↵erences in the quality of service received
by the African American and white RAs when traveling by di↵erent transportation services.
Here, we explain our various measures of quality of service, and how we tested for di↵erences
between travelers of di↵erent races.
    We used several di↵erent metrics to quantify the quality of service received by the RAs
in this study, and which we would expect to be di↵erent if discrimination were occurring.
Several measures of time are illustrated in Appendix Figure A.2, and include:

   • Acceptance time is the length of time that passed between when an RA sent a trip
     request and when that request was accepted by a driver.

   • Estimated waiting time 1 is the waiting time that was displayed in the app imme-
     diately before the RA requested a ride.

   • Estimated waiting time 2 is the waiting time that was displayed in the app after
     the trip request was accepted.

   • Actual waiting time is the length of time that passed between when a trip was
     accepted and when the driver arrived to pick up the RA.

   • Travel time is the length of time that passed between when the driver arrived to pick
     up the RA and when the RA was dropped o↵ at the end of the trip.

    We might expect to see di↵erences in acceptance time between races if drivers discrimi-
nate. In the case of Lyft, which showed the passenger’s profile photo to the driver as part
of the trip request, a driver’s likelihood of declining the request might be a↵ected by the
traveler’s apparent race. In the case of Uber, which showed the passenger’s first name to
the driver after the trip is accepted, this seems less likely. However, it is possible that some
drivers might accept and then quickly cancel a trip after seeing the passenger’s name, be-
havior that some drivers have advocated in online forums (UberPeople.Net, 2015). Indeed,
we adapted the Boston experimental design to be able to directly test for this. In either

                                               6
case, the request would then be passed to another driver, which would lead to a longer delay
between the time the passenger requested a trip and when that trip was ultimately accepted.
    We might also see di↵erences in estimated waiting time 2 and actual waiting time if
drivers discriminate. Let us first assume that a trip request is reliably routed to the nearest
driver and then to progressively further drivers if the closer driver(s) decline (or accept then
cancel) the request. If at least some drivers tend to decline requests from certain groups,
then on average those groups would be matched with drivers who are further away, and
would end up waiting longer for a car to pick them up. On the other hand, if the matching
of requests to drivers is fuzzier, this e↵ect would be attenuated, since declined requests would
sometimes be rerouted to drivers who are actually closer than the original driver. We would
expect the e↵ect to be strongest for actual wait times, which is our focus below.
    The purpose of this experiment is to test whether racial discrimination is present in TNC
services. The “treatment” in this context is race. We used two strategies to analyze the
Seattle data. First, we used linear regression to test for di↵erences in several measures of
quality of service. Second, we constructed matched pairs of trips by African American and
white RAs and tested for di↵erences in the quality of services between these matched groups.
In all cases, we analyzed the data for UberX, Lyft, and Flywheel separately.
    The general form of our regression model is shown in equation 2.1, for some outcome
variable y (e.g., Acceptance Time, Wait Time, etc.) for RA i at location j in situation t.
Racei is a dummy variables indicating RA i’s race, and Xijt is a vector of covariates unique
to the individual, location, and/or situation. For example, Xijt can include neighborhood
characteristics or the estimated waiting time associated with the trip request.2 This yields:

                               yijt =   0   +   1 Racei   + Xijt + ✏ijt .                           (2.1)

   As a robustness check we also present results that control for covariates through bal-
ancing. Specifically, we constructed datasets comprising of pairs of observations (one by an
African American RA, one by a white RA) that were matched on location, time of day,
and the RA’s sex. We required exact matching on sex and used Mahalanobis distance (Ma-
halanobis, 1936) to measure the closeness on time of day and location. We then matched
each observation with the nearest observation of a trip by an RA of the same sex and the
other race. We also included “calipers” that put an absolute maximum on the di↵erences
between the time of day and location of matched pairs. We checked to see that covariates
were balanced between the matched sets, and tested for di↵erences in service quality using
paired t tests.
   2
    In particular, we include demographics from the Census Block Group of the pickup point using 2010
data. We include three indicator variables. High Income is defined as median household income greater
than $75k annually (top 25%), High Pop Density is defined as fewer than 6750 people per square mile (lower
25%), and High AA Pop is defined as more than 1890 African American people per square mile (top 25%).




                                                      7
2.4     Results
We collected data on 581 app-hailed trips in total: 208 Uber trips, 222 Lyft trips and 143
Flywheel trips. Among these trips, 155 were finished by African American female students,
152 by white female students, 129 by African American males, and 145 by white males. The
fact that fewer trips were taken by African American males compared to other groups is due
to the aforementioned replacement of one African American male RA with another halfway
through the data collection process.3,4 We first present the results and then interpret them
as a whole at the end of the sub-section.
    Table 2 provides summary statistics for acceptance time, estimated waiting times, and
actual wait times of Uber, Lyft and Flywheel. The number of observations for the acceptance
time and actual waiting time of the three modes are di↵erent because some observations were
deleted due to the following reasons: (1) the RAs did not take a screenshot immediately
before requesting a trip, immediately after a trip request was accepted or immediately when
the driver arrived; (2) the times on the screenshots are missing or inaccurate because the
clock was fully or partly blocked on the phone; (3) the RAs made typos during data entry
(e.g., the time right before requesting a trip is later than the time right after the request
was accepted). Some observations of the estimated waiting time 1 were deleted because the
estimated waiting time did not show up when the service was busy. Comparing the three
services, Lyft requests are accepted more quickly, on average, but Uber has the shortest
average waiting time. Flywheel is the slowest when it comes to both trip acceptance time
and waiting time.
    We first test whether there are systematic di↵erences in the estimated wait times reported
by the services’ apps. This is a test of whether there were systematic di↵erences in the types
of trips that our African American research assistants hailed. Table 3 summarizes linear
regression models of the log of estimated waiting time 1 before trip requests were initiated,
for UberX, Lyft, and Flywheel. The results indicate that before trips were requested, there
were no significant di↵erences in the estimated waiting times presented to African American
and white RAs.
    Table 4 summarizes linear regression models of the acceptance times in Seattle for UberX,
Lyft, and Flywheel. We first present a simple test across means, then we control for the esti-
mated waiting time 1 (the waiting time displayed in the app prior to the trip being requested)
to control for situation-specific factors that would lead to a longer or shorter response time
by drivers; then, we control for the income, population density, African American density,
   3
      Appendix Figure A.3 shows the balance in the days, times, and locations (tours) of the experiments
actually done by the African American and white RAs. The distributions of the day of week and time of
day are similar between the races, but white males completed more trips on tour 4 than African American
males. Since tour 4 goes through downtown Seattle and the Capitol Hill neighborhood, where travel demand
is higher and Uber service supply is presumably higher, this imbalance in routes could lead to di↵erences in
waiting times.
    4
      We also collected data on 36 taxi trips in which the taxi was hailed from the curb. We come back to
this at the end of the paper.



                                                     8
crime rate, and the tours that the trips were on. Note that to conserve on power we include
tour fixed e↵ects instead of specific pickup-dropo↵ pairs. We analyze the log of the time
measures in order to improve the normality and homoskedasticity of residuals, and allow for
the interpretation of e↵ects as fractional changes in acceptance time.
    For each of the services, African American riders had longer acceptance times compared
to white riders. The e↵ects are statistically significant for each of the four Uber specifications
and the four specifications for Lyft. Only when tour and area covariates are controlled for do
we see a significant di↵erence of Flywheel acceptance time between African American and
white RAs.
    Next we turn to the actual waiting times, defined as the time that passes between when
the trip request is accepted and when the car arrives to pick up the traveler. Table 5 presents
the results of the (log) actual waiting time for UberX, Lyft, and Flywheel. African American
travelers waited approximately 30% longer to be picked up than did white travelers when
using UberX, even after adjusting for di↵erences in estimated waiting time. However, there
is no significant di↵erence in waiting times between African American and white travelers
using Lyft or Flywheel.
    We also analyze whether the behavior of drivers varied across the race of the passenger
after the trip had started. Specifically we look at both the travel time and travel distance.
Table 6 shows regression models of the log of travel time for UberX, Lyft, and Flywheel.
For each service, we show the ordinary least squares (OLS) regression as well as quantile
regressions for the 75th and 95th percentiles. The quantile regressions test for whether the
e↵ects are concentrated on fewer very long trips. For UberX and Lyft, the travel time as
recorded on the receipt is used as the dependent variable. Flywheel receipts did not include
travel time or distance, so the travel time was calculated based on the pickup and dropo↵
times recorded by the RAs. The travel time between the assigned origin and destination was
determined using the Google Maps API. The results indicate that the mean UberX travel
time was about 8% longer for African American RAs than for white RAs, after adjusting for
di↵erences in the length of the assigned trip. Moreover, the 95th percentile travel time was
about 16% longer for the African American RAs than for the white RAs. This is consistent
with a pattern in which a small number of drivers is causing the longer travel times for the
African American RAs. Travel times by Lyft and Flywheel were not significantly di↵erent
for African American and white travelers. However, the 95th percentile travel time for
female travelers in Flywheel was significantly longer than for males. This suggests that some
taxi drivers may have taken female passengers for longer rides than males on similar trips
although there is no consistent evidence to this e↵ect.
    Table 7 summarizes models of travel distance for individual trips by African American
and white travelers, based on the distances noted on Uber and Lyft receipts. As with
travel time, the expected distance from origin to destination was based on the Google Maps
API. There was no significant di↵erence in travel distances between African American and
white travelers, except for the 95th percentile distance for UberX. We did not analyze trip
distances for Flywheel since Flywheel receipts do not include trip distance. We come back

                                                9
to the di↵erence across platforms below.
    The linear regression models control for covariates through adjustment, which assumes
a linear relationship between the dependent and independent variables, which may or may
not be justified. As a robustness check, we constructed matched pairs of trips by African
American and white travelers of the same sex, requested not more than one hour apart, from
locations not more than one mile apart. Using this approach, we estimated the e↵ects of
race on acceptance time and actual waiting time. The results are summarized in Appendix
Tables A.1 through A.4, and indicate that our African American RAs waited significantly
longer than their white counterparts for UberX trips to be accepted and for an UberX vehicle
to show up.5


2.5     Interpretation and Lessons Learned
We summarize the above results as follows. There is some evidence that it takes longer for
trip requests from African Americans to be accepted across all of the platforms. The results
for estimated wait times suggest that this is not driven by systematic di↵erences in routes
or the timing of requests. We also find statistically significant longer wait times for African
Americans riding UberX. These e↵ects are as large as 35 log points. We find no significantly
di↵erent wait times for either Lyft or Flywheel. Furthermore, we can rule out e↵ects as
large as those estimated for UberX. Finally, African American travelers had (marginally)
significantly longer travel times than white travelers using UberX, but travel distances were
not statistically significantly di↵erent. Neither travel times nor distances were significantly
di↵erent for African American and white Lyft travelers.
    Taken as a whole, it would appear that there is evidence of racial discrimination among
UberX drivers, some evidence of discrimination about Lyft drivers, but no evidence of dis-
crimination among Flywheel drivers. What can explain the stark di↵erence among Flywheel
drivers? There are two plausible explanations. The first is that the Flywheel service does not
include photos of travelers in their profiles and so cannot present these to drivers. Therefore
racial discrimination would have to be based on the names of riders. While some of the
names of our African American RAs may have provided drivers with a signal of race, we
did not design the experiment to specifically test for this. Second, Flywheel works with
existing taxi drivers. It is possible that the subset of taxi drivers who opt into using it are
less inclined to discriminate than those who do not opt in. Perhaps taxi drivers inclined to
discriminate find it easier to do so by looking at would-be passengers on the street.
    We studied the behavior of taxi drivers by having RAs hail a taxi from the curb in
downtown Seattle. We instructed RAs to count the number of empty taxis that passed
   5
    We also analyzed the cumulative star ratings of each RA for UberX and Lyft. Appendix Figures A.4
and A.5 present these results. The average star ratings given to African American and white travelers are
very similar, indicating that the drivers who accepted the trips and provided star ratings did not provide
better or worse ratings based on the RA’s race. This may not be surprising if discrimination is operating
through the cancellation of trips. If this is the case the ultimate driver is not responsible for the longer wait
times.


                                                       10
by. Appendix Figure A.6 shows the distribution of the number of taxis that passed. The
first taxi stopped nearly 60% of the time for white RAs, but less than 20% of the time for
African American RAs. The white RAs never had more than four taxis pass them before
one stopped, but the African American RAs watched six or seven taxis pass them by in 20%
of cases. Based on the Wilcoxon rank-sum test, the di↵erence in the number of taxis passing
by African American and white RAs is highly significant (W = 48, p = 0.0007).
    Our results are consistent with both UberX and Lyft drivers discriminating in the process
of accepting ride requests. On Lyft, which shows drivers a photo of the traveler along with
the trip request, the opportunity for discrimination is obvious. With Uber, which shows
only a name, and only after a request has been accepted, the opportunity is less obvious.
However, it is possible that some drivers might accept a trip request and then quickly cancel
it after seeing the passenger’s name, as some Uber drivers have advocated in online forums.
In fact, we altered the experimental design in Boston to directly test for this. We discuss
this below.
    While we find statistically significantly di↵erent wait times for UberX riders, we did not
find di↵erences in wait times for Lyft. The longer wait time for an UberX is consistent with
the longer acceptance time. If some drivers are accepting then canceling rides, then new
drivers have to be assigned, which takes more time. If Uber initially sends the trip request
to the nearest driver, then the reassigned driver will tend to be farther away, increasing the
waiting time. Why, then, do we not see African American travelers also waiting longer for
a Lyft pickup? Admittedly, this is still an open question. One possibility is that Uber and
Lyft use di↵erent algorithms to match drivers and passengers. If drivers are assigned based
on criteria beyond just proximity to the passenger (e.g., star ratings, amount of time driver
has been idle) then the reassigned driver may actually be closer than the original driver,
attenuating the e↵ect of discrimination on waiting time. Another possibility is that Lyft
gets any discrimination out of the way immediately, so the request can be passed quickly on
to another driver. However, Uber drivers might be waiting for some time before ultimately
canceling, and only then does the trip request has to go to a new driver, creating an additional
delay in pickup.


3     Experiment 2: Boston
3.1    Experimental Design
Our experimental design in Seattle revealed a number of potential limitations to the exper-
iment, which we used to inform the design of the data collection in the Boston study. Some
of these we have already discussed. One that we have not discussed is that it is conceivable
that di↵erences in measured acceptance times or waiting times might be due to di↵erences
in how individual RAs logged their data and this was somehow correlated with race. For
example, perhaps African American RAs simply took an extra second or two between taking


                                              11
their screenshots and sending the trip request, and between trip acceptance and taking their
second screenshot. We doubt this is the case since we would expect to see this consistently
across all platforms, yet we did not see any di↵erence in acceptance times between African
American and white travelers when using Flywheel. Moreover, this cannot explain the larger
di↵erence in average waiting time (roughly 90 seconds) observed between African American
and white passengers using UberX.
    A second limitation is that it is possible that di↵erences between African American and
white passengers using UberX were due to some drivers having trouble identifying the African
American passengers at the pickup points. If, for example, drivers were not expecting an
African American passenger, then it might take them longer to see the passenger and drive
up to them. This could explain why the pickup times were longer for African American
passengers on UberX, even if there were no overt discrimination; although the driver arrives
for the pickup in the same amount of time, they might spend more time looking around for
the passenger. This might also explain why the travel times for UberX were longer, although
the travel distances were not; UberX might record the trip as starting when the driver arrives
at the pickup location, even if drivers sometimes spend a little extra time looking around for
their passengers. This could also explain why these e↵ects were not detected on Lyft; the
drivers have a photo of the passenger from the outset so they know exactly who they are
looking for.
    Finally, as was mentioned, we did not design the experiment to understand the precise
mechanism for discrimination by drivers receiving an UberX trip. As noted, drivers do not
receive any information about the passenger until after they accept the request, so it would
seem that if they were discriminating, they would need to cancel an accepted trip. Since we
did not originally anticipate the possibility of drivers accepting then canceling trips, we did
not provide the Seattle RAs with clear instructions about logging cancellations. Sometimes
the RAs noted that a cancellation had occurred, but we are not confident that they did so
in all cases. It is possible that a driver could cancel and UberX could assign a new driver,
without the RA noticing.
    We made two major changes to the experimental design for the Boston study. The first
is that we designed our study in Boston to use within-RA variation in race to eliminate
di↵erences in data collection practices between travelers. To accomplish this requires that
the same individual register for two di↵erent UberX profiles and two di↵erent Lyft profiles:
one with an “African American sounding” first name and one with a “white sounding” first
name.6 Furthermore, we recruited students with a range of ethnic backgrounds, but whose
appearance allowed them to plausibly travel as a passenger of either race. The second change
was that we instructed the RAs to watch vigilantly for cancellations. As noted above there is
active discussion on driver forums (e.g., UberPeople.Net (2015)) about whether cancellations
  6
    Students were issued two identical phones, each with UberX and Lyft applications installed and with
a travel profile under the assigned pseudonym. To reduce the likelihood that students behaved di↵erently
under one profile or another, neither pseudonym was related to the traveler’s true name. This had the
additional benefit of preserving the travelers’ anonymity for the duration of the project.


                                                  12
that are performed quickly are shown to a customer. If drivers can cancel quickly and not
appear on a customers screen, then measurements of cancellations by students should be
treated as a lower bound, and actual cancellations could be higher than those reported.
A third, less substantive change was that due to the increased focus on cancellations, we
turned our focus to the largest TNC services UberX and Lyft, and did not perform tests of
FlyWheel or street hails in Boston.


3.2    Data Collection
Eight individuals traveled as part of the experiment in Boston, using the pseudonyms shown
in Table 8. These pseudonyms were taken from lists of names developed by Bertrand and
Mullainathan (2004) that had been strongly identified as African American or white by pan-
els of observers. Paying for the rides presented a challenge, since travel profiles were not real
individuals and did not have credit cards. Payment was initially made using institutional
purchase cards, but rapid accumulation of Uber and Lyft transactions on a few credit cards
raised fraud flags by issuing banks, Uber, and Lyft. To avoid account suspension and po-
tentially stranding travelers in remote parts of the city, we extended payment methods to
include their personal credit cards, and eventually PayPal accounts under the pseudonyms
issued to the traveling students. However, even this became a challenge as both the accounts
under the pseudonyms were canceled by Uber. Ultimately, these challenges led the experi-
ment to be terminated prior to our the planned termination date. The experiment ran from
Nov. 5, 2015 to March 3, 2016.


3.3    Site and Route Choices
As in Seattle, we developed specific travel tours that consisted of a list of stops with specific
pickup and drop o↵ points. These tours ensured that we could control for the demographics
of the pickup location and the expected distance and duration of each trip. We performed
a GIS analysis of the Boston area, shown in Figure A.7. In determining which location
attributes to include in the analysis, we hypothesized that drivers would accept or reject
rides based on a mixture of fear and greed. For example “What is my expected revenue for
this and future rides, and what is my fear that harm will be done to me by this passenger
or others in the pickup location?” We examined pickup locations for household income,
population density, measures of minority population density, and the presence of a transit
stop at the point of pickup. We used the demographics at each location to help design tours
as described below.
    The final research design used five unique tours constructed with multiple objectives in
mind: (i) start and end near the same place, (ii) limit the distance and duration of each trip
to near the minimum fare threshold to reduce overall cost, (iii) induce as much variation in
pickup location demographics as possible, (iv) minimize overlap with other tours to reduce
likelihood of multiple travelers a↵ecting performance for each other, (v) where possible, to


                                               13
ensure pickup locations were within sight of a business open until at least 9pm.
   Rather than indicating the pickup location on a map, students were instructed to enter
the complete address of the pickup location and destination to prevent small variations in
pickup location based on individuals. Since students were traveling late in the day and
sometimes in bad weather, in a few instances students requested to end the last trip of the
tour at their home address. These trips, and trips where students realized they had entered
the origin or destination address incorrectly, were excluded from trip distance and duration
analyses.7


3.4     Traveler Instructions
While the research design includes fixed-RA e↵ects to control for individual variations in
behavior (using the UberX and Lyft apps or at the point of pickup) student travelers fol-
lowed specific instructions in requesting and taking rides in a similar fashion to our Seattle
experiment. These instructions were to: (i) enter the complete address of both the pickup
location and the destination when requesting a ride to minimize variation in origins and
destinations, (ii) minimize interaction with the driver to (A) lower the chances that a driver
would recognize them, and (B) to minimize any di↵erences in behavior that would change
star ratings, (iii) not to cancel rides unless ride was input incorrectly, (iv) not to give drivers
directions unless requested, and (v) to leave five-star ratings unless they felt the driver was
threatening or dangerous.
    After several initial travel days looking for cancellations, students identified an unantic-
ipated form of driver behavior. Some drivers would accept a ride and then apparently not
attempt to pickup the passenger—either not to move at all or even to drive in the direction
opposite the traveler. Since this scenario could result in students waiting indefinitely for a
ride in unfamiliar locations, we established a threshold of 20 minutes. If after 20 minutes
the driver had not made any indication of attempting to pickup the passenger—either con-
tacting the passenger or driving measurably closer to the pickup location—students canceled
the ride and flagged the first attempt as a de facto cancellation by the driver.
   7
     We were aided by the Seattle experiment for calculating statistical power. We calculated the sample
size required to detect a variety e↵ects on the means of the variables described above using the summary
statistics from Seattle. We calculate the samples sizes required to detect a 5, 10, and 15 percent increase in
the variables of interest. We used the UberX sample for our calculations and assume an ↵ of 0.05 and power
equal to 0.90. These calculations implied sample sizes of roughly 1,700, 400, and 200 for detectable e↵ects
with actual wait times of 5, 10, and 15 percent, respectively. The full results are reported in Appendix Table
A.5. To err on the conservative side, we performed these calculations without including any covariates. In
the next section we describe what covariates we included to gain some statistical power. Based on these
calculations we targeted 1000 data points for the Boston experiment. Because of the early termination of
the data collection in Boston we ended with 911 trip requests.




                                                     14
3.5     Empirical Strategy and Analysis
As with the Seattle experiment, the purpose of this experiment is to test for the presence
of racial discrimination. In the Boston experiment, treatment is whether the rider has what
Fryer and Levitt (2004) refer to as “distinctively black names.” Since each of our student
travelers used two pseudonyms are able to include RA-specific fixed e↵ects in our econometric
specifications. The starting point for our empirical analysis is to estimate di↵erences in the
within-RA means of the variables described above across implied race. More specifically, for
a given outcome, y (e.g., acceptance time, waiting time, etc.), for RA i, using name k, at
location j, at time t, our regressions take the form of:


                           yikjt =    0   +   1 ImpliedRaceik   + µi + ✏ikjt .                        (3.1)

   In some specifications we will omit the RA fixed e↵ects to test for di↵erences across
genders. This yields the following variant of equation 3.2:


                 yijkt =   0   +   1 ImpliedRaceik   +    2 ImpliedGenderi       + ✏ijkt .            (3.2)

   We will also estimate specifications that control for covariates.8 These covariates pick up
location, trip, and day-of-week e↵ects. We therefore augment equation 3.2, yielding:


              yijkt =      0   +   1 ImpliedRaceik   + Xj + µi + ✏ijkt ,                              (3.3)
              yijkt =      0   +   1 ImpliedRaceik   +    2 ImpliedGenderi       + Xj + ✏ijkt .       (3.4)


3.6     Results
We collected data on 911 total trip requests in Boston: 460 trips with Lyft and 451 trips with
UberX. Drivers canceled 66 requests (57 actual cancellations, and 9 de facto cancellations in
which the driver started the trip without the student or made no apparent pickup attempt).
Students canceled 6 trips after recognizing they made input errors in the requests. After
excluding cancellations, 839 completed trips remained.
    Of the 839 completed trips, for estimates of acceptance and waiting times we removed
samples where travelers failed to capture a screenshot of one or more timestamps during the
trip. 80 trips were removed, leaving 759 trips in which all valid timestamps were observed—
372 using UberX, and 387 using Lyft. Of these 759 observations, 46 trips had at least one
   8
    In particular we include indicator variables for whether the pickup location has a high African American
population, a high median income, and a low population density. Demographics were assigned by Census
Block Group of the pickup point using 2010 data. Upper Black Pop Quartile is defined as 20% or greater
African American population, Upper Income Quartile is defined as median household income greater than
$60k annually, and Lower Population Density Quartile is defined as fewer than 12800 people per square mile.


                                                     15
prior cancellation, leaving 713 observations for Accept Time and Wait Time analysis, 364
using Lyft and 349 using Uber. Table 9 provides summary statistics for request times, wait
times, and estimated waiting times for UberX and Lyft in Boston. In cases where a driver
cancellation occurred, students recorded the time of the first trip request as the request time.
As a result, both Lyft and UberX show large standard deviations in Acceptance Times, and
median Acceptance Times are far lower than means for both services.
    Table 9 and Figure A.8 shows a descriptive comparison of Acceptance Time, Estimated
Waiting Time and Actual Waiting Time between African American and White passengers
for the UberX and Lyft services. In contrast to results of the Seattle study, waiting times
and acceptance times were not substantially longer for African American passengers than
for white passengers in either UberX or Lyft; Acceptance Time, Actual Waiting Time 1
and Waiting Time Increase measures were broadly similar across racial groups, and slightly
shorter for African American passengers using Uber.
    As with the Seattle experiment, we begin by confirming that estimated wait times prior
to calling a ride do not systematically vary by name. Table 10 confirms this. Next we turn
to cumulative distributions of Acceptance Time, Actual Waiting Time and Waiting Time
increase in Figure A.8. As with the basic statistical measure, CDFs do not include broadly
di↵erent behavior between demographic groups. Table 11 shows the results of regressions
for Acceptance Time in Boston, and Table 12 shows the results of Actual Waiting Time in
the Boston experiment.
    As predicted by initial sample size estimates, few coefficients of statistical significance
can be found in either analysis. For some specifications, Acceptance Times are longer for
African American males but with large standard errors. As expected, Actual Waiting Times
are highly dependent on Estimated Waiting Times, and all else equal Actual Waiting Times
will be lower when the service provider is UberX.
    New to the Boston experiment was the ability to analyze cancellations. All 911 obser-
vations were used in evaluating cancellation rates – 460 observations using UberX and 451
observations using Lyft. Since UberX drivers only see the name of passengers after accepting
a ride, we expect to observe di↵erences in behavior only in UberX. If Lyft drivers were to
discriminate based on the name, they would simply ignore the ride request, an action which
is not directly observable.
    We first tabulate the rate of cancellations of trips by service, race, and gender. The
results are shown in Table 13. The simple summary statistics suggest that cancellations
against passengers using African American names are substantially higher for trips with
UberX, but not for Lyft. For all passengers on UberX, those using African American-
sounding names face more than double the cancellation rate than when the same passengers
use white-sounding names (10.1% vs. 4.9%). Furthermore, this e↵ect appears larger for
African-American male names than for African American female names.
    When using UberX, the di↵erence is greater for males than females. For males, those
using African American-sounding names face a cancellation rate more than twice as high as
those same individuals when using white-sounding names – 11.2% cancellation rates for males

                                              16
when using African American-sounding names compared to 4.5% when the same individuals
use white-sounding names. The di↵erence is nearly as bad for female riders: the cancellation
rate for females is 8.4% when using a African American-sounding name and 5.4% when
using a white-sounding name. For Lyft, males face approximately the same cancellation
rate, whereas females actually face a lower cancellation rate when using African American-
sounding names.
    Next we use regression to gauge statistical significance and to control for a broad array of
demographic variables for the pickup locations, individual fixed e↵ects for the passengers, and
fixed e↵ects for the day of the week. The results from these regressions are shown in Table
14. We start by analyzing only the means. For Lyft, we find no statistically or economically
significant di↵erence across names. The treatment e↵ect for UberX is significant and suggests
a more than doubling of the probability of a cancellation for riders using African-American
sounding names consistent with the cross-tabs above.
    We expand the analysis in two dimensions. First, we include a variety of controls, such
as demographics of the pickup location and day of week. Second, we interact the treatment
with gender. For completeness we allow the caucasian baseline cancellation probability to
also vary by gender. Column 2 presents these results for Lyft. Again, we find little evidence
of an increase in cancellations across race or gender. This again serves as a useful null test
since drivers can observe the prospective passenger’s name prior to accepting. Column 4
reports the results for UberX. We find that discrimination appears to be focused on African
American males. The cancellation rate faced by travelers using an African American male
name more than doubles (139% increase) relative to a white-male sounding name. To gauge
the robustness of this result to RA-specific behavior, Column 5 includes RA fixed e↵ects.
The estimate on African American male dummy is robust to the inclusion of these.
    We also investigated whether discrimination was isolated to specific pick-up areas (columns
6 & 7). We also interact the African American male indicator variable with the low pop-
ulation density dummy variable. Interestingly, we find that the increase in cancellations is
concentrated in low population density areas. In fact, the cancellation rate of riders with
African American names is no di↵erent outside of these areas. The e↵ects in low population
density areas is startling. In these areas, males with African American-sounding names face
an increase in the cancellation rate of 15.7 percentage points; this is a more than tripling of
the cancellation rate faced by white males.
    We next turn to travel time and distance. Of the 839 completed trips, for estimates of
travel distance, time, and cost we removed samples where travelers had entered an incorrect
origin or destination address. 19 trips were removed for incorrect origin or destination
addresses as entered by the traveler, leaving 820 samples with correct requested trip length
and time. We compared the actual travel distance, time and cost as billed on the receipt
compared to the travel distance and travel time as estimated on Google Maps between the
origin and destination of each scheduled trip.
    Table 15 shows the results of a regression of the log of actual trip distance (as billed
on the UberX or Lyft receipt) compared to the log of estimated travel distance between

                                              17
the origin and destination as predicted by Google Maps. Regressions are estimated using
Ordinary Least Squares (OLS), Least Absolute Deviation (LAD) and Quantile regression
using values of Tau of 0.75 and 0.95.
    Google Maps estimates of distance for each route are strongly significant in all cases,
with a coefficient very close to a value of 1. The Surge multiplier (or PrimeTime in Lyft
trips) is weakly significant, indicating that drivers will travel farther with a passenger if the
passenger is paying more than the standard rate.
    Results indicate that female travelers are driven farther. OLS regression using the log of
travel distance indicates that female travelers are driven approximately 5% farther. Quantile
regressions using Tau of 0.75 and 0.95 indicate that the impact on female travelers increases
monotonically with statistical significance on all but Tau of 0.95.
    Table 16 shows the results of a regression of the log of actual trip duration in seconds (as
billed on the UberX or Lyft receipt) vs the log of estimated travel time for the origin and
destination as predicted by Google Maps. Regressions are estimated using Ordinary Least
Squares (OLS) and Quantile regression using values of Tau of 0.75 and 0.95.
    No coefficients are strongly significant, although as with travel distance coefficient on
female travelers is positive in all cases, with marginal significance. Coefficient on surge
multiplier is strongly positive, indicating that trips tend to last longer when the passenger
is paying more than the standard rate.
    This behavior was confirmed by anecdotal evidence from female passengers. Some exces-
sive fares were the result of drivers who started the trip before picking up the passenger or
ended the trip after dropping o↵ the female passenger. Other female riders reported “chatty”
drivers who drove extremely long routes, on some occasions even driving through the same
intersection multiple times. As a result, the additional travel that female riders are exposed
to appears to be a combination of profiteering and flirting to a captive audience.9


4     Conclusions
Transportation sharing networks such as UberX and Lyft bring a number of benefits to
the economy, ranging from cheaper transportation options to employment opportunities for
drivers. The digital platform of sharing networks can also reduce discrimination because it
can control what drivers know about the passenger prior to pickup.
    To better understand the degree of discrimination present in current ride sharing net-
works, we designed two large-scale randomized control trials, one in Seattle and one in
Boston, where we varied the race or perceived race of passengers.
    We found that African American travelers in Seattle experienced statistically significantly
longer delay waiting for a trip request through UberX or Lyft to be accepted. African
   9
     We also analyzed the cumulative star ratings of each RA for UberX and Lyft. Appendix Figures A.4
and A.5 present these results. As in Seattle, average star ratings given to African American and white travel
profiles are very similar, indicating that the drivers who accepted the trips and provided star ratings did not
provide better or worse ratings based on the RA’s race.


                                                      18
American travelers also waited significantly longer for an UberX vehicle to arrive and pick
them up than did white travelers, but waiting times were the same for African American
and white travelers using Lyft. Finally, we note that UberX drivers see only a passenger’s
location and star rating before accepting or declining a trip request, and see the passenger’s
name after accepting. Lyft drivers can see the passenger’s name and photo before accepting
or declining the request.
    Based on these findings, we theorize that at least some drivers for both UberX and
Lyft discriminate on the basis of the perceived race of the traveler. Because UberX drivers
see a passenger’s name and photo only after accepting a trip, UberX drivers discriminate
by canceling after accepting the trip and seeing the passenger’s name whereas Lyft drivers
simply choose not to accept a trip. The added step associated with discrimination among
UberX drivers increases wait times.
    Given these results, we adapted the Boston experiment to more closely focus on cancel-
lations. We found that UberX drivers are nearly three times as likely to cancel a ride on
a male passenger upon seeing that he has a “black-sounding” name. This e↵ect is robust
across numerous model specifications and seems to be driven primarily by behavior in areas
with low population densities. In these extreme cases drivers are more than four times as
likely to cancel on a African American male passenger than on a white male passenger. As
expected, given that Lyft driver see passenger information prior to accepting a ride, we find
no e↵ect of race on Lyft cancellations. We also found that UberX drivers were more likely to
cancel trips for passengers being picked up near subway stops, perhaps because a passenger
at a subway stop is either a low-income passenger, or a subway stop indicates a multi-modal
journey with a lower expected revenue.
    Using the most direct measure (observed cancellations in Boston) there appears to be
evidence that African American passengers receive worse service, compared to white riders,
in TNC or ride-hailing based services such as Uber and Lyft. This discrimination is not
the result of any policy by ride hailing providers, but rather the behavior of individual
TNC drivers. It is important to note, however, that we compare service quality across
African American and white passengers within TNC services. That is, we do not compare
the relative amount of discrimination across TNC and traditional taxi-cab services. In our
Seattle experiment we found that discrimination within traditional taxi-cab also exists. The
first taxi stopped nearly 60% of the time for white RAs, but less than 20% of the time for
African American RAs. Furthermore, white RAs never had more than four taxis pass them
before one stopped, but the African American RAs watched six or seven taxis pass them by
in 20% of cases. These di↵erences are statistically significant.


5    Potential Modifications for TNC Service Providers
Aggregate measures of service delivery by TNC providers appear to do little to dissuade
drivers from discriminating against passengers to whom they do not wish to deliver service,


                                             19
or from driving di↵erently based on the gender of the passenger. TNC providers could
consider a number of additional measures to ensure fairness in service delivery:

  1. Do not use names to identify passengers and drivers. Instead, provide a unique passcode
     that is given to the passenger and the driver to confirm the correct identity at the time
     of pickup. However, this could lead to unintended consequences for passengers’ star
     ratings and subsequent ability to request rides, if discriminating drivers who would
     otherwise decline or cancel a request are instead compelled to transport the passenger.

  2. To avoid extended rides given to female passengers, fixed fares could be o↵ered between
     pickup and drop o↵ points. This would eliminate additional fares paid by female
     passengers and provide a disincentive for drivers to travel farther than necessary.

  3. Since cancellations likely cost travelers more time than declined requests, increasing
     the disincentives for driver cancellations, including de facto cancellations where the
     driver makes no attempt at a pickup, may be appropriate.

  4. Perform periodic audits of driver behavior that appears to be discriminatory in nature.

  5. Counterintuitively, if one accepts that a certain number of drivers are inclined to dis-
     criminate, and it is difficult to police such behavior, the Lyft model of providing a
     name and photo immediately might lead to less negative outcomes for travelers. This
     is because a declined request leads to a small increase in acceptance time, but is quickly
     re-routed to another nearby driver. Although this presumably leads to small (though
     undetectable in our data) increases in waiting time, this e↵ect is likely smaller than
     the time wasted on a cancellation, which is the likely outcome if passenger information
     is not revealed until after the trip is accepted.

  6. Ultimately, passengers might resort to creating accounts with nicknames that de-
     identify their race. This study identified the relative ease with which Uber and Lyft
     accounts with arbitrary names can be created. This simply requires an email address
     and a form of payment, the name of which doesn’t necessarily need to match that of
     the rider account.

  7. Finally, TNC services have a treasure trove of data that could also be analyzed for
     evidence of discrimination across the channels we investigate as well as others. While
     these data obviously would not be generated from an experimental setting, it would
     be possible to analyze both cancellation and wait times across passengers. These
     data could also speak to the heterogeneity in these e↵ects across geography and driver
     characteristics. Finally, researchers could also analyze the areas where drivers choose
     to serve and how this a↵ects wait times.




                                             20
6     Tables and Figures
6.1   Figures

                Figure 1: TNC ad featuring an African American rider




                                        21
               Figure 2: Potential sources of discrimination

               Before Ride              Requests                 Fares            After Ride
                                     Maximize short-        Maximize short-
               Maximize long-                                                       Advise other
                                      term revenue;          term revenue;
Motives        term revenue
                                     minimize per-trip        obtain good
                                                                                      drivers of
                 potential                                                           experience
                                           risk                  rating



              • Surge Prices                                                     • First Name
                                    • Location              • First Name
Information   • Neighborhood                                                     • Interaction with
                                    • Star Rating           • Interaction with
                Demographics                                                       Passenger
                                    • First Name              Passenger
              • Hearsay                                                          • Gratuity



                   Where                   Reject                Route
                                                                                        Star
Action              do I                     or                    &
                                                                                       Rating
                   drive?                  Cancel                Service



              Smart et al. (2015)   Smart et al. (2015)         This Work             This Work
              Hughes & MacKenzie    Edelman et al. (2016)
              (2016)                This Work




                                                    22
6.2     Tables
6.2.1      Seattle Experiment

                          Table 1: Attribute variables of experiment design
 Attributes              Attribute levels
 Routes                  7 levels: 7 routes
 Mode for first trip     3/2 levels: UberX, Lyft, & Flywheel in stage 1; UberX & Lyft in stage 2
 Race                    2 levels: black, white
 Sex                     2 levels: female, male
 Day of the week         4 levels: Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday
 Week of data collection 4/2 levels: 4 weeks in stage 1, 2 weeks in stage 2
   Notes: This table shows the number of routes table by research assistants, the mode selection, research assistant race and
   gender, and the frequency of trips taken for the Seattle experiment.



  Table 2: Descriptive analysis of the Acceptance time, Estimated waiting time 1 and
      Actual waiting time of Uber, Lyft and Flywheel in the Seattle experiment
 Service  Attributes            Acceptance time(s)         Est. waiting time 1 (min)         Actual waiting time (s)
 Uber     Num.obs                      190                            200                             187
          Mean                          25                            4.1                             275
          S.D.                          21                            1.9                             212
          Median                        18                             4                              225
          Black Mean                    29                            4.3                             316
          White Mean                   21                             3.9                             240
 Lyft     Num.obs                      199                            199                             202
          Mean                          23                            3.0                             284
          S.D.                          24                            1.8                             156
          Median                        16                             3                              270
          Black Mean                   23                             3.2                             284
          White Mean                   19                             2.7                             284
 Flywheel Num.obs                      130                            124                             124
          Mean                          44                            6.2                             446
          S.D.                          69                            3.5                             263
          Median                        28                             5                              381
          Black Mean                   35                             6.4                             447
          White Mean                   35                             6.1                             444
   Notes: This table shows the number of trips taken and summary statistics for the time until the request was accepted
   (Acceptance time), the estimated wait time reported by the app when the trip was requested (Est. wait time 1), and the
   actual wait time from when the trip was requested (Actual wait time) for the Seattle experiment. In addition, we report
   the means of these three variables by race.




                                                            23
Table 3: Relationship between race and the log of estimated waiting times prior to
                  requesting the trip in the Seattle experiment

                                                                   UberX      Lyft     Flywheel
                   (Intercept)                                     1.27⇤⇤⇤   0.85⇤⇤⇤    1.68⇤⇤⇤
                                                                   (0.04)    (0.06)     (0.08)
                   African American Traveler                        0.08      0.12         0.04
                                                                   (0.06)    (0.09)     (0.11)
                   R2                                               0.01      0.01       0.00
                   Adj. R2                                          0.00      0.01       -0.01
                   Num. obs.                                         188       183        121
                   RMSE                                             0.43      0.59       0.62
                   ⇤⇤⇤ p   < 0.001,   ⇤⇤ p   < 0.01, ⇤ p < 0.05
Notes: This table shows the a↵ect of race on estimated wait time prior to the trip request in the Seattle experiment. We
find no systematic relationship between the service’s estimated wait times and race.




                                                                  24
               Table 4: Models of the log of acceptance time for UberX, Lyft, and Flywheel in the Seattle experiment

                                                        UberX                                     Lyft                                     Flywheel
                                                Model 1 Model 2      Model 3      Model 1       Model 2       Model 3        Model 1       Model 2 Model 3
            African American                    0.28⇤⇤⇤ 0.24⇤⇤⇤      0.24⇤⇤⇤      0.24⇤⇤⇤        0.16⇤         0.17⇤⇤          0.06          0.19    0.27⇤⇤
                                                 (0.07)  (0.07)       (0.07)       (0.08)        (0.08)        (0.08)         (0.14)        (0.12)   (0.13)
            Log(ETA1)                                   0.22⇤⇤⇤       0.15⇤                      0.15⇤⇤         0.11                        0.28⇤⇤⇤  0.30⇤⇤⇤
                                                         (0.08)       (0.09)                     (0.07)        (0.08)                       (0.10)   (0.11)
            High Income                                                0.19⇤⇤                                   0.17⇤                                 0.26⇤
                                                                      (0.09)                                   (0.10)                                (0.15)
            Low Pop Density                                            0.08                                    0.29⇤⇤                                   0.16
                                                                      (0.11)                                   (0.12)                                (0.20)
            High AA Pop                                                  0.09                                   0.27⇤                                 0.13
                                                                      (0.11)                                   (0.14)                                (0.21)
            Route2                                                     0.46⇤⇤                                    0.22                                   0.25
                                                                      (0.20)                                   (0.22)                                (0.30)
            Route3                                                     0.47⇤⇤                                    0.10                                 0.23




25
                                                                      (0.18)                                   (0.21)                                (0.29)
            Route4                                                     0.38⇤⇤                                    0.12                                 0.08
                                                                      (0.18)                                   (0.20)                                (0.29)
            Route5                                                     0.56⇤⇤⇤                                  0.06                                  0.26
                                                                      (0.20)                                   (0.22)                                (0.30)
            Route6                                                     0.41⇤⇤                                    0.09                                 0.47
                                                                      (0.18)                                   (0.19)                                (0.30)
            Route7                                                     0.67⇤⇤⇤                                   0.20                                 0.53⇤
                                                                      (0.19)                                   (0.22)                                (0.32)
            (Intercept)                          2.92⇤⇤⇤   2.63⇤⇤⇤   3.30⇤⇤⇤       2.80⇤⇤⇤       2.68⇤⇤⇤      3.02⇤⇤⇤         3.34⇤⇤⇤       2.73 ⇤⇤⇤
                                                                                                                                                     2.24⇤⇤⇤
                                                 (0.05)    (0.11)     (0.23)       (0.06)        (0.08)        (0.23)         (0.10)        (0.19)   (0.40)
            R2                                    0.07      0.10       0.18         0.04          0.05          0.13           0.00          0.08     0.16
            Adj. R2                               0.07      0.09       0.13         0.04          0.04          0.07           -0.01         0.06     0.07
            Num. obs.                              190       188        186          199           183          182             130           121      120
            RMSE                                  0.49      0.48       0.47         0.59          0.56          0.55           0.81          0.68     0.68
            ⇤⇤⇤ p   < 0.01,   ⇤⇤ p   < 0.05, ⇤ p < 0.1
     Notes: This table shows regression models of the log of the time it takes until a trip is accepted for the Seattle experiment. We split the regressions by service (UberX,
     Lyft, and Flywheel). The first model is a simple di↵erence in mean times across African Americans and white. The second model controls for the estimated wait time prior
     to the trip being requested. Model 3 includes route fixed e↵ects, where routes are defined as a pre-determined chain of trips, and pickup-location characteristics to control
     for characteristics of the trip. For route characteristics, we use demographics from the Census Block Group of the pickup point using 2010 data. High Income is defined as
     median household income greater than $75k annually (top 25%), Low Pop Density is defined as fewer than 6750 people per square mile (lower 25%), and High AA Pop is
     defined as more than 1890 African American people per square mile (top 25%).
             Table 5: Models of the log of actual waiting time for UberX, Lyft, and Flywheel in the Seattle experiment

                                                           UberX                                  Lyft                                     Flywheel
                                                Model 1    Model 2   Model 3 Model 1            Model 2       Model 3       Model 1        Model 2 Model 3
            African American                    0.36⇤⇤⇤    0.29⇤⇤⇤   0.31⇤⇤⇤    0.00               0.05          0.06          0.00          0.04    0.03
                                                 (0.11)     (0.09)    (0.09)  (0.09)             (0.08)        (0.08)        (0.12)         (0.11)  (0.11)
            Log(ETA1)                                      0.96⇤⇤⇤   0.88⇤⇤⇤                    0.53⇤⇤⇤       0.48⇤⇤⇤                       0.60⇤⇤⇤ 0.53⇤⇤⇤
                                                            (0.10)    (0.11)                     (0.07)        (0.07)                       (0.09)  (0.10)
            High Income                                                 0.02                                    0.01                                 0.21
                                                                      (0.11)                                   (0.09)                               (0.13)
            Low Pop Density                                             0.17                                    0.10                                 0.09
                                                                      (0.13)                                   (0.11)                               (0.17)
            High AA Pop                                                0.05                                     0.09                                   0.11
                                                                      (0.13)                                   (0.13)                               (0.18)
            Route2                                                      0.34                                     0.30                                  0.23
                                                                      (0.24)                                   (0.21)                               (0.25)
            Route3                                                      0.27                                     0.30                                  0.28




26
                                                                      (0.22)                                   (0.20)                               (0.25)
            Route4                                                      0.30                                     0.29                                  0.28
                                                                      (0.21)                                   (0.19)                               (0.24)
            Route5                                                      0.17                                     0.35                                  0.07
                                                                      (0.24)                                   (0.22)                               (0.27)
            Route6                                                      0.21                                     0.24                                  0.20
                                                                      (0.21)                                   (0.18)                               (0.25)
            Route7                                                      0.25                                     0.08                                  0.01
                                                                      (0.23)                                   (0.21)                               (0.27)
            (Intercept)                          5.21⇤⇤⇤   3.99⇤⇤⇤   4.32⇤⇤⇤ 5.48⇤⇤⇤             5.02⇤⇤⇤      5.20⇤⇤⇤        5.91⇤⇤⇤        4.89⇤⇤⇤ 5.15⇤⇤⇤
                                                 (0.07)    (0.14)     (0.28)  (0.06)             (0.08)        (0.22)        (0.09)         (0.17)  (0.34)
            R2                                    0.06      0.36       0.37    0.00               0.26          0.29           0.00          0.30    0.35
            Adj. R2                               0.05      0.35       0.33    -0.00              0.25          0.25          -0.01          0.28    0.27
            Num. obs.                              186       185       183      202                187          186            124            113     112
            RMSE                                  0.72      0.59       0.59    0.62               0.53          0.53           0.69          0.57    0.58
            ⇤⇤⇤ p   < 0.01,   ⇤⇤ p   < 0.05, ⇤ p < 0.1
     Notes: This table shows regression models of the log of actual wait time from when the trip was requested to the time the research assistant was picked up in the Seattle
     experiment. We split the regressions by service (UberX, Lyft, and Flywheel). The first model is a simple di↵erence in mean times across African Americans and white.
     The second model controls for the estimated wait time prior to the trip being requested. Model 3 includes route fixed e↵ects, where routes are defined as a pre-determined
     chain of trips, and pickup-location characteristics to control for characteristics of the trip. For route characteristics, we use demographics from the Census Block Group of
     the pickup point using 2010 data. High Income is defined as median household income greater than $75k annually (top 25%), Low Pop Density is defined as fewer than
     6750 people per square mile (lower 25%), and High AA Pop is defined as more than 1890 African American people per square mile (top 25%).
                   Table 6: Models of the log of travel time for UberX, Lyft, and Flywheel in the Seattle experiment
                                                                              UberX                            Lyft                            Flywheel
                                                                    OLS      Tau=.75    Tau=.95     OLS      Tau=.75     Tau=.95     OLS       Tau=.75 Tau=.95
                      African American                             0.08⇤⇤      0.09⇤     0.16⇤⇤       0.01      0.06        0.05     0.07        0.03     0.03
                                                                   (0.04)     (0.05)     (0.06)    (0.05)     (0.05)      (0.06)    (0.05)      (0.05)   (0.04)
                      Female                                          0.05      0.01      0.02      0.05      0.11⇤⇤        0.06     0.07        0.06    0.12⇤⇤⇤
                                                                   (0.03)     (0.05)     (0.03)    (0.05)     (0.05)      (0.12)    (0.05)      (0.05)   (0.01)
                      Log(Estimated travel time)                   0.87⇤⇤⇤    0.81⇤⇤⇤    0.79⇤⇤⇤   0.87⇤⇤⇤    0.87⇤⇤⇤     0.84⇤⇤⇤   0.80⇤⇤⇤     0.86⇤⇤⇤  0.83⇤⇤⇤
                                                                   (0.06)     (0.09)     (0.09)    (0.07)     (0.05)      (0.19)    (0.08)      (0.09)   (0.04)
                      High Income                                     0.05     0.01       0.15⇤⇤    0.16⇤⇤     0.22⇤⇤⇤      0.05     0.02         0.01     0.01
                                                                   (0.04)     (0.05)     (0.07)    (0.06)     (0.07)      (0.11)    (0.06)      (0.03)   (0.04)
                      Low Pop Density                                0.09⇤      0.11⇤     0.23⇤⇤      0.07     0.16⇤⇤      0.05        0.11      0.13⇤⇤   0.24⇤⇤⇤
                                                                   (0.05)     (0.06)     (0.11)    (0.07)     (0.07)      (0.14)    (0.08)      (0.06)   (0.05)
                      High AA Pop                                   0.06       0.04       0.19⇤       0.01      0.02        0.16     0.04        0.02     0.11
                                                                   (0.05)     (0.07)     (0.11)    (0.08)     (0.08)      (0.12)    (0.09)      (0.06)   (0.10)
                      Route2                                        0.03       0.11       0.06      0.11       0.08        0.16      0.34⇤⇤⇤      0.39⇤    0.05
                                                                   (0.09)     (0.20)     (0.10)    (0.13)     (0.33)      (0.27)    (0.11)      (0.21)   (0.08)
                      Route3                                          0.09     0.07        0.23       0.02      0.11        0.11     0.35⇤⇤⇤     0.37⇤⇤⇤  0.47⇤⇤⇤
                                                                   (0.09)     (0.17)     (0.16)    (0.13)     (0.25)      (0.15)    (0.11)      (0.10)   (0.10)
                      Route4                                          0.05     0.07        0.11       0.04     0.01        0.08      0.25⇤⇤      0.17⇤⇤   0.28⇤⇤⇤




27
                                                                   (0.08)     (0.16)     (0.12)    (0.11)     (0.24)      (0.16)    (0.10)      (0.07)   (0.08)
                      Route5                                          0.12     0.01        0.28⇤    0.03       0.01        0.11       0.21⇤       0.21⇤   0.18⇤⇤
                                                                   (0.09)     (0.17)     (0.17)    (0.13)     (0.25)      (0.15)    (0.12)      (0.10)   (0.09)
                      Route6                                        0.05       0.19       0.06      0.06       0.07         0.28⇤      0.12       0.05    0.15
                                                                   (0.09)     (0.18)     (0.13)    (0.12)     (0.25)      (0.16)    (0.12)      (0.07)   (0.10)
                      Route7                                        0.03       0.19       0.10      0.07       0.04         0.08       0.08       0.10     0.05
                                                                   (0.09)     (0.18)     (0.21)    (0.13)     (0.25)      (0.20)    (0.13)      (0.14)   (0.13)
                      (Intercept)                                  4.41⇤⇤⇤    4.49⇤⇤⇤    4.85⇤⇤⇤   4.30⇤⇤⇤    4.54⇤⇤⇤     5.08⇤⇤⇤   4.74⇤⇤⇤     4.83⇤⇤⇤  4.97⇤⇤⇤
                                                                   (0.12)     (0.22)     (0.11)    (0.18)     (0.27)      (0.39)    (0.18)      (0.16)   (0.16)
                      R2                                            0.73                            0.62                             0.63
                      Adj. R2                                       0.71                            0.59                             0.59
                      Num. obs.                                      175       175        175        180       180         180        118        118       118
                      RMSE                                          0.23                            0.32                             0.27
                      ⇤⇤⇤ p   < 0.01,   ⇤⇤ p   < 0.05, ⇤ p < 0.1

     Notes: This table shows regression models of the log of the travel time. We split the regressions by service (UberX, Lyft, and Flywheel). For Uber and Lyft, travel times
     are those recorded on receipts. For Flywheel travel times are calculated based on RAs’ recorded pickup and drop o↵ times. The estimated travel times of the three services
     are calculated using Google API according to the assigned origins and destinations. The first model is ordinary least squares regression. We control for both race and
     gender, and include route fixed e↵ects, where routes are defined as a pre-determined chain of trips, and pickup-location characteristics to control for characteristics of the
     trip. The next two models are quantile regressions of the 75th and 95th quantile, respectively. For route characteristics, we use demographics from the Census Block Group
     of the pickup point using 2010 data. High Income is defined as median household income greater than $75k annually (top 25%), Low Pop Density is defined as fewer than
     6750 people per square mile (lower 25%), and High AA Pop is defined as more than 1890 African American people per square mile (top 25%).
                Table 7: Models of the log of travel distance for UberX, Lyft, and Flywheel in the Seattle experiment
                                                                                             UberX                            Lyft
                                                                                   OLS      Tau=.75    Tau=.95     OLS      Tau=.75     Tau=.95
                                     African American                              0.03       0.05      0.20⇤⇤⇤    0.01        0.00        0.12
                                                                                  (0.03)     (0.03)     (0.03)    (0.03)     (0.02)      (0.14)
                                     Female                                         0.06⇤      0.02       0.01       0.01     0.02        0.01
                                                                                  (0.03)     (0.01)     (0.03)    (0.03)     (0.02)      (0.16)
                                     Log(Estimated distance)                      0.90⇤⇤⇤    0.95⇤⇤⇤    0.98⇤⇤⇤   1.04⇤⇤⇤    1.01⇤⇤⇤     1.18⇤⇤⇤
                                                                                  (0.06)     (0.02)     (0.05)    (0.05)     (0.03)      (0.17)
                                     High Income                                     0.04     0.09⇤⇤      0.02       0.00     0.07⇤⇤⇤      0.01
                                                                                  (0.04)     (0.04)     (0.05)    (0.04)     (0.03)      (0.18)
                                     Low Pop Density                                 0.05     0.01       0.07⇤       0.07     0.08⇤⇤⇤      0.24
                                                                                  (0.05)     (0.05)     (0.03)    (0.05)     (0.03)      (0.17)
                                     High AA Pop                                   0.01        0.03       0.09     0.00       0.03        0.13
                                                                                  (0.05)     (0.04)     (0.06)    (0.05)     (0.03)      (0.16)
                                     Route2                                        0.03       0.05      0.23⇤⇤     0.04        0.03        0.06
                                                                                  (0.09)     (0.14)     (0.12)    (0.08)     (0.12)      (0.18)
                                     Route3                                          0.06      0.05       0.05     0.01        0.07        0.41⇤




28
                                                                                  (0.08)     (0.10)     (0.13)    (0.08)     (0.12)      (0.22)
                                     Route4                                         0.14⇤      0.01       0.02       0.00      0.06        0.41
                                                                                  (0.08)     (0.10)     (0.11)    (0.07)     (0.10)      (0.30)
                                     Route5                                          0.02      0.03      0.23        0.03      0.09       0.60⇤⇤
                                                                                  (0.09)     (0.11)     (0.20)    (0.08)     (0.11)      (0.28)
                                     Route6                                        0.04        0.01       0.11       0.04      0.06       0.41⇤⇤
                                                                                  (0.09)     (0.10)     (0.11)    (0.08)     (0.11)      (0.17)
                                     Route7                                          0.07      0.10       0.17       0.01      0.08        0.41
                                                                                  (0.10)     (0.11)     (0.11)    (0.09)     (0.11)      (0.26)
                                     (Intercept)                                  0.18⇤⇤     0.23⇤⇤     0.30⇤⇤     0.02       0.15        0.60
                                                                                  (0.09)     (0.11)     (0.12)    (0.08)     (0.11)      (0.37)
                                     R2                                            0.81                            0.84
                                     Adj. R2                                       0.79                            0.83
                                     Num. obs.                                      185       185        185        194       194         194
                                     RMSE                                          0.23                            0.20
                                     ⇤⇤⇤ p   < 0.01,   ⇤⇤ p   < 0.05, ⇤ p < 0.1
     Notes: This table shows regression models of the log of the travel distance. We split the regressions by service (UberX, Lyft, and Flywheel). For Uber and Lyft, travel
     times are those recorded on receipts. For Flywheel travel times are calculated based on RAs’ recorded pickup and drop o↵ times. The estimated travel times of the three
     services are calculated using Google API according to the assigned origins and destinations. The first model is ordinary least squares regression. We control for both race
     and gender, and include route fixed e↵ects, where routes are defined as a pre-determined chain of trips, and pickup-location characteristics to control for characteristics of
     the trip. The next two models are quantile regressions of the 75th and 95th quantile, respectively. For route characteristics, we use demographics from the Census Block
     Group of the pickup point using 2010 data. High Income is defined as median household income greater than $75k annually (top 25%), Low Pop Density is defined as
     fewer than 6750 people per square mile (lower 25%), and High AA Pop is defined as more than 1890 African American people per square mile (top 25%).
         Table 8: Subject name and race assignment in the Boston experiment

                      Individual         Gender        Race Assigned             Name
                      1                  F             Black                     Aisha
                                                       White                     Allison
                      2                  F             Black                     Ebony
                                                       White                     Kristen
                      3                  M             Black                     Hakim
                                                       White                     Brendan
                      4                  M             Black                     Darnell
                                                       White                     Brad
                      5                  F             Black                     Keisha
                                                       White                     Anne
                      6                  M             Black                     Kareem
                                                       White                     Greg
                      7                  M             Black                     Rasheed
                                                       White                     Todd
                      8                  F             White                     Laurie
 Research assistant names used in the Boston experiment. The first name is meant to reflect a stereotypical African
 American name, while the second is meant to project the research assistant as caucasian.


 Table 9: Descriptive analysis of the Acceptance time, Estimated waiting time 1 and
          Actual waiting time of Uber and Lyft in the Boston experiment

       Attributes         Acceptance Times          Est. waiting time 1 (min) Actual waiting time (s)
Uber   Num.obs                  372                            372                     372
       Mean                      48                            3.3                     218
       S.D.                     102                            1.4                     148
       Median                    25                             3                      196
       Black Mean               45.9                           3.3                     211
       White Mean               50.7                           3.3                     226
Lyft   Num.obs                  387                            387                     387
       Mean                     52.4                           2.8                     297
       S.D.                     168                            1.4                     211
       Median                    19                             2                      243
       Black Mean                55                            2.7                     296
       White Mean                49                            2.8                     299
 Notes: This table shows the number of trips taken and summary statistics for the time until the request was accepted
 (Acceptance time), the estimated wait time reported by the app when the trip was requested (Est. wait time 1), and the
 actual wait time from when the trip was requested (Actual wait time) for the Boston experiment. In addition, we report
 the means of these three variables by race.




                                                        29
Table 10: Relationship between race and the log of estimated waiting times prior to
                  requesting the trip in the Boston experiment

                                                                        UberX        Lyft
                           Intercept                                    5.214⇤⇤⇤   5.013⇤⇤⇤
                                                                         (.034)     (.038)
                           African American Name                            .032       .038
                                                                         (.045)     (.051)
                           R2                                             .001        .001
                           Adj. R2                                        -.001      -.001
                           Num. obs.                                       372        387
                           RMSE                                           .432       .498
                           ⇤⇤⇤ p   < 0.01,   ⇤⇤ p   < 0.05, ⇤ p < 0.1
Notes: This table shows the a↵ect of race on estimated wait time prior to the trip request in the Boston experiment. We
find no systematic relationship between the service’s estimated wait times and race.




                                                                30
Table 11: Models of the log of Acceptance Time for UberX and Lyft in the Boston
                                   experiment

                                                 UberX                                      Lyft
                                      Model 1    Model 2     Model 3       Model 4        Model 5        Model 6
  African American                      .000       .003           .011       .017           .017            .011
                                       (.059)     (.059)      (.057)        (.060)         (.060)         (.058)
  log(ETA1)                                        .075         .106                        .009            .049
                                                  (.069)      (.068)                       (.061)         (.059)
  High Income                                                   .034                                        .072
                                                              (.059)                                      (.060)
  Low Pop Density                                               .039                                        .089
                                                              (.060)                                      (.060)
  High AA Pop                                                   .097                                          .024
                                                              (.059)                                      (.059)
  Individual1                                                  .506⇤⇤⇤                                      .348⇤⇤
                                                              (.148)                                      (.153)
  Individual2                                                   .318⇤⇤                                      .063
                                                              (.160)                                      (.162)
  Individual3                                                   .339⇤⇤                                      .099
                                                              (.137)                                      (.144)
  Individual4                                                  .617⇤⇤⇤                                     .428⇤⇤⇤
                                                              (.147)                                      (.157)
  Individual5                                                    .251⇤                                        .068
                                                              (.142)                                      (.150)
  Individual6                                                  .393⇤⇤⇤                                        .036
                                                              (.149)                                      (.156)
  (Intercept)                         3.285⇤⇤⇤   2.896⇤⇤⇤    3.048⇤⇤⇤       3.000⇤⇤⇤       2.953⇤⇤⇤      2.797⇤⇤⇤
                                       (.044)     (.363)      (.373)         (.045)         (.310)        (.316)
  R2                                    .000        .003        .086           .000           .000          .124
  Adj. R2                               -.003      -.002        .056          -.003          -.005          .097
  Num. obs.                              349        349          349           364            364            364
  RMSE                                  .546       .546         .530          .570           .571           .541
  ⇤⇤⇤ p   < 0.01,   ⇤⇤ p   < 0.05, ⇤ p < 0.1
Notes: This table shows regression models of the log of the time it takes until a trip is accepted for the Boston experiment.
We split the regressions by service (UberX and Lyft). The first model is a simple di↵erence in mean times across African
Americans and white. The second model controls for the estimated wait time prior to the trip being requested. Model 3
includes route characteristics and research assistant fixed e↵ects. For route characteristics, we use demographics from the
Census Block Group of the pickup point using 2010 data. High Black Pop is defined as 20% or greater African American
population, High Income is defined as median household income greater than $60k annually, and Lower Population Density
is defined as fewer than 12800 people per square mile.




                                                            31
Table 12: Models of the log of actual waiting time for UberX and Lyft in the Boston
                                    experiment

                                              UberX                                       Lyft
                                      Model 1 Model 2        Model 3      Model 4       Model 5        Model 6
  African American                       .120    .102            .076        .042          .014            .008
                                       (.078)  (.073)         (.073)       (.072)        (.065)         (.065)
  log(ETA1)                                   .609⇤⇤⇤        .625⇤⇤⇤                    .612⇤⇤⇤        .611⇤⇤⇤
                                               (.086)         (.087)                     (.065)         (.067)
  High Income                                                  .032                                      .042
                                                              (.075)                                    (.068)
  Low Pop Density                                              .123                                      .016
                                                              (.076)                                    (.068)
  High AA Pop                                                    .023                                      .076
                                                              (.075)                                    (.067)
  Individual1                                                  .201                                      .235
                                                              (.188)                                    (.172)
  Individual2                                                 .494⇤⇤                                     .028
                                                              (.203)                                    (.182)
  Individual3                                                  .082                                      .051
                                                              (.174)                                    (.162)
  Individual4                                                  .091                                        .010
                                                              (.187)                                    (.176)
  Individual5                                                  .192                                      .052
                                                              (.180)                                    (.169)
  Individual6                                                    .063                                      .093
                                                              (.190)                                    (.175)
  (Intercept)                         5.213⇤⇤⇤   2.045⇤⇤⇤    1.762⇤⇤⇤     5.478⇤⇤⇤      2.416⇤⇤⇤       2.372⇤⇤⇤
                                       (.058)     (.452)      (.473)       (.054)        (.331)         (.356)
  R2                                    .007       .132        .175          .001         .196           .218
  Adj. R2                               .004       .127        .148         -.002         .192           .193
  Num. obs.                              349        349         349          364           364            364
  RMSE                                  .727       .680        .672         .679          .610           .610
  ⇤⇤⇤ p   < 0.01,   ⇤⇤ p   < 0.05, ⇤ p < 0.1
Notes: This table shows regression models of the log of actual wait time from when the trip was requested to the time the
research assistant was picked up in the Boston experiment. We split the regressions by service (UberX and Lyft). The
first model is a simple di↵erence in mean times across African Americans and white. The second model controls for the
estimated wait time prior to the trip being requested. Model 3 includes route characteristics and research assistant fixed
e↵ects. For route characteristics, we use demographics from the Census Block Group of the pickup point using 2010 data.
High Black Pop is defined as 20% or greater African American population, High Income is defined as median household
income greater than $60k annually, and Low Population Density is defined as fewer than 12800 people per square mile.




                                                            32
Table 13: Comparisons of cancellation rates between black and white passengers in the
                                Boston experiment

                             Passengers            Uber        Lyft
                                               Black White Black White
                             All               10.1% 4.9%  6.0% 7.7%
                             Males             11.2% 4.5%  8.4% 8.7%
                             Females           8.4% 5.4%   2.1% 6.4%
 Notes: This table reports the mean cancellation rates across the two services, as well as the cancellation rates across the
 four gender·race pairs in the Boston experiment.




                                                          33
                  Table 14: Models of cancellations in the Boston experiment
                                   Lyft       Lyft        Uber       Uber           Uber       Uber       Demographic
                                   Means      Weekday     Means      Weekday        Rider      Transit    Interaction
                                              E↵ects                 E↵ects         E↵ects     E↵ects
   African American Name             .017                 .052⇤⇤
                                   (.024)                 (.025)
   African American Male                      .000                   .075⇤⇤         .072⇤⇤     .073⇤⇤     .006
                                              (.032)                 (.034)         (.035)     (.035)     (.041)
   African American Female                      .064⇤                .037             .041       .019       .021
                                              (.036)                 (.039)         (.143)     (.142)     (.141)
   White Female                                 .028                 .012             .058       .030       .037
                                              (.037)                 (.039)         (.137)     (.136)     (.135)
   High AA Pop                                  .012                   .008           .007       .008       .011
                                              (.025)                 (.026)         (.026)     (.026)     (.026)
   High Income                                  .005                   .065⇤⇤         .067⇤⇤     .061⇤⇤     .058⇤⇤
                                              (.025)                 (.027)         (.027)     (.027)     (.026)
   Low Pop Density                              .008                 .055⇤⇤         .055⇤⇤     .053⇤⇤       .002
                                              (.025)                 (.026)         (.026)     (.026)     (.032)
   WeekdayTuesday                               .023                   .097           .139       .116       .125
                                              (.107)                 (.124)         (.127)     (.127)     (.125)
   WeekdayWednesday                             .016                   .022           .025       .017       .017
                                              (.047)                 (.050)         (.051)     (.051)     (.051)
   WeekdayThursday                            .010                   .027           .043       .032       .042
                                              (.050)                 (.053)         (.057)     (.056)     (.056)
   WeekdayFriday                              .010                   .043           .046       .055       .050
                                              (.051)                 (.054)         (.056)     (.056)     (.055)
   WeekdaySaturday                            .022                     .035           .042       .052       .048
                                              (.043)                 (.048)         (.049)     (.049)     (.048)
   WeekdaySunday                                .038                   .081           .068       .075       .071
                                              (.054)                 (.056)         (.057)     (.057)     (.056)
   Individual1                                                                      .122       .105       .109
                                                                                    (.128)     (.127)     (.126)
   Individual2                                                                      .031       .019       .020
                                                                                    (.130)     (.130)     (.128)
   Individual3                                                                        .019       .005       .005
                                                                                    (.066)     (.065)     (.065)
   Individual4                                                                      .027       .046       .045
                                                                                    (.068)     (.067)     (.067)
   Individual5                                                                      .068       .057       .065
                                                                                    (.125)     (.125)     (.124)
   Individual6                                                                      .026       .041       .047
                                                                                    (.068)     (.068)     (.067)
   Pickup at Transit                                                                           .100⇤⇤⇤    .097⇤⇤⇤
                                                                                               (.038)     (.038)
   Black Male * Low Pop                                                                                   .157⇤⇤⇤
   Density
                                                                                                          (.054)
   (Intercept)                      .077⇤⇤⇤   .097⇤⇤⇤     .049⇤⇤⇤    .054⇤          .051       .024       .044
                                    (.017)    (.029)      (.019)     (.031)         (.068)     (.068)     (.068)
   R2                               .001      .014        .009       .039           .050       .065       .083
   Adj. R2                          -.001     -.013       .007       .013           .010       .024       .041
   Num. obs.                        460       460         451        451            451        451        451
   RMSE                             .251      .253        .267       .266           .266       .265       .262
   ⇤⇤⇤ p < 0.01, ⇤⇤ p < 0.05, ⇤ p < 0.1

Notes: This table shows linear probability models for cancellations in the Boston experiment. We first show the results for
Lyft requests only. Lyft provides the name and photo of the prospective rider prior to the Lyft driver accepting the ride.
Therefore, we would not expect to see an impact of name on the probability of a cancellation since any discrimination that
could occur would happen prior to acceptance. An UberX driver does not see the name of the prospective passenger until
after accepting the ride. One channel of discrimination, therefore, would be for the driver to accept the ride, receive a signal
about the rider’s race, and then cancel. The first model is a simple di↵erence in the average rate of cancellations across
implied race. We then add day of week and pickup location characteristics as controls and allow for gender di↵erences. The
third model for Uber adds research assistant fixed e↵ects. The fourth model adds an indicator variable for whether the
pickup location is a public transit location in case the attractiveness of these rides is di↵erent. The final model interacts the
African American male name with an indicator variable for whether the location is in a low-population density area. For
route characteristics, we use demographics from the Census Block Group of the pickup point using 2010 data. High Black
Pop is defined as 20% or greater African American population, High Income is defined as median household income greater
than $60k annually, and Low Population Density is defined as fewer than 12800 people per square mile.




                                                             34
        Table 15: Models of the log of travel distance for UberX and Lyft in the Boston
                                          experiment

                                                         UberX                                     Lyft
                                               OLS      Tau = .75    Tau = .95        OLS       Tau = .75         Tau = .95
Female                                        .056⇤⇤     .079⇤⇤⇤        .089          .050         .027             .126⇤
                                              (.022)      (.030)       (.097)        (.031)       (.039)            (.076)
African American Name                          .002        .014          .068           .022       .035               .178⇤
                                              (.022)      (.033)       (.069)        (.031)       (.037)            (.101)
log(Google Est. Dist)                        .886⇤⇤⇤     .837⇤⇤⇤      .599⇤⇤⇤       .929⇤⇤⇤      .861⇤⇤⇤           .608⇤⇤⇤
                                              (.033)      (.041)       (.103)        (.047)       (.058)            (.115)
Surge Multiplier                               .063        .076          .033         .159        .180⇤              .249
                                              (.043)      (.055)       (.088)        (.099)       (.107)           (3.054)
(Intercept)                                      .001      .069       .554⇤⇤⇤           .120        .041             .337
                                              (.049)      (.073)       (.116)        (.106)       (.117)           (3.061)
R2                                             .641                                   .494
Adj. R2                                        .638                                   .489
Num. obs.                                       405       405          405             415           415              415
RMSE                                           .220                                   .314
⇤⇤⇤ p   < 0.01,   ⇤⇤ p   < 0.05, ⇤ p < 0.1
   Notes: This table shows regression models of the log of the travel distance. We split the regressions by service (UberX and
   Lyft). For Uber and Lyft, travel times are those recorded on receipts. The estimated travel times of the three services are
   calculated using Google API according to the assigned origins and destinations. The first model is ordinary least squares
   regression. We control for both race and gender, and whether surge pricing is in e↵ect. The next two models are quantile
   regressions of the 75th and 95th quantile, respectively.




                                                                35
Table 16: Models of the log of travel time for UberX and Lyft in the Boston experiment

                                                UberX                                           Lyft
                         OLS                   Tau = .75 Tau = .95               OLS         Tau = .75       Tau = .95
Female                   .011                     .021      .009                .069⇤           .017            .113
                        (.033)                   (.042)    (.104)               (.039)         (.055)          (.120)
African American Name    .041                     .036      .124                   .024          .002            .079
                        (.033)                   (.042)    (.117)               (.039)         (.055)          (.131)
log(Google Est. Time)  .623⇤⇤⇤                  .560⇤⇤⇤   .441⇤⇤⇤              .767⇤⇤⇤        .647⇤⇤⇤         .595⇤⇤⇤
                        (.048)                   (.067)    (.140)               (.057)         (.081)          (.219)
Surge Multiplier       .211⇤⇤⇤                   .274 ⇤⇤
                                                           .378⇤⇤               .215⇤            .026           .427
                        (.063)                   (.125)    (.150)               (.124)         (.149)         (1.994)
(Intercept)           2.045⇤⇤⇤                  2.526⇤⇤⇤  3.502⇤⇤⇤             1.150⇤⇤⇤       2.322⇤⇤⇤         2.581
                        (.293)                   (.419)    (.824)               (.350)         (.483)         (2.431)
R2                       .311                                                    .318
       2
Adj. R                   .304                                                    .311
Num. obs.                 405                      405              405           415            415             415
RMSE                     .326                                                    .391
⇤⇤⇤ p   < 0.01,   ⇤⇤ p   < 0.05, ⇤ p < 0.1
  Notes: This table shows regression models of the log of travel time. We split the regressions by service (UberX and
  Lyft). For Uber and Lyft, travel times are those recorded on receipts. The estimated travel times of the three services are
  calculated using Google API according to the assigned origins and destinations. The first model is ordinary least squares
  regression. We control for both race and gender, and include route fixed e↵ects, and whether surge pricing is in e↵ect. The
  next two models are quantile regressions of the 75th and 95th quantile, respectively.




                                                           36
References
Bertrand, M. and S. Mullainathan (2004): “Are Emily and Greg More Employable
 Than Lakisha and Jamal? A Field Experiment on Labor Market Discrimination,” The
 American Economic Review, 94, 991–1013.

Donnelly, A. (2015): “Aboriginal actor Jack Charles ‘refused taxi twice in three days’,”
 BBC News.

Edelman, B. and M. Luca (2014): “Digital Discrimination: The Case of Airbnb.com,”
 Tech. rep., Harvard University.

Edelman, B., M. Luca, and D. Svirsky (2016): “Racial Discrimination in the Sharing
 Economy: Evidence from a Field Experiment,” Tech. rep., Harvard University.

Fryer, R. G. and S. D. Levitt (2004): “The Causes and Consequences of Distinctively
 Black Names,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 119, 767–805.

Glanville, D. (2015): “Why I Still Get Shunned by Taxi Drivers,” The Atlantic, October
 24.

Goddard, T., K. B. Kahn, and A. Adkins (2015): “Racial bias in driver yielding be-
 havior at crosswalks,” Transportation Research Part F: Traffic Psychology and Behaviour,
 33, 1–6.

Gonen, Y. (2015): “Puerto Rican mayor booted from NYC cab | New York Post,” NY
 Daily News.

Harshbarger, R. (2015): “City puts biased drivers who refuse rides on notice with new
 video,” New York Post, June 9th.

Hughes, R. and D. MacKenzie (2016): “Transportation network company wait times
 in Greater Seattle, and relationship to socioeconomic indicators,” Journal of Transport
 Geography, 56, 36–44.

Mahalanobis, P. C. (1936): “On the generalised distance in statistics,” Proceedings of
 the National Institute of Sciences of India, 2, 49–55.

Nicholson, E. (2013): “Southern Dallas Leaders Say Uber is Profiling Customers, and
  They Want City Hall to Act,” Dallas Observer, October 21.

Piff, P. K., S. DM, C. S, M.-D. R, and K. D (2012): “Higher Social Class Predicts
  Increased Unethical Behavior,” Proceedings of the National Academy of Science, 109, 4086–
  4091.



                                            37
Pope, D. G. and J. R. Sydnor (2011): “What’s in a Picture? Evidence of Discrimination
 from Prosper. com,” Journal of Human Resources, 46, 53–92.

Smart, R., B. Rowe, A. Hawken, M. Kleiman, N. Mladenovic, P. Gehred, and
 C. Manning (2015): “Faster and Cheaper: How Ride-Sourcing Fills a Gap in Low-Income
 Los Angeles Neighborhoods,” Tech. rep., BOTEC Analysis Corporation.

UberPeople.Net (2015): “Uber Cancellation Abuse - Mini FAQ,” Uber Drivers Forum.




                                         38
A     Appendix

    Figure A.1: Routes, pick-up locations and neighborhood characteristics of Seattle
                                      experiment.

      (a) Population density (per km2)              (b) Proportion of black population(%)   (c) Average income($)




         Assigned pick-up locations

      Route 1   Route 2     Route 3      Route 4   Route 5   Route 6   Route 7




                                                                1
                                     Figure A.2: Data collection process illustration.


                    Trip requested                                  Trip accepted                                       Trip started                      Trip ended
                           Acceptance Time                              Actual waiting time




                                                                                                                               Actual travel Time
                     Screen shot 1                                   Screen shot 2                                       Screen shot 3                     Screen shot 4




                                                                                       Estimated Waiting Time 2
                                         Estimated Waiting Time 1
        Uber




                                                                                       Estimated Waiting Time 2
                                         Estimated Waiting Time 1
        Lyft




                                                                                       Estimated Waiting Time 2
                                         Estimated Waiting Time 1
         Flywheel




Figure A.3: Balance in days, times, and tour IDs for trips taken by black and white RAs.
  70




                                                                                                                                                                                        Black
                                                                                                                                                    100
                                                                          80
  60




                                                                                                                                                                                        White
  50




                                                                                                                                                    80
                                                                          60
  40




                                                                                                                                                    60
                                                                          40
  30




                                                                                                                                                    40
  20




                                                                          20




                                                                                                                                                    20
  10




                                                                          0




                                                                                                                                                    0
  0




       Route 1       Route 3   Route 5           Route 7                         Mon                              Tue    Wed        Thu                   5pm   6pm   7pm   8pm   9pm   10pm




                                                                                                       2
Figure A.4: Cumulative Star Ratings for Black and White RAs Using UberX in Seattle.




 Figure A.5: Cumulative Star Ratings for Black and White RAs Using Lyft in Seattle.




                                         3
Figure A.6: Number of taxis passing by black and white RAs while hailing from the curb




                                          4
Figure A.7: GIS Analysis of Boston-area Census Block Groups by % Black Residents,
               Average Household Income, and Population Density




                                       5
                      Figure A.8: Empirical Cumulative Distribution of Acceptance Time, Actual Waiting
                             1.0
                                             Time 1 and Waiting Time increase.




                                                                                                                          1.0




                                                                                                                                                                                                               1.0
                             0.8




                                                                                                                          0.8




                                                                                                                                                                                                               0.8
                             0.6




                                                                                                                          0.6




                                                                                                                                                                                                               0.6
                             0.4




                                                                                                                          0.4




                                                                                                                                                                                                               0.4
                             0.2




                                                                                                                          0.2




                                                                                                                                                                                                               0.2
                                                                                            Black                                                                                          Black                                                                                      Black
                                                                                            White                                                                                          White                                                                                      White
                             0.0




                                                                                                                          0.0




                                                                                                                                                                                                               0.0
                                       0            50                100          150         200                                 0       200       400      600         800    1000        1200                             −500                     0                    500

                                                            Uber Accept Time                                                                     Uber Actual Waiting Time                                                                    Uber Waiting Time Increase
                             1.0




                                                                                                                          1.0




                                                                                                                                                                                                               1.0
                             0.8




                                                                                                                          0.8




                                                                                                                                                                                                               0.8
                             0.6




                                                                                                                          0.6




                                                                                                                                                                                                               0.6
                             0.4




                                                                                                                          0.4




                                                                                                                                                                                                               0.4
                             0.2




                                                                                                                          0.2




                                                                                                                                                                                                               0.2
                                                                                            Black                                                                                          Black                                                                                      Black
                                                                                            White                                                                                          White                                                                                      White
                             0.0




                                                                                                                          0.0




                                                                                                                                                                                                               0.0


                                       0            50                100          150         200                                 0       200       400      600         800    1000        1200                             −500                     0                    500

                                                            Lyft Accept Time                                                                     Lyft Actual Waiting Time                                                                     Lyft Waiting Time Increase




          Figure A.9: Relationships between estimated and actual waiting times for UberX, Lyft,
                                and Flywheel in the Seattle experiment

                                                                 Uber                                                                                                     Lyft                                                                                                   Flywheel                 ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ●
                      1000




                                                                                                                                1000




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           1000




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ●         ●
                                                    ●                                                                                                    ●                                                                                                     ●
                                               ●                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ●              ●       ●
                                                                            ●                                                                                                                                                                                      ●              ●                           ●
                                                                  ●                                                                                                                          ●
                                                                                      ●                                                                                                                                                                ●                     ●                 ●                        ●
                                                                                                                                                         ●
                      800




                                                                                                                                800




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           800




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ●                           ●
                                                                                                                                                     ●                                                                                                                                    ●
                                                                                  ●                                                                                                                                                                                     ●    ●                            ●
                                               ●                                  ●                                                                           ●                                                                                                                                                             ●
actual waiting time




                                                                                                        actual waiting time




                                                                                                                                                                                                                     actual waiting time




                                                    ●                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ●                           ●
                                                                  ●             Y=1.03X+42.01                                                    ●                                                                                                                 ●
                                               ●        ●                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ●
                      600




                                                                                                                                600




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           600




                                                    ●                                                                                                         ●                                                                                                                   ●
                                                        ●                                                                                                     ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                  ●                Y=0.76X+172.46                                                                       ●    ●        ●   ●        Y=0.52X+276.12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ●
                                                             ●    ●
                                                                            Y=X                                                             ●    ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                         ●    ●   ●                                                                                                     ●    ●    ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ●    ●
                                                    ●   ●    ●                                                                              ●    ●            ●
                                                                                                                                                              ●       ●          Y=X                                                                                         ●        ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ●
                                           ●
                                           ●   ●    ●   ●                   ●                                                                    ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                         ●                                                                                                                   ●            Y=X
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ●
                                                    ●   ●    ●                                                                                           ●    ●                                                                                                    ●    ●    ●            ●
                                                                                                                                                 ●                                                                                                                                ●
                      400




                                                                                                                                400




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           400




                                                    ●                                                                                       ●        ●                                                                                                         ●        ●    ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ●
                                       ●   ●   ●    ●
                                                    ●
                                                    ●        ●                                                                              ●        ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                         ●    ●                                                                                                ●        ●
                                       ●   ●        ●
                                                    ●   ●                                                                                   ●        ●
                                                                                                                                                     ●   ●    ●                        ●                                                                           ●
                                           ●   ●
                                               ●        ●                                                                                        ●   ●   ●    ●
                                                                                                                                                              ●                                                                                                    ●                  ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ●             ●
                                       ●   ●   ●    ●                                                                                            ●
                                                                                                                                                 ●       ●    ●   ●                                                                                                ●         ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ●
                                           ●
                                           ●        ●                                                                                       ●    ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                     ●
                                                                                                                                                     ●   ●        ●                                                                                    ●                ●
                                       ●
                                       ●   ●   ●        ●                                                                                        ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                         ●    ●
                                                                                                                                                              ●
                                                                                                                                                              ●                                                                                                ●
                                       ●   ●   ●    ●   ●
                                                        ●                                                                                        ●
                                                                                                                                                 ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                     ●        ●   ●                                                                                            ●        ●    ●    ●            ●                  ●
                                           ●   ●    ●   ●                                                                                   ●    ●
                                                                                                                                                 ●   ●   ●                                                                                                 ●       ●
                                       ●   ●   ●    ●
                                                    ●                                                                                       ●    ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                     ●   ●                                                                                                         ●    ●    ●
                                           ●
                                           ●   ●    ●                                                                                       ●    ●            ●                                                                                                    ●              ●
                      200




                                                                                                                                200




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           200




                                       ●   ●
                                           ●   ●    ●                                                                                       ●
                                                                                                                                            ●    ●
                                                                                                                                                 ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                     ●                                                                                                     ●   ●        ●
                                   ●       ●   ●    ●   ●                                                                                   ●    ●   ●                                                                                                 ●           ●    ●             ●
                                       ●   ●        ●
                                                    ●                                                                                       ●
                                                                                                                                            ●    ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                     ●                                                                                                         ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ●    ●
                                       ●   ●   ●
                                               ●    ●                                                                                       ●
                                                                                                                                            ●    ●
                                                                                                                                                 ●                                                                                                                 ●
                                       ●   ●
                                           ●   ●                                                                                            ●    ●
                                                                                                                                                 ●                                                                                                     ●   ●   ●        ●
                                       ●       ●                                                                                            ●    ●
                                       ●   ●                                    Regression line−white                                            ●   ●        ●
                                                                                                                                                                                           Regression line−white                                           ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ●                                            Regression line−white
                                       ●   ●                                                                                                ●    ●                ●
                                       ●
                                       ●   ●
                                           ●                                    Regression line−black                                       ●
                                                                                                                                            ●    ●                                         Regression line−black                                                                                        Regression line−black
                                                                                                                                                                      ●                                                                                ●
                                                                                                                                            ●                                                                                                              ●
                                           ●                                    Regression line−all                                                                                        Regression line−all                                                                                          Regression line−all
                      0




                                                                                                                                0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           0




                             0             200           400            600           800       1000                                   0             200          400            600             800       1000                                    0           200            400             600             800       1000

                                                   estimated waiting time                                                                                    estimated waiting time                                                                                    estimated waiting time




                                                                                                                                                             6
Table A.1: Matched pair comparisons of Acceptance Time for Uber, Lyft, and Flywheel.

                                          Service              UberX   Lyft    Flywheel
         log(AcceptanceT ime)             # of Matched pairs   50      39      21
                                          ATT                  0.25    0.078   0.047
                                          AI SE                0.08    0.066   0.080
                                          t                    3.20    1.18    0.59
                                          p                    0.001   0.24    0.56
                ActualW aitingT ime
         log( EstimatedW aitingT ime1 )   # of Matched pairs   49      37      19
                                          ATT                  0.156   0.053   -0.102
                                          AI SE                0.066   0.060   0.073
                                          t                    2.38    0.87    -1.40
                                          p                    0.017   0.38    0.16




                                                  7
     Table A.2: Matched pair comparison of Waiting times for UberX in Seattle.

Match based on          Gender                      No limit   Exact    Exact    Exact      Exact    Exact
                        Time of request di↵ limit   No limit   1h       1h       1h         1h       1h
                        location di↵ limit          No limit   1 mile   1000 m   0.5 mile   500 m    200 m
Request Time            Num of Matched pairs        83         62       51       50         46       36
                        ATT                         5.5        6.6      6.08     6.7        6.4      9.8
                        AI SE                       4.4        4.2      4.1      4.0        4.0      3.6
                        t-stat                      1.25       1.59     1.53     1.64       1.59     2.70
                        p.Val                       0.21       0.11     0.12     0.10       0.11     0.007
Waiting Time Increase   Num of Matched pairs        82         61       50       49         45       34
                        ATT                         30.5       41.8     41.44    38.3       38.6     54.9
                        AI SE                       26.8       21.1     20.4     20.2       16.8     16.4
                        t-stat                      1.14       1.98     2.03     1.90       2.30     3.35
                        p.Val                       0.255      0.047    0.042    0.058      0.022    0.001



       Table A.3: Matched pair comparison of Waiting times for Lyft in Seattle.

Match based on          Gender                      No limit   Exact    Exact    Exact      Exact    Exact
                        Time of request di↵ limit   No limit   1h       1h       1h         1h       1h
                        location di↵ limit          No limit   1 mile   1000 m   0.5 mile   500 m    200 m
Request Time            Num of Matched pairs        84         50       41       39         36       23
                        ATT                         6.7        6.0      8.0      8.3        7.1      8.3
                        AI SE                       4.6        3.8      3.6      3.6        3.7      3.6
                        t-stat                      1.52       1.60     2.21     2.29       1.89     2.32
                        p.Val                       0.14       0.12     0.03     0.02       0.06     0.02
Waiting Time Increase   Num of Matched pairs        84         53       43       37         31       21
                        ATT                         15.5       -0.4     2.2      -1.8       -13.7    -21.6
                        AI SE                       24.2       20.1     18.4     17.3       17.1     12.9
                        t-stat                      0.64       -0.02    0.11     -0.10      -0.80    -1.67
                        p.Val                       0.52       0.98     0.91     0.92       0.42     0.09



    Table A.4: Matched pair comparison of waiting times for Flywheel in Seattle.

Match based on          Gender                      No limit   Exact    Exact    Exact      Exact    Exact
                        Time of request di↵ limit   No limit   1h       1h       1h         1h       1h
                        location di↵ limit          No limit   1 mile   1000 m   0.5 mile   500 m    200 m
Request Time            Num of Matched pairs        58         30       22       21         20       13
                        ATT                         10.7       4.6      0.05     -1.7       -1.2     3.5
                        AI SE                       5.4        3.2      2.9      2.7        2.6      1.6
                        t-stat                      2.00       1.42     0.02     -0.63      -0.44    2.25
                        p.Val                       0.05       0.16     0.99     0.53       0.66     0.02
Waiting Time Increase   Num of Matched pairs        55         25       20       19         18       11
                        ATT                         10.3       -77.2    -102.2   -114.1     -134.3   -133.2
                        AI SE                       56.1       33.9     33.5     33.8       35.4     33.2
                        t-stat                      0.18       -2.28    -3.07    -3.38      -3.79    -4.0
                        p.Val                       0.85       0.02     0.00     0.00       0.00     0.00




                                                    8
                      Table A.5: Required sample sizes

Variable                                  5 percent   10 percent   15 percent
Actual Wait Time                             1,736        434          193
Estimated Wait Time                           903         226          101
Ratio of Actual To Estimated Wait Time      1,378         345          154
  Actual and Estimated Wait Time            37,672       9,418        4,186
Cancellation                                  NA          NA           NA
Actual Drive Time                            1,056        264          118
Estimated Drive Time                          NA          NA           NA
Ratio of Actual to Estimated Drive Time       NA          NA           NA
  Actual and Estimated Drive Time             NA          NA           NA




                                      9
