                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                 DISCRIMINATION AS A SELF-FULFILLING PROPHECY:
                     EVIDENCE FROM FRENCH GROCERY STORES

                                         Dylan Glover
                                        Amanda Pallais
                                        William Pariente

                                       Working Paper 22786
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w22786


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    October 2016




We would like to thank Yann Algan, David Autor, Thomas Le Barbanchon, Eric Cediey, Raj
Chetty, Bruno Crépon, Muriel Dejemeppe, Eleanor Dillon, Esther Duflo, Erin Fletcher, Roland
Fryer, Ed Glaeser, Lisa Kahn, Lawrence Katz, Danielle Li, Florian Mayneris, four anonymous
referees, and seminar participants at Berkeley Haas, London School of Economics, Nova
Business School of Economics, Paris School of Economics, Sciences Po, University of California
Santa Barbara, University of Illinios at Urbana-Champaign, University of Namur, and UC
Louvain for their helpful comments. We would also like to thank Lisa Abraham, Jenna Anders,
Frédéric Cochinard, Elizabeth Mishkin, and Adrien Pawlik for superb research assistance. We
gratefully acknowledge funding from the Fonds d’Expérimentation pour la Jeunesse (France).
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2016 by Dylan Glover, Amanda Pallais, and William Pariente. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Discrimination as a Self-Fulfilling Prophecy: Evidence from French Grocery Stores
Dylan Glover, Amanda Pallais, and William Pariente
NBER Working Paper No. 22786
October 2016
JEL No. J24,J71,J78,M50

                                         ABSTRACT

Examining the performance of cashiers in a French grocery store chain, we find that manager bias
negatively affects minority job performance. In the stores studied, cashiers work with different
managers on different days and their schedules are determined quasi-randomly. When minority
cashiers, but not majority cashiers, are scheduled to work with managers who are biased (as
determined by an Implicit Association Test), they are absent more often, spend less time at work,
scan items more slowly, and take more time between customers. Manager bias has consequences
for the average performance of minority workers: while on average minority and majority
workers perform equivalently, on days where managers are unbiased, minorities perform
significantly better than do majority workers. This appears to be because biased managers interact
less with minorities, leading minorities to exert less effort.


Dylan Glover                               William Pariente
Sciences Po                                Institut de Recherche Économique et Sociale (IRES)
28 rue des Saints-Pères                    Universite Catholique de Louvain
75007 Paris                                Place Montesquieu 3, B-1348
dylan.glover@sciencespo.fr                 Louvain-la-Neuve, Belgium
                                           william.pariente@uclouvain.be
Amanda Pallais
Department of Economics
Harvard University Littauer
Center Cambridge, MA
02138 and NBER
apallais@fas.harvard.edu
1       Introduction
A vast economic literature tests for the presence of labor market discrimination, a setting in
which equally-productive minority and non-minority workers are treated di¤erently in terms
of hiring, pay, or promotion. Becker’s pioneering work, The Economics of Discrimination
(1957), introduced the notion of taste-based discrimination: employers experience disutility
when employing minority workers and compensate by paying minorities less or requiring
them to be more productive for the same wage. A subsequent body of work, starting with
Phelps (1972) and Arrow (1973), conceived of discrimination not as a matter of animus but
one of imperfect information. Unfavorable priors about minority workers’ productivity or
imperfect screening precision causes employers to treat equally-skilled minority and majority
workers unequally. Building on these insights, Lundberg and Startz (1983) and Coate and
Loury (1993) showed how statistical discrimination could potentially depress minorities’skill
investments by leading minorities to correctly believe that these investments would not be
fully rewarded. As a result, statistical discrimination may lead to a self-ful…lling prophecy
whereby employers’adverse prior beliefs about minorities’skill levels are self-con…rming in
equilibrium.
    Something that unites these strands of literature is the implicit assumption that em-
ployers’tastes and beliefs do not directly impact worker productivity. Although statistical
discrimination might inhibit skill investment, it does not directly a¤ect the performance of
workers with given skill levels. However, a strand of literature beginning with Steele and
Aronson (1995) documents that adverse stereotypes about minority groups’ abilities can
directly reduce group members’ performance. This body of work demonstrates that when
stereotypes are made salient prior to performance (e.g., test-takers are asked to report their
race or gender), blacks, Hispanics, and women tend to perform signi…cantly worse than in
settings where group membership is not made salient. This line of research, which has so
far had limited in‡uence on the economic literature, implies that adverse employer beliefs
about minorities – whether stemming from animus or statistical discrimination – could be
self-ful…lling, not because they inhibit minority skill investment but because they induce
minorities to perform worse on the job. Related research shows that individuals’own stereo-
types can negatively impact their performance (Co¤man, 2014) and that these stereotypes
need not be fully accurate (Bordalo et al., forthcoming).
    This paper presents a novel test of whether discriminatory beliefs directly a¤ect minority
workers’job performance in a real-world workplace.1 We study 34 outlets of a French grocery
    1
    This is related to the literature showing that workers and students bene…t from interacting with co-
ethnics. See, e.g., Dee (2004) and (2005), Stoll et al. (2004), Stau¤er and Buckley (2005), Giuliano et
al. (2009) and (2011), Price and Wolfers (2010), and Hjort (2014). This is also related to the literature




                                                   2
store chain. In these stores, there is a sizable proportion of minority workers that, based on
their names, we identify as having a North African or Sub-Saharan African origin.2 We study
new cashiers hired on six-month contracts since these workers are assigned quasi-randomly
to managers. These cashiers, like all cashiers in the stores, work with di¤erent managers on
di¤erent days. Unlike more senior workers, however, they are not allowed to submit schedule
preferences. Their schedules are determined by a computer program which assigns shifts to
meet predicted demand, taking into account the preferences of more senior workers. This
ensures that the minority and majority workers in our sample do not choose the managers
they work with and that minority and non-minority workers work with the same managers
under similar conditions. Worker and manager schedules are publicly posted several weeks
in advance, so workers know which managers they will be working with beforehand.
     We measured managers’bias towards minorities with an Implicit Association Test (IAT).
This test is widely used to measure bias, particularly in psychology (see Nosek et al., 2007;
Lane et al., 2007; and Greenwald et al., 2009 for summaries of the literature). IAT scores have
been correlated with many real-world decisions and are di¢ cult for subjects to manipulate.3
The test uses the speed with which subjects categorize prompts to determine the implicit
association that individuals have between two concepts: here (1) traditionally French or
North African sounding names and (2) words indicating worker competence or incompetence.
Our manager bias score thus measures the extent to which managers associate North African
names with poor worker performance. This concept is correlated with, but distinct from,
managers’distaste for minorities (Agerstrom et al., 2007).
     Each of the stores in our sample tracks individual performance at a daily level. The
stores provided us with data on absences and time worked (determined by time clock data),
scanning speed, and time taken between customers. Absences are particularly important to
the …rm and being absent three times is one of the few ways a worker can be …red during her
initial six-month contract. The …rm also particularly cares about scanning speed. It posts a
list of workers’articles scanned per minute in the break room each week. The …rm uses these
performance metrics and consultations with the managers about workers’performance and
customer relations to determine whether workers will be o¤ered a longer contract at the end
of their six-month contract. Approximately 30-40% of workers are o¤ered a longer contract.
started by Rosenthal and Jacobson (1968) showing that teachers’expectations about student performance
can directly a¤ect student outcomes.
    2
      Workers are categorized into minority and non-minority status based on their names because in France
it is illegal to ask workers their ethnicity. ISM CORUM, an expert in discrimination testing in France, did
the categorization. We gave ISM CORUM separate lists of …rst and last names, so that it would not be able
to identify any individual in the study.
    3
      See e.g., Kim (2003), Friese et al. (2007), Green et al. (2007), Greenwald et al. (2009), and Rooth
(2010).




                                                    3
    We assess whether minority cashiers perform worse on the days they work with managers
who are biased against their minority group. Because there may be other di¤erences between
more- and less-biased managers – biased managers may simply be less skilled, for example
– we do not want to simply attribute the change in minority performance when working
with more-biased managers to manager bias. Instead, we utilize a di¤erence-in-di¤erence
methodology, comparing the change in minority workers’performance under more- and less-
biased managers to the change in non-minority performance.
    We …nd that manager bias leads minorities to perform worse. When scheduled to work
with biased managers, minorities are more likely to be absent. When they do come to work,
they spend less time at the store. This is driven by the fact that they are much less likely
to stay after their scheduled shift ends. While workers are allowed to leave when their shift
ends, managers can ask them to work late. Because workers are paid based on time worked,
we estimate that minorities earn 2.5% less as a result of manager bias.
    Minorities also scan items more slowly and take more time between customers when
working with biased managers. Throughout our analyses, none of the di¤erential e¤ects of
working with more-biased managers are explained by the other manager characteristics we
have, including the managers’ own minority status. The e¤ect of manager bias is concen-
trated in stores with fewer minority workers and appears to grow during the contract (though
this latter di¤erence is not statistically signi…cant).
    We use data from a worker survey conducted after the contract to distinguish between
theories of discrimination that can explain our results.4 First, we …nd little evidence that
animus –or biased managers treating minorities poorly –can explain our results. Minority
workers do not report that biased managers disliked them or that they disliked biased man-
agers. They report that biased managers were less likely to assign them to unpleasant tasks
(cleaning) and no more likely to assign them unpleasant registers or breaks.
    Our evidence is most consistent with a theory in which biased managers interact less
with minority workers. Research in psychology on "aversive racism" has found that individ-
uals with implicit biases towards minority groups are less likely to speak to, more hesitant
in speaking to, and less friendly towards members of those groups.5 They may feel less
comfortable interacting with minorities or they may be concerned about appearing biased.
Using whether a worker remembered each manager as an indicator for worker-manager in-
   4
     One explanation that cannot drive the day-to-day di¤erences in performance we …nd is that biased
managers depress minority human capital accumulation. Minorities may accumulate fewer skills under
biased managers, but we would not detect this since minorities would have any skills they learned working
with unbiased managers on the days when they work with biased managers.
   5
     See, e.g., McConnell and Leibold (2001), Dovidio et al. (2002) and Hebl et al. (2002). Dovidio and
Gaertner (2008) summarize this literature.




                                                   4
teraction, we …nd minorities were less likely to remember biased managers. Worker-manager
interaction appears to be a key determinant of performance: workers performed substan-
tially better when working with managers they remembered.6 Biased managers interacting
less with minorities is consistent with the fact that biased managers were less likely to ask
minorities to do cleaning duties. It may also explain why minorities are less likely to stay
after the end of their shifts when working with biased managers: the managers may simply
not ask them to.
    An alternative explanation concerns stereotypes. Minorities may hold negative stereo-
types about their suitability for the job or be aware of existing stereotypes about their
group and biased managers may activate these negative stereotypes. To test whether this
occurred, we asked workers which managers gave them the most con…dence in their abilities.
Minorities do not report that biased managers gave them less con…dence in their abilities.
Nevertheless, this does not rule out an explanation whereby biased managers subconsciously
activate minorities’negative stereotypes.
    Finally, we test whether the negative impact of manager bias on minority performance
leads to statistical discrimination in hiring. If it did, the store would act as if minority workers
were less productive than majority workers with the same characteristics. In the absence
of manager bias, hired minorities would actually be more productive than hired majority
workers. Overall, we …nd that minority and majority workers perform equivalently. There is
no di¤erence in their average absence rates, time spent at work, articles scanned per minute,
or time taken between customers. However, consistent with statistical discrimination, when
working with unbiased managers, minority workers perform substantially better than do
non-minorities. They are half as likely to be absent and scan signi…cantly faster.
    With some assumptions, we can combine our performance metrics to estimate the number
of customers each worker serves per day. On average, minorities serve an insigni…cant 2%
more customers than do majorities. However, on days with unbiased managers, minorities
serve 9% more customers than majorities do. This is a substantial di¤erence: while the
average minority is at the 53rd percentile of average worker performance, on days with
unbiased managers she is at the 79th percentile. This suggests there are real consequences
of manager bias on minority workers’performance and thus, in theory, workers’subsequent
labor market outcomes.7
   6
     This is consistent with Mas and Moretti (2009) which …nds that monitoring improves cashiers’perfor-
mance.
   7
     Unfortunately, we do not have data on which workers were o¤ered a second contract. Our identi…cation
strategy also does not lend itself well to determining the e¤ect of manager bias on workers’subsequent labor
market outcomes since over the six-month contract, there is little variation in the average bias workers are
exposed to.




                                                     5
    The paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 explains the empirical context, while Section
3 discusses the theories of discrimination that could explain our results and their testable
predictions. Section 4 describes the data, provides descriptive statistics, and tests the iden-
tifying assumption that minority and majority cashiers work with more- and less-biased
managers under similar conditions. Section 5 presents the main results of the paper, show-
ing that across several outcomes, minorities perform worse when working with more-biased
managers. Section 6 tests the predictions of the di¤erent theories of discrimination and
Section 7 concludes.


2       Setting
We study entry-level cashiers in a large French grocery store chain. These cashiers are hired
on a speci…c contract called Contrat de Professionnalisation (CP): a six-month contract
subsidized by the government. In return for the subsidy, the …rm trains CP workers on
being a cashier and the retail sector in general. Apart from the direct subsidy, these contracts
are advantageous to …rms because they include a week-long trial period before the o¢ cial
contract start date in which workers are trained without pay. During this week, either party
can walk away from the contract without penalty.
    CP cashiers complete the same job (running a cash register) as other workers. However,
there are two special aspects of their employment. First, one day each week CPs attend
training, during which they are not on the store ‡oor. (Training days are not included in
our data.) Second, CPs have no control over their schedules. All other cashiers are allowed
to submit schedule preferences. A computer system assigns shifts by matching predicted
demand to the available workforce, taking the preferences of non-CP workers into account.
The computer system is constrained to ensure that workers have the requisite number of
days o¤ and that no worker may have more than two split shifts per week, open the store
more than twice per week, or close the store more than twice per week.8 Schedules are
determined three weeks at a time and, once determined, publicly posted. Manager schedules
are also publicly posted in advance, so workers know ahead of time which managers they will
be working with. The chief cashier (the managers’boss) can, in theory, revise the schedules
assigned by the computer system. However, this happens very rarely.
    The stores typically have around …ve cashier managers (henceforth managers) and 100
to 250 cashiers. There are 30 to 80 registers in each store, though it is rare that all the
registers are open at once. The manager on duty sits in a special station in the middle of
    8
    A split shift occurs when a worker is scheduled to work for two separate periods in the same day (e.g.,
from 9 am to 12 pm and from 3 pm to 6 pm).




                                                    6
the registers. When a cashier arrives for her shift, she badges (clocks) in near the manager
station. She typically has a brief conversation with the manager, who gives her the day’s
news and assigns her to a register. Some workers are assigned to special cash registers, such
as the 10 items or less line or the self-checkout, though this is rare for CPs. The worker
then gets her till (cash box) from the safe, sets it up at her station, and starts receiving
customers. There are no baggers in these stores; customers bag their items themselves.
    The manager roams the store, talking with cashiers and monitoring them at their stations.
She manages the lines, opening and closing new ones and directing customers to short ones.
Cashiers whose lines are closed are assigned to other tasks such as aisle arrangement, the
welcome desk, or assisting managers. The manager also decides when workers can go on
break, though the amount of break time is speci…ed in workers’ contracts. Workers are
allowed to leave at the end of their shifts, but the manager can ask them to work late.
Before leaving, cashiers confer with the manager, return their till to the safe, and badge out
near the manager station.
    CP workers are hired in waves: approximately twice a year each store has a "promotion,"
in which new CPs are hired. The managers we study are rarely involved in the hiring process,
which is conducted by the chain’s central o¢ ce and the store’s chief cashier.
    The most important performance metrics for workers are showing up to work, showing
up on time, and having the correct amount of money in the till. During the CP, workers
can only be …red for misconduct, which includes having more than three absences, being
late more than three times, having more than three warnings for misbehavior, or having
even one report of violent conduct or one large till deviation. If misconduct occurs, the chief
cashier decides whether to …re the CP, relying on the advice of the managers. Aside from
misconduct, the most important indicator of cashier performance is the number of articles
scanned per minute. Each week, a list of workers’ average articles per minute is publicly
posted in the employee break room.
    CPs are not paid based on performance; they are paid solely based on time worked. In
particular, CPs are not paid for days they are absent, though after three sick days and a
doctor’s authorization, the government pays 70% of workers’ pay during their sick leave.9
CPs’paychecks are also adjusted if they work more or less than scheduled.
    CPs’main incentive to perform well is the opportunity to receive another contract. After
their initial CP, about 30% to 40% of workers are o¤ered another contract. The chief
cashier decides whether to o¤er subsequent contracts to each worker based on the worker’s
performance, manager evaluations, and the number of available positions at the store. These
   9
    CPs earn vacation time, but cannot use it for days o¤: they are paid for their vacation days after the
end of the contract.




                                                    7
subsequent contracts are of longer duration and pay higher salaries.
   Managers are on inde…nite-term contracts with …xed pay, not dependent on their per-
formance. However, they undergo a yearly performance review with the chief cashier which
assesses customers’ checkout experience. This is in large part determined by how quickly
the lines move, though it also includes register cleanliness, the stocking of the small shelves
at each register, and e¤ectively handling customer problems. While managers are graded
on their support of inexperienced cashiers, they do not have the primary responsibility for
cashier training.


3    Theories of Discrimination
We discuss several theories of discrimination and the predictions they make for our context.
We discuss only those theories that could explain our main results: that minorities are absent
more often, leave work earlier, and have worse on-the-job performance on days when they
work with more-biased managers. For example, while manager bias may impede minority
skill development (e.g., Lundberg and Startz, 1983; Coate and Loury, 1993), our study cannot
assess whether this occurs. Even if it did, minorities would have similar skills on days when
they worked with both more- and less-biased managers.
    The …rst four columns of Table 1 summarize the predictions of these theories, which are
tested in Section 6.
    Beckerian Taste for Discrimination
    Biased managers may simply dislike minorities. This animus could lead biased managers
to treat minorities badly and give them unpleasant tasks. This may make minorities dislike
coming to work, so they are absent more often and leave work earlier. This animus could also
impede minority performance on the job. To test whether manager animus drives our results,
we assess whether minorities report that biased managers liked them less and assigned them
to unpleasant tasks in a worker survey conducted after the end of the contract.
    Less Interaction and Statistical Discrimination
    Individuals with higher implicit biases towards a minority group have been found to
spend less time talking to, to have more hesitation in speaking to, and to act less friendly
towards minority group members (McConnell and Leibold, 2001; Dovidio et al., 2002; and
Hebl et al., 2002). Biased individuals may be uncomfortable interacting with minorities or
their actions can be driven by a desire to seem unprejudiced (see Dovidio and Gaertner,
2008 for a summary of the literature on aversive racism). In our context, this may lead
biased managers to spend less time at the stations of minority workers. When they need
a task accomplished – even an unpleasant one – they may be less likely to ask a minority.



                                              8
Minorities may realize which managers are paying less attention to them and exert less e¤ort
when these managers are on duty.
    These lower minority e¤ort and performance levels can lead to statistical discrimination
in hiring (Phelps, 1972; Arrow, 1973). Statistical discrimination leads the …rm to act as
if minority workers are less productive than majority workers with the same quali…cations.
Under statistical discrimination, hired minorities would have better quali…cations than hired
majority workers and they would be more productive than majorities when not exposed to
manager bias.
    We use the worker survey to test whether biased managers interact less with minority
workers and are less likely to assign minorities to unpleasant tasks. We test for statistical
discrimination by assessing whether minorities perform better than majority workers on days
with unbiased managers.
    Stereotypes and Statistical Discrimination
    Stereotypes could also lead minorities to perform worse under biased managers. Under
self-stereotyping (Co¤man, 2014), workers’expectations about their group’s suitability for
a given task a¤ect their performance. Here, minorities might think that workplace envi-
ronments (even relatively low-skill ones) are not environments where minorities thrive. For
self-stereotyping to lead to di¤erent performance on di¤erent days, workers would have to
either update their stereotypes from day to day or these stereotypes would have to be dif-
ferentially activated by certain managers. A closely-related explanation is stereotype threat
(Steele and Aronson, 1995), under which the risk of con…rming negative group stereotypes
leads minorities to become anxious and perform worse. To assess the extent to which man-
agers di¤erentially activate either self-stereotypes or stereotype threat, we asked workers
the extent to which di¤erent managers made them feel con…dent in their abilities. While
this tests for conscious activation of stereotypes, it would not capture stereotypes activated
subconsciously.
    Worse minority performance due to stereotypes could also lead to statistical discrimina-
tion in hiring. As above, we test for this by comparing minority and majority performance
on days with unbiased managers.


4     Data and Descriptive Statistics
4.1    Data Sources
We utilize three sources of data: store administrative data, manager survey data, and worker
survey data. The store administrative data provide information on worker and manager



                                              9
schedules and worker performance. The manager survey data provide our measure of man-
ager bias. We use the worker survey data to learn about the mechanism for the e¤ect.

4.1.1    Administrative Store Data

We collected daily data for each CP in a given promotion over a six-week period between
July 2011 and August 2012. We have schedule data: the precise times at which workers and
managers were supposed to begin and end their shifts. These data allow us to determine
which manager(s) a worker was scheduled to work with on a given day.
    We also have badge data: the precise times that workers and managers badged in and
out of the stores. Both managers and CPs must badge in and out at the beginning and end
of their shifts and for breaks, so we have actual working times to the minute. Combining
these data with the schedule data provides our …rst two metrics of worker performance:
absence and the number of minutes worked relative to the number of minutes the worker
was scheduled to work.10 Time spent at the store can di¤er from what was scheduled for
three reasons: (1) workers arrive earlier or later than scheduled, (2) workers leave earlier
or later than scheduled, and (3) workers take breaks. While workers are entitled to breaks,
these are not scheduled by the computer program.
    We also have daily worker performance data, most importantly, articles per minute
scanned. The time over which articles per minute is calculated starts when a worker scans
a customer’s …rst item and stops when a worker scans a customer’s last item, so it is not
a¤ected by the time between customers. We also have two other determinants of line speed.
The …rst is inter-customer time: the time between …nishing one customer’s transaction and
starting to scan the next customer’s items. The second is payment time: the time between
the scanning of a customer’s last item and the completion of the customer’s transaction,
during which time she is paying. While the …rm tracks both of these metrics, they are not
emphasized as key measures of performance by the …rm.
    Our …nal sample has 34 stores, including 204 workers and 4,371 worker-day observa-
tions.11 We initially asked for data from all of the chain’s stores in France and received the
necessary administrative data from 45 of them. From these 45 stores, we eliminate 11 in
which managers did not take the IAT. (The process of getting managers to take the IAT is
explained more below.) Because most stores had multiple promotions during the year, we
have data on 51 promotions from the 34 stores in our sample. Two stores did not provide
  10
    We analyze time worked relative to time scheduled instead of simply time worked to gain precision.
  11
    Throughout the paper, we cluster standard errors at the store level to allow for correlation in performance
both within and across days in a store. While we have more than 30 clusters, we show that p-values are
similar when we use a wild cluster bootstrap procedure that is robust to having a small number of clusters
(Cameron et al., 2008, Garthwaite et al., 2014).



                                                      10
data on inter-customer time, while four did not provide data on payment time, so we have
slightly smaller samples for these outcomes.12
    Because we wanted variation in the timing of the observations during the contract, we
asked for data on weeks three through eight of the contract for some promotions and weeks
18 to 23 for others. Because stores kept data for one year only, we have data on weeks 18 to
23 for promotions that occurred chronologically earlier and data on weeks three to eight for
promotions that occurred chronologically later.
    In addition to these data, the stores provided a few other worker and manager character-
istics. Most importantly, it provided their names. In France, it is illegal to ask people about
their ethnicity. Thus, we utilize workers’ names as an indicator of their minority status.
ISM CORUM (Inter Service Migrants, Centre d’Observation et de Recherche sur L’Urbain
et ses Mutations), a leading specialist in discrimination testing in France, performed the
categorization. We provided ISM CORUM with separate lists of …rst and last names, so
that it did not know the name of any individual in our study, much less any information
about the workers it classi…ed. Each …rst and last name was categorized into one of …ve
possible origin types: (1) European, (2) North African, (3) Sub-Saharan African, (4) Mixed
or undetermined, and (5) Other (including names of Turkish and Asian origins). We consider
workers with a North African and Sub-Saharan sounding …rst or last name as the minorities
in this context. In the appendix we show results are robust to using other de…nitions of
minority status.
    We also classi…ed workers’ and managers’ gender using their names. The chain also
provided managers’rank (position) within the store and managers’date of birth.

4.1.2    Manager Survey and IAT

We measure managers’ bias towards minority workers using an Implicit Association Test
(Greenwald et al., 1998; Nosek et al., 2007). The IAT is widely used, particularly in psy-
chology, to measure unconscious bias. The test involves categorizing two sets of words to the
left- and right-hand sides of a computer screen. In our case, subjects were presented with
(1) names typically indicating a French origin (e.g., Jean) or names traditionally indicating
a North African origin (e.g., Ahmed) and (2) adjectives that describe good employees (e.g.,
reliable) or bad employees (e.g., incompetent).
    In all rounds, one word at a time (either a name or adjective) comes onto the screen and
subjects are told how to categorize it (e.g., adjectives describing good employees to the left,
  12
    One store simply did not provide data on either of these outcomes. The remaining stores provided data
on the total amount of inter-customer time or payment time during the worker’s shift, not scaled by the
number of customers served.




                                                   11
adjectives describing bad employees to the right). Subjects are instructed to categorize the
words as quickly as possible. In the rounds used for scoring, the names and the adjectives are
interspersed. In one of these rounds, subjects are tasked with categorizing French sounding
names and negative adjectives to the same side of the screen, while in the other, they are
tasked with categorizing North African sounding names and negative adjectives to the same
side. The idea behind the test is that if a subject has an implicit association between two
concepts (e.g., workers of North African origin and bad employees), it should be easier and
quicker to do the categorization when they are placing those words on the same side of the
screen. The test produces a measure of bias that compares the time taken to categorize
items when North African sounding names and negative adjectives are categorized on the
same side of the screen, relative to when French sounding names and negative adjectives are
categorized on the same side.13
    IAT scores have been found to be correlated with judgments, choices, and psychological
responses (Bertrand et al., 2005). For example, IAT scores are correlated with voting behav-
ior (Friese et al., 2007), callback rates of minority job applicants (Rooth, 2010), and doctors’
provision of di¤erential medical treatments by race (Green et al., 2007). Moreover, research
suggests that it is very di¢ cult to fake an IAT score.14
    The chain’s human resource o¢ ce contacted the chief cashier in each store, asking them
to get the managers to take the IAT as part of a study. While managers could likely tell
from the IAT that the study concerned their beliefs about minorities, they did not know the
exact purpose of the study. Managers were allowed to take the test during work hours, but
did not receive any payment for doing so. Initially, managers received an email with a link
to the IAT so that they could take the IAT at their convenience. We sent email reminders
and periodically called the chief cashiers to induce more managers to take the test. We also
visited stores that had technical di¢ culty accessing the IAT website, administering the IAT
in person to these managers.
    The managers took the IAT on average 17 months after the administrative data in our
sample. Thus, neither taking the IAT nor knowledge of our study could have a¤ected man-
agers’treatment of minority workers in our data. Managers’experience in the store could
have a¤ected their implicit beliefs, but it seems very unlikely that interaction with the CPs
in our study would have led to variation in those beliefs. In particular, our identi…cation
strategy ensures that the more- and less-biased managers we compare worked with the same
  13
     We randomized the order in which subjects completed these rounds. We also included practice rounds
to mitigate order e¤ects (Nosek et al., 2007). We used the computer software Inquisit to administer the IAT.
  14
     See, e.g., Banse et al. (2001), Eglo¤ and Schmukle (2002), Kim (2003), Greenwald et al. (2009), and Hu
et al. (2012). Faking a score on an IAT requires a speci…c strategy of slightly speeding up or slowing down
in certain blocks, a strategy that few participants spontaneously discover (Greenwald et al., 2009).




                                                    12
CPs. The vast majority of our managers (85%) had been at the store for over 10 years, so
would have seen at least 20 di¤erent CP promotions, several more recent than the ones we
study. In addition to the CPs, these managers have managed 100 to 250 workers at a time
for many years (relative to an average of six CPs per manager in our study), most of whom
they work with much longer than with CPs. Moreover, the e¤ects do not change with the
length of time between the administrative data and when managers took the IAT. Finally, we
use male names in the IAT (over 90% of our CPs are female) so managers are not prompted
by the names of speci…c workers.
    While it is unlikely that interacting with the CPs in our study a¤ected managers’IAT
scores, interacting with minorities in general might have. For example, if minorities disliked
some managers and, as a result, performed badly for them, these managers might have
developed negative beliefs about minority workers’performance. We think this is unlikely:
minorities do not report disliking biased managers and the negative impacts on minority
performance appear to be driven by manager actions, not solely worker actions. Nevertheless,
we cannot fully rule out this alternative explanation.
    We have IAT scores for 77% of the managers in the 34 stores. On most dimensions we
have, managers who took the IAT and those who did not look similar. Managers who took
the IAT were the same average age and were equally likely to be a minority and to have a
high position in the store as managers who did not. Calculating manager …xed e¤ects for
all of our performance outcomes produces no signi…cant di¤erences between managers who
did and did not take the IAT. (These di¤erences are also inconsistently signed.) There is no
correlation between the number of days it took managers to take the IAT after we requested
it and their IAT scores, so it does not necessarily appear that more-biased managers were
more reluctant to take the test. Male managers were less likely than were female managers
to take the IAT. We show, however, that our results are robust to including controls for
manager gender and manager gender interacted with worker minority status.

4.1.3   Worker Survey

We conducted a telephone questionnaire from May 2013 to September 2013, surveying former
CPs about their relationship with each of their managers. The heart of the questionnaire
comprised CPs ranking their managers on a variety of dimensions. Respondents rated the
extent to which they remembered each manager, which we use as a measure of worker-
manager interaction. We also described manager traits or actions (e.g., the manager who
liked the worker best) and asked workers to rate in order the top and bottom three managers




                                             13
on each trait.15 We provided workers with a list of managers, but did not tell workers
managers’IAT scores, nor did we ask whether they thought the managers were biased.
    Half of surveyed workers responded. The main cause of non-response was that CPs no
longer had the same contact information and their phone numbers had been disconnected.
(Only 2% of workers answered the phone but refused to answer the survey.) We have survey
responses for 94 workers in our main sample. Because we did not know which stores would
provide performance data when we conducted the survey, we surveyed a larger sample. We
also have survey data for 74 workers for whom we have manager IAT but not performance
data and 10 workers for whom we have performance data but not manager IAT scores.
    Controlling for store …xed e¤ects, minorities were 7.4 percentage points less likely to
respond to the survey (o¤ a base of 52.6% for majorities). While this is not a statistically
signi…cant di¤erence, it is not a small one. Appendix Table 1 compares the characteristics and
performance of workers who responded and workers who did not, for the whole sample and
separately for minority and majority workers. There are few di¤erences between respondents
and non-respondents. Of the 30 comparisons in the table, one is signi…cant at the 5% level
and two are signi…cant at the 10% level.16 This is consistent with chance di¤erences.


4.2     Descriptive Statistics
Table 2 reports descriptive statistics. We only know two things about all CPs: their minority
status and gender, both based on their names. While 28% of workers are minorities, only 7%
are male. The CP survey paints a slightly richer picture of workers in these stores. Despite
the fact that this is an entry-level job, the average worker is 30 years old and has had four
previous jobs. This is the …rst job for only 11% of the sample. Most workers (61%) do not
have a high school degree, while relatively few (7%) have more than a high school education.
    Managers tend to be older: they average 41 years of age. Relatively few of the managers
are minorities themselves (6%) and few are male (10%). Managers’IAT scores suggest that
most are biased against minorities. For ease of interpretation, throughout the paper, we
divide managers’raw IAT scores by the standard deviation (0.36) in our sample. Positive
scores indicate preference for majorities while negative score indicate preference for minori-
ties. The average (scaled) manager IAT score is thus 1.35, which means that the average
manager is 1.35 standard deviations away from being completely unbiased. Using the typical
  15
     Most workers had six or fewer managers during the CP. In a pilot, we asked workers to rate all of their
managers. However, workers found this di¢ cult. There was substantial non-response and a few workers
asked to stop the survey.
  16
     Respondents worked more minutes per day than did non-respondents both among majority workers and
in the overall sample. Respondents in the overall sample were also less likely to be from the Paris region.




                                                    14
thresholds in the literature,17 9% of managers show little to no bias against minorities, 20%
show a slight bias against minorities, and 66% of our sample shows moderate to severe bias
against minorities. Only 4% of our sample shows a preference for minorities. These managers
seem approximately as biased as US undergraduates are against African-Americans though
more biased than Americans who choose to take an IAT online (e.g., Amodio and Devine,
2006; Smith-McLallen et al., 2006; Mooney, 2014).
    Appendix Table 2 shows the results of regressing manager IAT score on manager char-
acteristics. The point estimates suggest that older managers tend to be more biased, while
minority managers are less biased against their own group. However, none of these coe¢ -
cients are signi…cant, partially because we have so few minority managers.18 Minority CPs
work, on average, in stores where managers are just as biased as do majority CPs.
    Workers are scheduled to work just over four days per week on average (in addition to
the training day). Working days are distributed relatively evenly Monday through Saturday.
We have relatively few observations on Sundays as the …rm opens on Sundays only during
December. Workers are scheduled to work just over seven hours per day on average. The
median shift starts at 10:15 am and ends at 8:15 pm.
    Table 2 also provides the means of the dependent variables. First, CPs are absent less
than 2% of working days, an absence rate that leads to an average of two absences over
the six-month contract. Second, CPs work almost exactly the number of minutes they
are scheduled to. Workers badge out of the store during breaks, but they tend to arrive
earlier and stay later than scheduled. On average, CPs scan approximately 18.5 articles per
minute, take just under 30 seconds between …nishing one customer’s transaction and starting
the next19 and spend approximately 50 seconds per customer in payment time.


4.3     Exogeneity
Throughout the paper we want to interpret any change in performance when minority work-
ers worked with biased managers – relative to when majority workers worked with biased
  17
     See, e.g., Greenwald et al. (2003), Rooth (2010), Haider et al. (2011), and Hahn et al. (2014). Raw
IAT scores below -0.15 indicate some preference for minorities; scores between -0.15 and 0.15 indicate little
to no bias; scores between 0.15 and 0.35 indicate a slight bias against minorities; and scores above 0.35 show
moderate to severe bias against minorities.
  18
     The coe¢ cients suggest that, on average, minority managers are 0.44 standard deviations less biased
and a manager 10 years older is 0.08 standard deviations more biased. Controlling for other manager
characteristics and store …xed e¤ects, these e¤ects decrease to 0.14 and 0.03 standard deviations, respectively.
  19
     We eliminate 25 observations where workers spent more than two minutes on average between customers
throughout the day. We think these are likely data errors or they indicate that something else was going on
in the store outside the CP’s control. (For example, one observation indicates that a worker spent 49 minutes
on average between customers.) Spending over two minutes on average between customers is unrelated to
manager bias or the interaction of manager bias and worker minority status.




                                                      15
managers –as a causal e¤ect of working with those managers. The key assumption is that
minority workers were not systematically scheduled to work with biased managers on days
or times when their performance would have been particularly high or low for other reasons.
We …rst assess whether minority and majority workers were scheduled to work at similar
times under similar conditions. We then analyze whether minority and majority workers
were scheduled to work with more- and less-biased managers at similar times under similar
conditions. Throughout the paper, we use the times that CPs and managers were scheduled
to work to construct CPs’exposure to bias since CPs’actual working times respond to the
managers they are paired with.
    Panel A of Table 3 compares the shifts minority and majority workers were scheduled
to work. Each column in the panel presents a separate regression of a characteristic of a
scheduled working day on an indicator for the worker’s minority status. We control for store
…xed e¤ects, as shift assignment is only quasi-random within a store. We cluster standard
errors at the store level.
    The …rst dependent variable is the bias (IAT score) of the manager the CP was sched-
uled to work with. For workers who were scheduled to work with multiple managers on a
given date, this is a weighted average of the managers’ IAT scores, where the weights are
the amount of time each worker was scheduled to work with each manager. If we do not
have a manager’s bias score, we simply omit this manager from the calculation. We might
have expected that if minority workers had control over their schedules or their schedules
were assigned non-randomly by managers, they would have been less likely to work with
biased managers than were majority workers. Instead, we see that this di¤erence is not
signi…cant and the point estimate goes in the opposite direction. The next column investi-
gates whether minority workers are more likely to work with managers who themselves are
minorities. Again, we …nd no e¤ect. Next, we consider minorities’likelihood of working with
male managers and Level 4 managers (who are higher in the store hierarchy than Level 3
managers). We see no di¤erence in the likelihood that minority and majority workers are
scheduled to work with di¤erent types of managers. Nor do we see a di¤erence in the number
of managers they work with on a shift (Column 5).
    The next column considers the days worked. Workers may systematically scan articles
faster on some days than others, for example because stores are busier. To construct a single
measure of how productive workers are on a given date, we calculate the average articles
scanned per minute in all other stores in our data (excluding the store itself) on that date.
We see no evidence that minority workers work on particularly productive or unproductive
days, nor are minority workers any more or less likely to work in the early morning or late
evening. Minority and majority workers work the same number of hours per day and are



                                             16
equally likely to have split shifts. Appendix Table 3A shows that minority and majority
workers also work under similar conditions when we do not restrict the sample to days in
which they are working with at least one manager who took the IAT.
   Table 3B assesses whether minority workers work with more- and less-biased managers
under the same conditions as do non-minorities. It presents the results of estimating the
equation

           yist =   +   1 (minorityi   biasist ) +   2 biasist   +   3 minorityi      +    s   + "ist :   (1)

Here, yist is a characteristic of the shift worker i in store s who was scheduled to work on
day t: M inorityi is an indicator for worker i being a minority and biasist is the bias of the
manager that the worker was scheduled to work with on day t in store s, measured using
managers’scaled IAT scores. Store …xed e¤ects, s ; are also included. The coe¢ cient 2 can
be signi…cantly di¤erent from zero without violating our key assumption, though it never
is. This term measures how the conditions under which more- and less-biased managers
work with non-minorities di¤er. The coe¢ cient 3 measures how the working conditions of
minority and majority CPs di¤er when working with unbiased managers. We see across the
board that these coe¢ cients are insigni…cant. The coe¢ cient on the interaction term, 1 ,
is the primary coe¢ cient of interest. This coe¢ cient shows how the working conditions of
minority CPs change relative to the change in the working conditions of majority CPs when
both work with a manager one standard deviation more biased. Again, all the coe¢ cients
are insigni…cant. Appendix Table 3B shows that the all the coe¢ cients are also insigni…cant
when we include worker …xed e¤ects instead of store …xed e¤ects. Appendix Table 4 shows
that minority CPs are not di¤erentially likely to be scheduled to work at the same times as
other minority CPs.


5    E¤ect of Manager Bias on Performance
We now turn our attention to assessing whether minority workers perform worse when paired
with biased managers. We …rst consider absence rates and the amount of time spent at work.
These metrics are important to the …rm and directly a¤ect workers’pay. Then, we consider
measures of performance while at work, the most important of which is articles scanned per
minute.
   To determine the e¤ect of manager bias on worker performance, we estimate the equation

              yist =    +   1 (minorityi   biasist ) +   2 biasist   +   i   + Xist   3   + "it :         (2)



                                                17
    Here, yist is a performance metric for worker i in store s on day t (e.g., the number of
articles per minute scanned). M inorityi and Biasist are de…ned as in the previous section.
The regression controls for worker …xed e¤ects, i ; and shift characteristics Xist : Standard
errors are clustered at the store level. The coe¢ cient of interest, 1 ; measures how minorities’
performance changes (relative to the change in non-minority performance) when working
with a manager one standard deviation more biased.
    We expect the estimate of 1 to be attenuated due to measurement error. Workers’names
do not provide a perfect measure of minority status and we do not have IAT scores for all
managers. However, the largest source of measurement error is likely to be that managers’
IAT scores are not a perfect measure of bias. Nosek et al. (2007) summarizes studies
measuring the IAT’s reliability over time and …nds that individuals’scores on di¤erent IAT
administrations have a correlation of approximately 0.56, an e¤ect that doesn’t change with
the length of time between testing. If the IAT is a combination of managers’true implicit
bias and noise that is uncorrelated across test administrations, the coe¢ cients of interest
will be attenuated by a factor of approximately 1:8 due to the measurement error in the IAT
score:


5.1    Time Spent at Work
CPs are absent less than 2% of days. Absence rates increase throughout the week, start-
ing at a low of 0.7% on Monday and reaching 2.3% on Saturday; absence rates are even
higher (2.8%) on the rare occasion that workers work on Sunday. However, absences are not
signi…cantly di¤erent on days with morning or evening shifts.
    Panel A of Table 4 shows the e¤ect of manager bias on absence rates. The …rst column
adds no controls, Xist : It shows that working with a manager with an IAT score one standard
deviation higher leads minorities to have an absence rate one percentage point higher. The
e¤ect is large in magnitude (70% of the mean) even before corrections for measurement
error. The subsequent two columns add (1) day of the week …xed e¤ects and controls for the
shift starting in the early morning and ending in the late evening and (2) date …xed e¤ects,
respectively. Adding these controls does not change the coe¢ cient of interest.
    The …nal column includes as controls a dummy for the manager being a minority and an
indicator for the worker and the manager both being minorities. Because there are so few
minority managers, we do not estimate these terms precisely. However, including these terms
does not change the coe¢ cient of interest (nor does simply eliminating days with minority
managers). Thus, the e¤ect of working with a biased manager appears to result from the
manager’s bias, not the manager’s group a¢ liation.




                                               18
    Throughout the panel, the measured e¤ect of working with a biased manager for majority
workers is negative, suggesting that non-minorities are less likely to be absent when scheduled
to work with biased managers. However, this e¤ect is always insigni…cant and smaller than
the e¤ect for minority workers.
    We next investigate the e¤ect of working with biased managers on the amount of time
spent at work. Panel B of Table 4 replicates Panel A where the dependent variable, yist ; is
the actual number of minutes the CP worked in excess of the number of minutes she was
scheduled to work. These regressions are limited to days workers show up to work.20
    The panel shows that even on days that minorities are not absent, they work less when
paired with a biased manager. When working with a manager one standard deviation more
biased, they work about 3.3 fewer minutes. This is about one twelfth of a standard deviation
before correcting for measurement error. As in the prior panel, the result is robust to the
addition of controls and is not driven by the manager’s minority status. However, unlike in
the previous panel, the point estimates do not suggest that majority workers spend more
time at work when scheduled to work with biased managers.
    Aside from being absent, there are three main ways that a worker could spend less time
at work: she could arrive later, leave earlier, or take longer breaks. We …nd that working
with a biased manager primarily leads minorities to leave work earlier. Table 5 presents
regressions similar to those in Table 4B, where the dependent variables are di¤erent aspects
of time spent at work. There is no signi…cant e¤ect of manager bias on arrival time: in
fact, the far-from-signi…cant point estimate suggests that minority workers arrived earlier
when working with biased managers. Similarly, there is no signi…cant e¤ect of manager bias
on break time. However, a minority worker paired with a manager one standard deviation
more biased left the store 3.7 minutes earlier on average. This is not driven by minorities
leaving before the end of their shift: if anything, minorities were more likely to stay until
shift end when working with biased managers. But, they were substantially less likely to
stay after.21 This could be because biased managers biased managers were less likely to ask
  20
     Note that because we eliminate days workers were absent, these regressions could be biased. Because we
include worker …xed e¤ects, for this bias to be driving our results it would have to be the case that minority
workers would have chosen to work more than average (relative to their schedules) on the days that being
scheduled to work with a biased manager led them to be absent. Instead, we believe that any bias likely
attenuates our results. It seems reasonable that the days that minority workers did not show up as a result
of being paired with biased managers are days that they would have worked relatively less had they arrived.
  21
     Consistent with this, when we adjust our speci…cation to include the bias of the manager on duty at
the end of the shift, instead of the average manager bias throughout the day, the e¤ect on minutes worked
more than doubles to -6.71 (without controls) and -7.18 (with our full controls). However, neither of these
estimates is signi…cant at conventional levels, with p-values of 0.132 and 0.114, respectively. Appendix Figure
1 shows the measured e¤ect of manager bias on minorities staying di¤erent lengths of time after the shift
ends: from staying any time after the end of the shift to staying up to …ve hours after the shift ends. Manager
bias appears to decrease the number of minutes minorities stay after their shifts throughout the distribution.




                                                      19
minority workers to stay late or because minorities were less likely to agree when working
with biased managers.
    While we do not have information on workers’pay, we can use estimates of time spent at
work to estimate how much more minorities would earn (relative to majorities) if they worked
only with unbiased managers. Re-estimating the minutes worked regression including days
that workers were absent suggests that, for each standard deviation increase in manager bias
minorities spend 8 fewer minutes per day at work. Eliminating manager bias would increase
the time minorities spent at work and their pay by 2.5% (before correcting for measurement
error).


5.2     Performance while at Work
We now examine the e¤ect of manager bias on minority performance while at work, …rst
considering the number of articles per minute scanned. This is one of the performance
metrics over which workers have the most control and one of the metrics the …rm cares most
about. In each store, a list of workers’average articles per minute scanned is posted in the
break room each week.
    On average, CPs scanned 18.5 articles per minute. There are not large day-of-the-week
e¤ects in scanning speed, except that workers are exceptionally slow (1.2 articles per minute
slower on average) on the few occasions when they have to work Sundays. Workers also scan
articles more slowly on shifts that begin in the early morning.
    Before we show our causal estimates, Figures 1A and B plot the relationship between
manager bias and articles per minute scanned for minorities (Panel A) and majorities (Panel
B). Each point plots the average articles per minute scanned by either minority or majority
workers on days that they faced the indicated level of bias. Manager IAT scores are ag-
gregated into bins of 0.2 and the size of the point indicates the number of observations in
each bin. These graphs do not remove any individual or store …xed e¤ects, so di¤erences in
scanning speed may result from cross-store di¤erences in the types of workers hired or items
purchased, instead of the bias workers are exposed to. Nonetheless, these graphs tell the
same story as the regressions: minorities tend to scan slower when working with more-biased
managers. Majority workers appear to scan more quickly when working with more-biased
managers, but the e¤ect for majorities is smaller than the e¤ect for minorities.
    Table 6A replicates the format of Table 4A, showing the e¤ect of manager bias on scanning
For example, it decreases the probability that a minority will stay at least an hour and a half after her shift
ends by 1.5 percentage points. If these minorities who would have stayed at least 90 minutes instead leave at
the end of their shifts, a decrease in these longer shifts would account for approximately half of the overtime
e¤ect.




                                                      20
speed. To the extent that cashiers’performance at work is a¤ected by the bias of managers
they actually work with (as opposed to the bias of the managers they are scheduled to work
with), the coe¢ cients in this table can be thought of as the reduced form for an instrumental
variables regression in which the bias of the scheduled manager instruments for the bias of
the manager on duty. These two bias measures have a high correlation (0.93).
    Table 6A shows that working with biased managers leads minority workers to scan items
more slowly. Being scheduled to work with a manager who scored one standard deviation
higher on the IAT leads the average minority worker to scan 0.28 fewer items per minute.
(The standard deviation of articles per minute is 2.9.) Unreported regressions show that
manager bias does not appear to induce minorities to perform extremely poorly (in the
bottom 15%), but otherwise it a¤ects the entire distribution of performance: from making
minorities more likely to perform poorly (in the bottom 25%) to making them less likely to
perform extremely well. The coe¢ cients indicate that biased managers may cause majority
workers to scan articles more quickly, though this e¤ect is only signi…cant at the 10% level
and in only one of the speci…cations.
    Panel B of Table 6 investigates the e¤ect of manager bias on inter-customer time, the
amount of time that a cashier spends between …nishing one customer’s transaction and
starting to scan the next customer’s items. While this is not an oft-discussed performance
metric in the store, it directly a¤ects the speed at which the lines move. On average, workers
spend just under thirty seconds between customers. Working with a manager who is one
standard deviation more biased leads minority workers to spend about 1.2 more seconds
between customers. This is approximately one tenth of a standard deviation or 4% longer.
    In contrast, there is no e¤ect of manager bias on payment time: the time between the
scanning of a customer’s …nal item and the end of the transaction, during which time the
customer is paying. See Appendix Table 5 for estimates. This may be because payment time
largely depends on the customer.
    Appendix Table 6 shows that our results on the e¤ect of manager bias are not driven
by the other manager characteristics in our data: manager position in the …rm, age, or
gender. Appendix Table 7 shows the results are robust to using di¤erent de…nitions of
minority status. Panel A considers as minorities only workers with either a …rst or last
name of North African origin (and eliminates remaining workers with names of Sub-Saharan
African origin), while Panel B does the reverse. The e¤ects of manager bias on workers of
North and Sub-Saharan African origin are similar. Panel C utilizes the original de…nition
of minority workers, but considers as majority workers only workers who have both a …rst
and last name of European origin (eliminating workers of indeterminate, mixed, or other
origins). The results are virtually unchanged. The results are also robust to using a wild



                                             21
cluster bootstrap, a method suggested for small numbers of clusters (Cameron et al., 2008).22
    An alternative explanation for our results is that CPs’ performance does not respond
to managers, but instead responds to senior cashiers who tend to work disproportionately
with certain managers. More-biased workers may sort towards more-biased managers or
senior minority workers may sort away from more-biased managers.23 It is di¢ cult to test
this theory directly since we do not have data on senior cashiers (just managers and CPs).
However, we think this explanation is unlikely. While senior cashiers have some control over
their schedules, they can only submit preferences over the times they work, not the people
they work with. The way that a worker could attempt to work with a particular manager
is by requesting certain shifts that the manager prefers. For example, if a biased manager
tended to work Monday mornings, but not Tuesday afternoons, biased senior cashiers who
wanted to work with this manager could request these times. There is a limit to how much
workers can control their schedules: because the …rm values everyone doing their "fair share"
of di¤erent kinds of shifts, it has included this as a constraint in the assignment algorithm.
    Appendix Table 8 shows that the measured e¤ects of manager bias on minority perfor-
mance are virtually identical if we control for shift (day of the week morning or evening)
within store and thus the likely sorting of senior cashiers. While senior workers could sort
towards managers in a more sophisticated way, the fact that this most likely method ex-
plains none of the e¤ect of manager bias suggests that senior cashier sorting is not driving
our results.
    Why do …rms employ biased managers given that biased managers negatively impact
minority performance? One explanation is that biased managers do not decrease average
performance. Regressing worker performance on manager IAT scores indicates that biased
managers don’t generate worse average worker performance. While biased managers depress
the performance of minority workers, minorities are a small share (28%) of the entire work-
force. For three out of the four main outcomes, point estimates suggest that biased managers
(insigni…cantly) improve majority worker performance. Because managers can choose when
they work, the estimates of manager bias on overall worker performance may include the
e¤ects of di¤erent store conditions and do not necessarily isolate managers’e¤ect on worker
performance. Nevertheless, adding controls for shift characteristics does not change the
  22
     Using a wild cluster bootstrap, the p-values for the coe¢ cients on the minority worker manager bias
term in the …rst columns of Tables 4 and 6 are 0.016 (absences), 0.009 (minutes worked), 0.049 (articles
scanned per minute), and 0.093 (inter-customer time).
  23
     Even though we do not think this describes what is happening in the stores, this alternative explanation
might have similar implications. If minority performance is negatively a¤ected by more-biased senior workers,
then the bias of more senior store personnel would still be harming minority workers. If senior minority
workers prefer not to work with biased managers, then this explanation would still include manager bias
a¤ecting minorities’work patterns.




                                                     22
estimates.


5.3     Heterogeneity in E¤ects
Table 7 examines how the impact of bias evolves over the contract (Panel A) and how it
di¤ers in more- and less-diverse stores (Panel B). We focus on articles per minute scanned
because it is important to the store and has continuous variation.
    The two columns in Panel A show the results of estimating Equation (2), where obser-
vations are limited to promotions for which we have early- and late-week data, respectively.
Appendix Table 9 shows that promotions for which we have early- and late-week data have
similar worker and manager characteristics. In fact, many stores are included in both re-
gressions because they have one promotion with early-week data and one promotion with
late-week data.
    CPs become more productive over time. In the latter part of the contract, workers scan
two more articles per minute than they do in the early part. The negative e¤ect of manager
bias on minority performance also appears to increase over time. The e¤ect of the bias is
estimated to be twice as large in the latter weeks of the contract as it is in the early weeks,
though the coe¢ cients are not signi…cantly di¤erent.
    Panel B shows the e¤ect of manager bias by workforce diversity. While we do not have
data on any non-CP workers, we ask managers about the diversity of their stores in the
manager survey. Since it is illegal to directly solicit data on ethnicity, we ask managers the
fraction of workers that they have managed that come from "sensitive urban zones" (ZUS).
ZUS have high concentrations of immigrants and …rst generation citizens (ONZUS, 2011)
and ZUS residence has been used as a signal of minority status in a study of anonymous
resumes (Behaghel et al., 2015). We average manager responses within a store to create a
proxy for store diversity. The reported fraction of workers who come from ZUS is positively
correlated with the fraction of minority CPs in our data. Panel B shows that the negative
e¤ect of manager bias is driven by stores with relatively little diversity. In less-diverse stores,
minority workers scan 0.48 fewer articles per minute for each standard deviation increase in
manager bias. Appendix Table 9 shows that there are other di¤erences between more- and
less-diverse stores, though none of these di¤erences seem to drive the e¤ect of manager bias.24
  24
   More-diverse stores have more male workers and male managers (both signi…cant at the 10% level) and
younger managers (signi…cant at the 1% level) than do less-diverse stores.




                                                 23
6      Evidence on Mechanisms
In this section, we use administrative data and data from the worker survey to test the
predictions of the discrimination theories presented in Section 3. The last column of Table
1 shows the results of these tests.
    The data seem inconsistent with managers having animus towards minorities. Minorities
do not perceive biased managers as disliking them. In the worker survey, we asked work-
ers to rank their managers on the extent to which the manager liked the worker and the
manager was likely to recommend the worker for promotion. We use workers’ answers to
order managers from the 1 (the lowest ranked) to N (the highest ranked).25 The …rst two
columns of Table 8A show the results of estimating Equation (2) with workers’ rankings
of their managers on these two dimensions as the dependent variables. While neither co-
e¢ cient is signi…cant, both are positive, suggesting that, if anything, minorities perceived
biased managers as liking them more than other managers. We also asked workers to rate
how much they enjoyed working with each manager. Minorities again rated biased managers
insigni…cantly more positively.
    To assess whether biased managers activated minorities’negative stereotypes, we asked
workers which managers initially made the worker feel most con…dent in their abilities. There
is no evidence that biased managers made minorities anxious about con…rming stereotypes or
activated self-stereotypes of poor performance –minorities rate biased managers as making
them feel insigni…cantly more con…dent about their abilities (Table 8A). Though, as dis-
cussed in Section 3, this does not rule out an explanation whereby stereotypes are activated
subconsciously.
    Panel B analyzes whether biased managers are di¤erentially likely to assign minorities
to unpleasant tasks. Animus would lead them to do so, while avoiding interacting with
minorities would lead them to be less likely to assign minorities to additional tasks, regardless
of whether the tasks are pleasant or unpleasant. The …rst two columns of Table 8B examine
workers’ register assignment and the desirability of their break times.26 Since all cashiers
need to be assigned to a register and given breaks, these two task assignments test for animus,
but not whether biased managers avoid interacting with minorities. Biased managers do not
assign minorities to unpleasant registers or break times.
    The …nal column considers assignment to cleaning duties. Telling a worker to shut down
her register and start cleaning requires interaction. Cleaning is typically considered to be
  25
     We eliminate managers workers indicated not remembering from this ranking since workers almost never
ranked these managers. We analyze whether workers remembered their managers separately.
  26
     Managers choose when workers can take their breaks, but not how much break time workers receive,
which is stipulated in workers’contracts.




                                                   24
cashiers’ least pleasant task. Consistent with biased managers avoiding minorities, but
inconsistent with animus, biased managers are signi…cantly less likely to assign minorities
to cleaning duties.27 This is also consistent with the idea that biased managers may be less
likely to ask minorities to stay late. The interaction theory may also explain why the e¤ect
of manager bias is larger in stores with less diversity: it may be more di¢ cult for managers
to avoid minority workers when a larger share of the workforce is minority.
    To further test the interaction theory, we asked CPs to rate the extent to which they
remembered each manager. We utilize remembering a manager (ranking the manager at least
two out of 10) as an indicator of the amount of interaction the worker and manager had.
Workers performed much better when working with managers with whom they interacted
more. The …rst column of Table 9A shows that workers scanned 1.5 more articles per
minute when working with a manager they later remembered. However, workers did not
perform better when working with managers they had been scheduled to work with more
often (Column 2), nor does the e¤ect on worker performance of remembering the manager
change when we control for the amount of time spent working together (Column 3). The
impact of worker-manager interaction on scanning speed also does not decrease when we
add manager …xed e¤ects (Column 4). Taken together, this suggests that worker-manager
interaction within a shift leads workers to perform substantially better. This is akin to Mas
and Moretti (2009), which …nds that cashiers exert more e¤ort when their performance is
being noticed by coworkers they value.
    Minorities report interacting less with biased managers: they were about 1.5 percentage
points less likely to remember managers one standard deviation more biased (Table 9B, Col-
umn 1).28 The …nal columns in Table 9B suggest how worker-manager interaction a¤ects the
measured impact of manager bias on minority performance. While the results are imprecise,
when we limit the sample to days when the worker remembered the manager, the e¤ect of
manager bias on minority performance falls by 25%.
    Summarizing our results, we …nd the strongest evidence for the theory in which biased
managers feel less comfortable with minority workers, so they interact less with them and
are less likely to assign them to new tasks, even unpleasant ones. We …nd no evidence of
animus: minorities do not report that biased managers disliked them or assigned them to
unpleasant tasks. We have less clear evidence on whether stereotypes play a role: we do not
…nd that biased managers made minorities consciously anxious about their abilities, but this
does not rule out that they activated stereotypes on a subconscious level.
  27
    Managers concerned with appearing biased might be particularly concerned with the optics of assigning
minorities to clean.
 28
    Unsurprisingly, workers were more likely to remember managers they were scheduled to work with more.




                                                   25
     Next, we assess whether manager bias feeds back into statistical discrimination in hiring.
If it does, minorities should perform better than majorities when they do not face manager
bias, but as a result of manager bias, minorities may not perform better on average. This is
consistent with what we …nd. Table 10 presents estimates from the regression

                                   yist =   + minorityi +       s   + "ist                              (3)

where yist is a metric of performance of worker i in store s on date t and s are store …xed
e¤ects. The coe¢ cient of interest, ; shows how minority workers’performance compares to
the performance of majority workers in the same store. Panel A includes all days. It shows
that minority workers’ average performance is statistically indistinguishable from that of
majority workers. However, Panel B compares minority and majority workers’performance
on days when they work with unbiased managers. (Because most managers are biased, this
is only a small fraction of days.) On days when workers spend at least half their time with
unbiased managers, minority workers perform substantially better than do non-minority
workers. They are approximately half as likely to be absent, they scan 0.75 more articles per
minute, and they take two fewer seconds between customers. Thus, while overall minority
and majority workers perform similarly, this analysis suggests that if minority and majority
workers both worked in a workplace without manager bias, minority workers would perform
better.29
    We can also use this design to evaluate the magnitude of the impact of manager bias
on minority performance. We …rst estimate the number of customers served by each worker
on each day by combining the time she spent at work with her average articles per minute
scanned, inter-customer time, and payment time. We assume that the average customer has
25 items, though our results are not very sensitive to this assumption. We also assume that
cashiers spend all day at their registers receiving customers. To the extent that this is not
true, but manager bias has similar impacts on minority productivity on other tasks, this
can still be thought of as a summary measure of performance. Under these assumptions,
the average majority worker serves 162 customers per day. The average minority serves an
additional 2.8 customers, controlling for store …xed e¤ects, a di¤erence which is far from
signi…cant (Table 10A). However, on days with unbiased managers, the average minority
cashier serves 14 customers more per day than does the average majority (Table 10B). This
  29
     Another test for statistical discrimination would be to assess whether hired minorities have better ob-
servable characteristics than hired majorities. We have only one pre-employment characteristic that should
have a clear relationship with productivity: educational attainment. Consistent with statistical discrimi-
nation, minorities are more than three times as likely to have education above high school as are majority
workers (16% vs. 5%) and that this di¤erence remains nearly as large (9.1 percentage points) when store
…xed e¤ects are added.



                                                    26
is a 9% increase in average performance. These results imply that the average minority
worker is at the 53rd percentile of average cashier performance, while the average minority
working with unbiased managers would be at the 79th percentile.
    These conclusions would be erroneous if minority workers were simply intertemporally
substituting e¤ort towards days with unbiased managers. If they were fully intertemporally
substituting, manager bias would not a¤ect average minority performance, it would just lead
minorities to perform worse on some days and better on others. The fact that minorities
performed better on days without bias would not indicate their higher general productivity
or be evidence of statistical discrimination. However, we provide two tests that suggest that
minorities are not simply intertemporally substituting e¤ort towards days with unbiased
managers. Table 11 shows the e¤ect of working with a more-biased manager on one day
on the worker’s performance in the rest of the week.30 Under intertemporal substitution,
working with a more-biased manager on one day should lead minorities to perform better in
the rest of the week. We …nd no evidence that this is the case. In fact, minorities scan items
signi…cantly slower in the rest of the week when they spend one more day with a more-biased
manager.
    We can also look at workers’ response to manager bias aggregated over longer periods
(Appendix Table 10). If a worker is intertemporally substituting her e¤ort within a given pe-
riod (e.g., at the week or two-week level), performance should be uncorrelated with manager
bias at that level of aggregation. However, we …nd no evidence that the impact of manager
bias is attenuated when performance is aggregated over longer periods. For absences, the
measured e¤ect of manager bias is relatively constant with the level of aggregation, though it
is no longer statistically signi…cant once the data is aggregated. For articles per minute, the
measured e¤ect increases as the level of aggregation increases. Consistent with the results
in Table 11, this may indicate that there are some cumulative e¤ects of manager bias on
scanning speed.


7      Conclusion
The paper has shown that working with biased managers leads minority workers to perform
more poorly. When scheduled to work with more-biased managers, minority cashiers are
more likely to be absent and they leave work earlier. Because these workers are paid based
on time worked, this leads to a loss in wages for minority workers. Minorities also scan items
more slowly and take more time between customers when working with biased managers.
  30
    We control for manager bias in the rest of the week and its interaction with the worker’s minority status
to eliminate the e¤ects of intra-week correlation in manager bias.




                                                     27
It does not appear that this results from manager animus. Instead, it appears that biased
managers feel uncomfortable with minority workers and interact less with them, leading
minority cashiers to exert less e¤ort.
    These results come from one setting: entry-level cashiers in a large French grocery store
chain. However, they may be applicable to many other workplace settings. In our setting,
biased managers’discomfort with minorities can lead them to monitor minorities less, assign
minorities to new tasks less frequently, and not ask minorities to stay late. In other settings,
interacting less with minority employees may have larger consequences if it also leads biased
managers to train, mentor, advise, or challenge minorities less.
    Our results raise the question of the type of policy responses that could be used to
ameliorate the impact of manager bias on minority workers. One set of potential policies
would aim to directly reduce implicit bias. Beaman et al. (2009) …nds that having female
leaders reduces implicit bias against women. Outside of the workplace, Rao (2014) and
Boisjoly et al. (2006) …nd that exposure to a group can reduce bias against it. Another
set of potential policies would attempt to mitigate the e¤ect of manager bias by directly
targeting manager actions. For example, these interventions could encourage managers to
interact with all workers equally or provide more speci…c guidelines about how to manage
workers. Investigating the e¤ects of such policies is an interesting question for future research.


References
Agerström, J., R. Carlsson, and D.-O. Rooth (2007): “Ethnicity and obesity:
 Evidence of implicit work performance stereotypes in Sweden,” Working Paper, IFAU-
 Institute for Labour Market Policy Evaluation.

Amodio, D. M., and P. G. Devine (2006): “Stereotyping and evaluation in implicit race
 bias: Evidence for independent constructs and unique e¤ects on behavior,” Journal of
 Personality and Social Psychology, 91(4), 652.

Arrow, K. (1973): “The theory of discrimination,”Discrimination in Labor Markets, 3(10),
 3–33.

Banse, R., J. Seise, and N. Zerbes (2001): “Implicit attitudes towards homosexual-
 ity: Reliability, validity, and controllability of the IAT,” Zeitschrift für Experimentelle
 Psychologie, 48(2), 145–160.

Beaman, L., R. Chattopadhyay, E. Duflo, R. Pande, and P. Topalova (2009):




                                               28
  “Powerful women: Does exposure reduce prejudice?,” Quarterly Journal of Economics,
  124(4), 1497–1540.

Becker, G. S. (1957): The Economics of Discrimination. University of Chicago Press,
 Chicago.

Behaghel, L., B. Crépon, and T. Le Barbanchon (2015): “Unintended e¤ects of
 anonymous résumés,”American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 7(3), 1–27.

Bertrand, M., D. Chugh, and S. Mullainathan (2005): “Implicit discrimination,”
 American Economic Review: Papers and Proceedings, 95(2), 94–98.

Boisjoly, J., G. J. Duncan, M. Kremer, D. M. Levy, and J. Eccles (2006): “Empa-
 thy or antipathy? The impact of diversity,”American Economic Review, 96(5), 1890–1905.

Bordalo, P., K. Coffman, N. Gennaioli, and A. Shleifer (forthcoming): “Stereo-
 types,”Quarterly Journal of Economics.

Cameron, A. C., J. B. Gelbach, and D. L. Miller (2008): “Bootstrap-based improve-
 ments for inference with clustered errors,” Review of Economics and Statistics, 90(3),
 414–427.

Coate, S., and G. C. Loury (1993): “Will a¢ rmative-action policies eliminate negative
 stereotypes?,”American Economic Review, 83(5), 1220–1240.

Coffman, K. B. (2014): “Evidence on self-stereotyping and the contribution of ideas,”
 Quarterly Journal of Economics, 129(4), 1625–1660.

Dee, T. S. (2004): “Teachers, race, and student achievement in a randomized experiment,”
 Review of Economics and Statistics, 86(1), 195–210.

        (2005): “A teacher like me: Does race, ethnicity, or gender matter?,” American
  Economic Review, 95(2), 158–165.

Dovidio, J. F., and S. L. Gaertner (2008): “New directions in aversive racism research:
 Persistence and pervasiveness,”in Motivational Aspects of Prejudice and Racism, pp. 43–
 67. Springer.

Dovidio, J. F., K. Kawakami, and S. L. Gaertner (2002): “Implicit and explicit
 prejudice and interracial interaction,”Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 82(1),
 62.



                                             29
Egloff, B., and S. C. Schmukle (2002): “Predictive validity of an Implicit Association
 Test for assessing anxiety,”Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 83(6), 1441.

Friese, M., M. Bluemke, and M. Wänke (2007): “Predicting voting behavior with
 implicit attitude measures: The 2002 German parliamentary election,”Experimental Psy-
 chology, 54(4), 247.

Garthwaite, C., T. Gross, and M. J. Notowidigdo (2014): “Public health insurance,
 labor supply, and employment lock,”Quarterly Journal of Economics, 129(2), 653–696.

Giuliano, L., D. I. Levine, and J. Leonard (2009): “Manager race and the race of new
  hires,”Journal of Labor Economics, 27(4), 589–631.

Green, A. R., D. R. Carney, D. J. Pallin, L. H. Ngo, K. L. Raymond, L. I.
 Iezzoni, and M. R. Banaji (2007): “Implicit bias among physicians and its prediction of
 thrombolysis decisions for black and white patients,”Journal of General Internal Medicine,
 22(9), 1231–1238.

Greenwald, A. G., D. E. McGhee, and J. L. Schwartz (1998): “Measuring individual
 di¤erences in implicit cognition: The Implicit Association Test,” Journal of Personality
 and Social Psychology, 74(6), 1464.

Greenwald, A. G., B. A. Nosek, and M. R. Banaji (2003): “Understanding and using
 the Implicit Association Test: I. An improved scoring algorithm,” Journal of Personality
 and Social Psychology, 85(2), 197–216.

Greenwald, A. G., T. A. Poehlman, E. L. Uhlmann, and M. R. Banaji (2009):
 “Understanding and using the Implicit Association Test: III. Meta-analysis of predictive
 validity,”Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 97(1), 17.

Hahn, A., C. M. Judd, H. K. Hirsh, and I. V. Blair (2014): “Awareness of implicit
 attitudes,”Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 143(3), 1369–1392.

Haider, A. H., J. Sexton, N. Sriram, L. A. Cooper, D. T. Efron, S. Swoboda,
 C. V. Villegas, E. R. Haut, M. Bonds, P. J. Pronovost, et al. (2011): “Asso-
 ciation of unconscious race and social class bias with vignette-based clinical assessments
 by medical students,”Journal of the American Medical Association, 306(9), 942–951.

Hebl, M. R., J. B. Foster, L. M. Mannix, and J. F. Dovidio (2002): “Formal
 and interpersonal discrimination: A …eld study of bias toward homosexual applicants,”
 Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 28(6), 815–825.


                                            30
Hjort, J. (2014): “Ethnic divisions and production in …rms,” Quarterly Journal of Eco-
 nomics, 129(4), 1899–1946.

Hu, X., J. P. Rosenfeld, and G. V. Bodenhausen (2012): “Combating automatic auto-
 biographical associations: The e¤ect of instruction and training in strategically concealing
 information in the Autobiographical Implicit Association Test,” Psychological Science,
 23(10), 1079–1085.

Kim, D.-Y. (2003): “Voluntary controllability of the Implicit Association Test (IAT),”Social
  Psychology Quarterly, 66(1), 83–96.

Lane, K. A., M. R. Banaji, B. A. Nosek, and A. G. Greenwald (2007): “Under-
  standing and using the Implicit Association Test: IV. What we know (so far) about the
  method,” in Implicit Measures of Attitudes, ed. by B. Wittenbrink, and N. Schwarz, pp.
  59–102. The Guilford Press.

Lundberg, S. J., and R. Startz (1983): “Private discrimination and social intervention
  in competitive labor market,”American Economic Review, 73(3), 340–347.

Mas, A., and E. Moretti (2009): “Peers at work,” American Economic Review, 99(1),
 112–145.

McConnell, A. R., and J. M. Leibold (2001): “Relations among the Implicit Associa-
 tion Test, discriminatory behavior, and explicit measures of racial attitudes,” Journal of
 Experimental Social Psychology, 37(5), 435–442.

Mooney, C. (2014): “Across America, whites are biased and they don’t even know it,”The
 Washington Post: Wonkblog.

Nosek, B. A., A. G. Greenwald, and M. R. Banaji (2007): “The Implicit Association
 Test at age 7: A methodological and conceptual review,”in Automatic Processes in Social
 Thinking and Behavior, ed. by J. Bargh, pp. 265–292. Psychology Press.

ONZUS (2011): “Observatoire National des Zones Urbaines Sensibles,” Discussion paper,
 Secrétariat général du Comité interministériel des villes.

Phelps, E. S. (1972): “The statistical theory of racism and sexism,” American Economic
 Review, 62(4), 659–661.

Price, J., and J. Wolfers (2010): “Racial discrimination among NBA referees,” Quar-
 terly Journal of Economics, 125(4), 1859–1887.



                                             31
Rao, G. (2014): “Familiarity does not breed contempt: Diversity, discrimination and gen-
 erosity in Delhi schools,”Working Paper.

Rooth, D.-O. (2010): “Automatic associations and discrimination in hiring: Real world
 evidence,”Labour Economics, 17(3), 523–534.

Rosenthal, R., and L. Jacobson (1968): “Pygmalion in the classroom,”Urban Review,
 3(1), 16–20.

Smith-McLallen, A., B. T. Johnson, J. F. Dovidio, and A. R. Pearson (2006):
  “Black and white: The role of color bias in implicit race bias,” Social Cognition, 24(1),
  46–73.

Stauffer, J. M., and M. R. Buckley (2005): “The existence and nature of racial bias
  in supervisory ratings,”Journal of Applied Psychology, 90(3), 586–591.

Stoll, M. A., S. Raphael, and H. J. Holzer (2004): “Black job applicants and the
  hiring o¢ cer’s race,”Industrial & Labor Relations Review, 57(2), 267–287.




                                            32
                                   Figure 1A. Manager Bias and Worker Performance
                                                                  Minority Workers


              24
Articles Scanned per Minute
16       18   1420      22




                              -3           -2           -1           0         1                 2             3   4
                                                                  Manager IAT Score
                              Note: The size of each marker indicates the number of observations in the bin.




                                   Figure 1B. Manager Bias and Worker Performance
                                                                  Majority Workers
              24
Articles Scanned per Minute
16       18   1420      22




                              -3           -2           -1           0         1                 2             3   4
                                                                  Manager IAT Score
                              Note: The size of each marker indicates the number of observations in the bin.




                                                                        33
                                                     Table 1. Theories of Discrimination and Their Predictions

                                              Beckerian Taste for          Less Interaction and        Stereotypes and Statistical    Empirical Findings
                                                Discrimination           Statistical Discrimination          Discrimination

Biased managers are [more/less] likely               More                             Less                         --                        Less
to give minorities unpleasant tasks

Minorities report that biased managers
                                                      Yes                              --                          --                        No
dislike them

Biased managers spend less time with
                                                       --                             Yes                          --                        Yes
minorities

Biased managers make minorities less
                                                       --                              --                         Yes                No (not consciously)
confident in their abilities

Minorities are more productive than
majority workers when they do not face                 --                             Yes                         Yes                        Yes
bias
Note: "--" indicates that a particular model does not make a clear prediction.




                                                                                 34
                                                           Table 2. Descriptive Statistics

                                                      Administrative Data Sample                                Worker Survey Sample
                                           All Observations from      Regression Sample                 All Survey         Survey Respondent
                                               Included Stores        (Observations with               Respondents          Regression Sample
                                                                      Manager IAT Scores)
A. Worker Characteristics
  Minority                                         28%                        28%                           29%                      25%
  Male                                             6.9%                       7.4%                          7.7%                     7.3%

  Age                                                                                                       29.9                     30.1
  Number of Previous Jobs                                                                                    3.9                      4.0
  Less than High School Education                                                                           58%                      61%
  High School Degree                                                                                        35%                      32%
  More than High School Education                                                                            7%                       7%

  Number of Workers                                 218                        204                          310                      178

B. Manager Characteristics
  Minority                                           6%                        8%
  Male                                              10%                        7%
  Level 4 (High Position)                           18%                       18%
  Age                                               41.1                      41.1

  Average IAT Score (in Standard Devs)                                        1.35
  Moderate to Severe Bias                                                     66%
  Slight Bias                                                                 20%
  Little to No Bias                                                            9%
  Preference for Minorities                                                    4%

  Number of Managers                                154                        119

C. Shift Characteristics
   Scheduled Days per Week                          4.2                        4.2
   Scheduled Hours per Day                          7.2                        7.2
   Absent                                          1.8%                       1.6%
   Minutes Worked in Excess of Schedule            -0.31                      -0.06
   Articles Scanned per Minute                      18.5                      18.5
   Inter-Customer Time (Seconds)                    29.2                      28.7
   Payment Time (Seconds)                           50.7                      50.8

  Number of Shifts                                 5,099                      4,371

  Number of Stores                                   34                          34                           70                       51
Note: The first two columns of data provide descriptive statistics for the sample for whom we have administrative data. The first includes all
observations from the 34 included stores, while the second includes only observations for which we have the manager's IAT score. The final two
columns provide descriptive statistics for the worker survey sample. The first includes all survey respondents, while the second includes only those
workers for whom we either have managers' IAT scores or performance data and are thus included in the analysis. Level 4 managers have a higher
position in the store than the remaining managers. Manager age is reported as of January 1, 2012. Moderate to Severe Bias is defined as having a
raw IAT score above 0.35, Slight Bias is defined as having a raw IAT score between 0.15 and 0.35, Little to No Bias is defined as having a raw IAT
score between -0.15 and 0.15, and Preference for Minorities is defined as having a raw IAT score below -0.15.




                                                                         35
                                                               Table 3. Exogeneity of Scheduled Shifts

                       Manager      Minority      Male         Level 4       Total     Articles per  Shift Includes          Shift Includes   Total Hours Split Shift
                        Bias        Manager      Manager       Manager      Managers Minute in Other Early Morning           Late Evening
                                                                                     Stores on Date



                                                                                   A. Minority Workers
Minority Worker          0.005        0.000        -0.011        -0.001       -0.025         0.045              0.014            0.021           0.017        -0.000
                        (0.022)      (0.003)      (0.009)       (0.004)      (0.043)        (0.086)            (0.015)          (0.013)         (0.034)      (0.011)

                                                                          B. Minority Workers and Manager Bias
Minority Worker ×                     0.009        -0.002        0.008        -0.013        0.049           -0.004               0.007           0.038        0.002
Manager Bias                         (0.007)      (0.008)       (0.010)      (0.024)       (0.044)         (0.008)              (0.007)         (0.037)      (0.012)

Minority Worker                       -0.009       -0.009        -0.010       -0.011          -0.007            0.019            0.013          -0.024       -0.002
                                     (0.009)      (0.007)       (0.012)      (0.034)         (0.074)           (0.017)          (0.013)         (0.049)      (0.020)

Manager Bias                          -0.032       0.015         0.049        0.066          -0.043            -0.002           -0.003          -0.058       -0.017
                                     (0.021)      (0.025)       (0.033)      (0.048)         (0.093)           (0.011)          (0.019)         (0.062)      (0.022)

Observations             4,371         4,371         4,371       4,371        4,371          4,238              4,371             4,371           4,368         4,371
Dependent Variable
Mean                      1.13         0.060         0.114       0.171        2.74           18.23              0.141             0.580            7.22         0.465
Store FE.'s               Yes            Yes          Yes         Yes          Yes             Yes               Yes               Yes             Yes           Yes
Note: Each column in Panel A shows the result of regressing the dependent variable indicated by the column heading on an indicator for the worker being a
minority. Each column in Panel B shows the results of regressing the same dependent variable on a dummy for the worker's minority status, the manager's IAT
score (in standard deviation terms), and the interaction of the worker's minority status and the manager's IAT score. Both the dependent variables and the
manager's IAT score are based on the store's schedule, not actual realizations. For example, Shift Includes Early Morning is a dummy variable for the shift being
scheduled to start at 9 am or earlier, regardless of whether the worker arrived by that time. Shift Includes Late Evening is an indicator for the shift being scheduled
to end at 8 pm or later. Manager Bias is the manager's IAT score, while Minority Manager , Male Manager , and Level 4 Manager are indicators for a manager
being a minority, being male, and having a high-level management position, respectively. When workers are scheduled to work with more than one manager,
manager variables are averages, weighted by the amount of time workers were scheduled to work with each manager. Observations are worker-days and standard
errors are clustered at the store level.




                                                                                  36
                    Table 4. Effect of Manager Bias on Time Spent at Work

                                       A. Dependent Variable: Absence Indicator
Minority Worker ×              0.0098**       0.0095**        0.0117***       0.0118***
Manager Bias                   (0.0039)        (0.0040)        (0.0042)        (0.0043)

Manager Bias                    -0.0021          -0.0021          -0.0050          -0.0052
                                (0.0031)         (0.0032)         (0.0040)         (0.0042)

Minority Worker ×                                                                   0.0081
Minority Manager                                                                   (0.0972)

Minority Manager                                                                   -0.0057
                                                                                   (0.0153)

Observations                    4,371              4,371           4,371            4,371
Dependent Variable Mean         0.0162            0.0162           0.0162          0.0162
R-squared                       0.0005            0.0031           0.0835          0.0835

                              B. Dependent Variable: Minutes Worked in Excess of Schedule
Minority Worker ×              -3.295**         -3.279**       -3.327*          -3.237*
Manager Bias                     (1.550)         (1.588)       (1.687)          (1.678)

Manager Bias                    -0.002            -0.002           -0.005          -0.005
                                (1.141)           (1.167)          (0.969)         (1.009)

Minority Worker ×                                                                    0.349
Minority Manager                                                                   (10.501)

Minority Manager                                                                   -3.712
                                                                                   (4.592)

Observations                      4,163            4,163            4,163            4,163
Dependent Variable Mean          -0.068           -0.068           -0.068           -0.068
R-squared                         0.001            0.008            0.129            0.129

Individual F.E.'s                   Yes               Yes               Yes             Yes
Day of the Week F.E.'s               No               Yes               No              No
Morning/Evening F.E.'s               No               Yes               Yes             Yes
Date F.E.'s                          No               No                Yes             Yes
Note: Each column in each panel shows the result of regressing the dependent variable on
the interaction of the worker's minority status and the manager's IAT score (in standard
deviation terms), controlling for the manager's IAT score and worker fixed effects. The
dependent variable in Panel A is an indicator for the worker being absent. The dependent
variable in Panel B is the number of minutes worked in excess of the number of minutes the
worker was scheduled to work. The first column includes no additional controls. The second
column adds day of the week fixed effects, an indicator for the shift starting at 9 am or
earlier, and an indicator for the shift ending at 8 pm or later. The third column includes date
fixed effects and drops the day of the week fixed effects. The last column adds a dummy for
the manager being a minority and the interaction of the worker's and the manager’s minority
status. Observations are worker-days and standard errors are clustered at the store level.


                                                             37
                                             Table 5. Additional Results on Time Spent at Work

                           Minutes Arrived Before        Break Time        Minutes Stayed        Stayed Until Shift   Stayed at Least 10
                                 Shift Start              (Minutes)        After Shift End             End            Minutes After Shift
                                                                                                                             End
Minority Worker ×                   1.617                   1.081                -3.773**              0.014               -0.041*
Manager Bias                       (1.858)                 (1.381)                (1.674)             (0.024)              (0.023)

Manager Bias                        0.633                   -0.698                -0.402               -0.005               0.003
                                   (1.358)                 (0.616)               (1.027)              (0.017)              (0.017)

Observations                          4,163                4,163                  4,163                4,163                  4,163
Dependent Variable Mean                4.63                15.55                  10.84                0.844                  0.437
R-squared                             0.121                0.136                  0.101                0.129                  0.133
Note: Each regression shows the result of regressing the dependent variable indicated by the column on the interaction of the worker's
minority status and the manager's IAT score (in standard deviation terms), controlling for the manager's IAT score and worker fixed
effects. The regressions additionally control for the manager’s minority status, the interaction of the worker's and the manager's
minority status, date fixed effects, and dummies for the shift starting at 9 am or earlier and ending at 8 pm or later. Observations are
worker-days and standard errors are clustered at the store level. *, ** denote significance at the 10% and 5% levels, respectively.




                                                                            38
                    Table 6. Effect of Manager Bias on Performance at Work

                                       A. Dependent Variable: Articles Scanned per Minute
Minority Worker ×                    -0.276**      -0.279**         -0.233**       -0.249**
Manager Bias                          (0.109)       (0.111)          (0.108)        (0.111)

Manager Bias                          0.140*          0.140           0.080           0.102
                                      (0.083)        (0.083)         (0.065)         (0.073)

Observations                          3,601           3,601           3,601          3,601
Dependent Variable Mean               18.53           18.53           18.53          18.53
R-squared                             0.001           0.013           0.195          0.195

                                     B. Dependent Variable: Inter-Customer Time (Seconds)
Minority Worker ×                    1.213**       1.228**         1.417**        1.360**
Manager Bias                         (0.590)       (0.553)          (0.649)       (0.665)

Manager Bias                          -0.648         -0.571          -0.656          -0.580
                                      (0.386)        (0.376)         (0.521)         (0.534)

Observations                          3,287           3,287           3,287          3,287
Dependent Variable Mean               28.70           28.70           28.70          28.70
R-squared                             0.001           0.013           0.195          0.195

Individual F.E.'s                          Yes             Yes              Yes             Yes
Day of the Week F.E.'s                     No              Yes              No               No
Morning/Evening F.E.'s                     No              Yes              Yes             Yes
Date F.E.'s                                No              No               Yes             Yes
Manager Minority Variables                 No              No               No               Yes
Note: Each regression shows the result of regressing the dependent variable on the interaction
of the worker's minority status and the manager's IAT score (in standard deviation terms),
controlling for the manager's IAT score and worker fixed effects. The dependent variables are
the number of articles per minute scanned (Panel A) and the average number of seconds
between finishing one customer's transaction and scanning the next customer's items (Panel
B). The first column includes no controls. The second column adds day of the week fixed
effects, an indicator for the shift starting at 9 am or earlier, and an indicator for the shift
ending at 8 pm or later. The third column includes date fixed effects and drops the day of the
week fixed effects. The last column adds a dummy for the manager being a minority and the
interaction of the worker's and the manager’s minority status. Observations are worker-days
and standard errors are clustered at the store level. *, ** denote significance at the 10% and
5% levels, respectively.




                                                       39
                            Table 7. Heterogeneity in the Effect of Manager Bias on Work Performance
                                         Dependent Variable: Articles Scanned per Minute

                                                A. Time During Contract                       B. Fraction ZUS in the Store
                                         Early Weeks            Late Weeks               Below Median             Above Median
Minority Worker ×                           -0.200               -0.422**                  -0.477**                   -0.002
Manager Bias                               (0.141)                (0.160)                   (0.203)                  (0.112)

Manager Bias                                0.051                 0.305**                   0.267**                 -0.102
                                           (0.123)                (0.115)                   (0.099)                 (0.168)

Observations                                 2,404                   1,197                      1,864                  1,340
Dependent Variable Mean                      17.88                   19.82                      18.64                  18.39
p-value: Coefficients are equal              0.249                   0.249                      0.037                  0.037
R-squared                                    0.001                   0.004                      0.003                  0.001
Note: Each regression shows the result of regressing the dependent variable on the interaction of the worker's minority status and
the manager's IAT score (in standard deviation terms), controlling for the manager's IAT score and worker fixed effects. The
dependent variable is the number of articles per minute scanned. Observations in the first column are limited to days for which we
have the early weeks (weeks 3 to 8) of the contract, while observations in the second column are limited to days for which we have
the late weeks (weeks 18 to 23) of the contract. Observations in the third column are limited to stores in which managers reported
relatively few workers from ZUS (below the median in our sample), while the final column includes the remaining stores.
Observations are worker-days and standard errors are clustered at the store level. ** denotes significance at the 5% level.




                                                                            40
                                        Table 8. Worker-Manager Affection and Task Assignment

                                                                    A. Worker-Manager Affection
                                Manager Liked You Best      Manager Most Likely to You Enjoyed Working with Manager Initially Made
                                                             Recommend You for           Manager Best          You Feel Most
                                                                 Promotion                                       Confident
Minority Worker ×                         0.019                     0.078                    0.243                 0.194
Manager Bias                             (0.246)                   (0.212)                  (0.234)               (0.196)

Manager Bias                              0.152                     0.251*                     -0.061                     0.134
                                         (0.131)                    (0.148)                    (0.162)                   (0.127)

Observations                             3,036                       2,862                      3,209                     3,189
Dependent Variable Mean                  3.991                       4.053                      4.062                     4.073
R-squared                                0.015                       0.042                      0.010                     0.026

                                                                         B. Task Assignment
                                 Manager Assigned to        Manager Assigned Best Management of Lines and Manager Assigned to
                                Preferred Register Type           Breaks                 Customer Flows     Fewest Cleaning Duties
                                                                                     Encouraged Performance
Minority Worker ×                        -0.035                      0.146                     -0.153                   0.673***
Manager Bias                             (0.391)                    (0.469)                    (0.308)                   (0.189)

Manager Bias                              0.021                     -0.083                      0.129                     -0.276
                                         (0.157)                    (0.146)                    (0.137)                   (0.182)

Observations                              2,288                        2,553                       2,864                    2,235
Dependent Variable Mean                   4.010                        3.922                       4.215                    3.373
R-squared                                 0.002                        0.008                       0.018                    0.045
Note: Each column in each panel shows the result of regressing the dependent variable on the interaction of the worker's minority status
and the manager's IAT score (in standard deviation terms), controlling for the manager's IAT score and worker fixed effects. The
dependent variable is the worker's ranking of the manager on the question indicated by the column heading. This ranking ranges from 1
(the lowest ranked manager) to N (the highest ranked manager), where N is the number of managers the worker had. Observations are
worker-days and standard errors are clustered at the store level. *, *** denote significance at the 10% and 1% levels, respectively.




                                                                   41
                                           Table 9. Worker-Manager Interaction

                                             Panel A. Effect of Worker-Manager Interaction on Performance
                                                    Dependent Variable: Articles Scanned per Minute
Remembers Manager                       1.510**                                  1.587**               2.053***
(Indicator)                             (0.635)                                  (0.630)                (0.744)

Fraction of Time Scheduled                                    -1.172               1.724                     4.021
with Manager                                                 (1.352)              (3.638)                   (3.828)

(Fraction of Time Scheduled                                                       -4.454                     -6.603
with Manager)2                                                                    (4.886)                   (5.407)

Individual F.E.'s                         Yes                  Yes                  Yes                       Yes
Manager F.E.'s                            No                   No                   No                        Yes

Observations                             1,885                1,885                1,885                     1,885
Dependent Variable Mean                  18.42                18.42                18.42                     18.42
R-squared                                0.008                0.001                0.010                     0.095


                                        Panel B. Minority Status, Manager Bias, and Worker-Manager Interaction
                                 Dependent Variable:                    Dependent Variable: Articles Scanned per Minute
                                 Remembers Manager
                                     (Indicator)
                                       All Days                                  All Days           Days where Worker
                                                                                                   Remembers Manager
Minority Worker ×                     -0.0152*                                   -0.415*                   -0.311
Manager Bias                           (0.0086)                                  (0.209)                  (0.314)

Manager Bias                            0.0190*                                  0.271**                    0.203**
                                        (0.0097)                                 (0.114)                    (0.095)

Fraction of Time Scheduled              0.6362*                                   -1.932                     -5.115
with Manager                            (0.3351)                                  (4.159)                   (4.161)

(Fraction of Time Scheduled             -0.5605                                    1.017                     4.114
with Manager)2                          (0.3981)                                  (6.270)                   (5.757)

Individual F.E.'s                         Yes                                       Yes                       Yes

Observations                              3,958                                     1,584                      1,317
Dependent Variable Mean                   0.932                                     18.52                      18.66
R-squared                                 0.017                                     0.006                      0.005
Note: Each regression in Panel A shows the results of regressing articles scanned per minute on the variables listed in the
left-most column, controlling for worker fixed effects. Remembers Manager is an indicator for the worker reporting in the
worker survey that she remembered the manager she was scheduled to work with that day. Fraction of Time Scheduled
with Manager is a number between 0 and 1. It is the fraction of the worker's time in the administrative data that she was
scheduled to work with the given manager, averaged over all working days. The first column of Panel B regresses an
indicator for whether the worker remembered the manager on the interaction of the worker's minority status and the
manager's IAT score (in standard deviation terms), controlling for the manager's IAT score, the fraction of time in the
administrative data the worker spent with the manager, this fraction squared, and worker fixed effects. The next column in
the panel regresses articles per minute scanned on these same variables. The final column in the panel replicates the
previous column, but eliminates days where the worker did not remember the manager. Throughout, observations are
worker-days and standard errors are clustered at the store level. *, **, *** denote significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1%
levels respectively.



                                                                      42
                                 Table 10. Comparison of Minority and Non-Minority Performance

                                   Absence       Minutes Worked in Articles Scanned          Inter-Customer Time     Estimated
                                   Indicator     Excess of Schedule  per Minute                    (Seconds)     Customers Served
                                                                                                                      per Day

                                                                            A. All Days
Minority Worker                    -0.0041              0.522                0.282                  0.504               2.80
                                   (0.0072)            (2.213)              (0.329)                (0.719)             (2.02)

Non-Minority Mean                   0.0187              -1.186              18.55                  28.21                162
Observations                         4,371              4,163               3,601                  3,287               3,086
Store F.E.'s                          Yes                 Yes                Yes                    Yes                 Yes

                                                                 B. Days with Unbiased Managers
Minority Worker                    -0.0127*             2.572              0.745**            -2.075*                 13.94**
                                   (0.0067)            (2.331)              (0.323)           (1.113)                  (4.84)

Non-Minority Mean                   0.0267              -4.268              18.65                  26.59                162
Observations                          482                444                 367                    330                 301
Store F.E.'s                          Yes                 Yes                Yes                    Yes                 Yes

                                                                  C. Days with Biased Managers
Minority Worker                    -0.0047              0.271               0.006               0.936                   2.21
                                   (0.0094)            (2.872)             (0.383)             (0.935)                 (2.68)

Non-Minority Mean                   0.0194              -1.106              18.65                  27.94                162
Observations                         3,474              3,319               2,832                  2,555               2,395
Store F.E.'s                          Yes                 Yes                Yes                    Yes                 Yes

                                                                         D. All Other Days
Minority Worker                     0.0026              0.379               1.292**                 0.178               -0.25
                                   (0.0027)            (1.625)              (0.325)                (0.186)             (2.05)

Non-Minority Mean                    0.0036               0.928                17.69               31.88                  156
Observations                           445                 429                  422                 421                   410
Store F.E.'s                           Yes                 Yes                   Yes                Yes                   Yes
Note: Each column in each panel shows the result of a separate regression of the dependent variable indicated by the column on
an indicator for the worker being a minority, controlling for store fixed effects. Estimated Customers Served per Day is calculated
under the assumption that customers average 25 items. Standard errors are clustered at the store level. Days with Unbiased
Managers are days where the worker spent at least 50% of the day with managers with a raw (unscaled) IAT score between -0.15
and 0.15. Days with Biased Managers are days where the worker spent more than 50% of the day with managers whose raw IAT
score exceeds 0.15. Days where a worker spent more than 50% of her time with managers biased in favor of minorities (managers
with raw IAT scores below -0.15) and days where a worker did not spend more than 50% of her time with managers in any bias
category are included in Panel D as "All Other Days." *, ** denote significance at the 10% and 5% levels, respectively.




                                                                 43
               Table 11. Effect of Manager Bias on Performance in Rest of the Week
                  Dependent Variable: Average Performance in Rest of the Week

                                    Absence      Minutes Worked    Articles Inter-Customer
                                    Indicator      in Excess of Scanned per Time (Seconds)
                                                     Schedule      Minute
Minority Worker ×                    0.0023            -0.628     -0.099**       -0.336
Manager Bias                        (0.0020)          (0.940)      (0.041)      (0.274)

Manager Bias                        -0.0029           1.185*           0.063          -0.030
                                    (0.0017)          (0.638)         (0.046)         (0.203)

Observations                           4,271              4,174        3,935            3,610
Dependent Variable Mean                0.0153             -0.053        18.43            29.04
R-squared                              0.0010             0.0058       0.0061           0.0026
Notes: Each column shows the result of regressing the workers' average performance in the rest of
the week on the interaction of the worker's minority status and the manager's IAT score (in
standard deviation terms) on a given day. Regressions control for the manager's IAT score on that
day and worker fixed effects. We also control for the average manager IAT score in the rest of the
week and this score interacted with the worker's minority status. Standard errors are clustered at
the store level. ** denotes significance at the 5% level.




                                                      44
                                                 Appendix Figure 1. Effect of Manager Bias on Overtime
                                                 Effect on Staying at Least the Given Number of Minutes after Shift End

Effect of 1 Standard Deviation of Manager Bias
   -.04      -.03     -.02     -.01     0




                                                 0        30        60       90      120     150     180    210      240   270   300
                                                                                    Minutes after Shift End
                                                 Note: Regressions control for date and time of day fixed effects.




                                                                                             45
                                                   Appendix Table 1. Characteristics of Respondents and Non-Respondents to the CP Survey

                                                                All Workers                                   Minority Workers                                  Majority Workers
                                                Respondents         Non-          p-value of        Respondents      Non-      p-value of         Respondents        Non-        p-value of
                                                                Respondents       Difference                     Respondents Difference                          Respondents     Difference
Male                                                7.7%            8.1%             0.855             6.7%          6.8%        0.994                8.1%           9.0%           0.743

Absence Rate                                       0.018            0.028           0.423              0.016           0.006         0.364            0.016           0.037           0.235
Minutes Worked in Excess of Schedule                2.59            -2.51           0.064              2.92            1.29          0.765            2.51            -4.58           0.031
Articles Scanned per Minute                        18.57            18.43           0.699              18.84           18.20         0.298            18.51           18.56           0.919
Inter-Customer Time (Seconds)                      28.51            29.50           0.420              27.94           31.24         0.130            28.65           28.52           0.933
Payment Time (Seconds)                             50.51            50.73           0.768              51.83           52.13         0.823            50.17           50.02           0.868

Paris Region                                         42%             49%              0.095               63%            59%         0.585           33%              41%            0.103
Municipality has Less than 25,000 Residents          33%             29%              0.330               28%            24%         0.544           35%              33%            0.639
Municipality has 25,000 to 75,000 Residents          49%             52%              0.435               54%            54%         0.984           47%              50%            0.457
Municipality has More than 75,000 Residents          18%             19%              0.877               18%            21%         0.524           19%              17%            0.696
Notes: The Paris Region or "Ile-de-France" is one of the 13 administrative regions in France. Municipality population data comes from 2013 Census data. P-values are calculated from t-tests.




                                                                                               46
                                            Appendix Table 2. Correlates of Manager IAT Scores
                                           Dependent Variable: Standardized Manager IAT Score

Minority                         -0.441                                                                             -0.364        -0.135
                                 (0.345)                                                                           (0.388)       (0.445)

Male                                           -0.078                                                               0.109         0.092
                                               (0.448)                                                             (0.617)       (0.675)

Age                                                          0.008                                                  0.008         0.003
                                                            (0.010)                                                (0.012)       (0.018)

Level 4 (High Position)                                                    0.019                                    -0.093        0.329
                                                                          (0.266)                                  (0.290)       (0.366)

Fraction ZUS in Store                                                                   -0.005                     -0.005
                                                                                        (0.004)                    (0.007)

Far Right Vote Share                                                                                  0.005        -0.006
                                                                                                     (0.016)       (0.016)

Observations                        119          119          119           119           110          119           110            119
R-squared                          0.014        0.000        0.005         0.000         0.003        0.001         0.021          0.269
Dependent Variable Mean            1.346        1.346        1.346         1.346         1.410        1.346         1.410          1.346
Store F.E.'s                        No           No           No            No            No           No            No             Yes
Note: Each column shows the results of regressing a manager's (standardized) IAT score on her characteristics. Level 4 managers have a
higher position in the store than the remaining managers. Manager age is reported as of January 1, 2012. Fraction ZUS in Store is the
fraction of workers that come from "sensitive urban zones," zones with high concentrations of immigrants and first generation citizens,
and is measured on a scale of 1 to 100. Far Right Vote Share is the share of votes received by the Front National Party in the first round
of the 2012 presidential election. This data comes from the French Ministry of the Interior. Standard errors are clustered at the store
level.




                                                                            47
                                                             Appendix Table 3. Exogeneity of Scheduled Shifts
                                                                Robustness to Alternative Specifications

                     Manager Bias    Minority      Male          Level 4        Total         Articles per      Shift Includes   Shift Includes     Total     Split Shift
                                     Manager      Manager        Manager       Managers     Minute in Other     Early Morning    Late Evening       Hours
                                                                                            Stores on that
                                                                                                 Date

                                                       A. Minority Workers, Including Observations with No Manager IAT
Minority Worker          0.005        -0.009       -0.020        -0.008         -0.127          0.043          0.008                 0.014          0.034        -0.001
                        (0.022)       (0.007)      (0.014)       (0.010)       (0.115)         (0.072)        (0.013)               (0.012)        (0.029)      (0.010)

Observations             4,371         5,099        5,099          5,099         5,099           4,945              5,099            5,099          5,094       5,099
Dependent
Variable Mean             1.13         0.051        0.116          0.156         2.44            18.28              0.141            0.581           7.20       0.461
Store F.E.'s              Yes           Yes          Yes            Yes          Yes              Yes                Yes              Yes            Yes         Yes


                                                               B. Minority Workers and Manager Bias, with Worker Fixed Effects
Minority Worker ×                      0.034        0.024          0.031         -0.059        -0.057           -0.013               0.016         -0.077        -0.027
Manager Bias                          (0.024)      (0.024)        (0.037)       (0.050)       (0.064)          (0.021)              (0.025)        (0.110)      (0.031)

Manager Bias                          -0.040        0.007          0.030         0.019           0.065              0.006           -0.015         -0.045        -0.013
                                      (0.026)      (0.023)        (0.039)       (0.052)         (0.055)            (0.013)          (0.023)        (0.067)      (0.024)

Observations                           4,371         4,371         4,371          4,371           4,238               4,371            4,371          4,368       4,371
Dependent Variable Mean                0.060         0.114         0.171           2.74           18.23               0.141            0.580           7.22       0.465
Individual F.E.'s                        Yes           Yes          Yes             Yes             Yes                Yes              Yes            Yes          Yes
Note: Panel A replicates Panel A of Table 3, including observations where we do not have the manager's IAT score. Panel B replicates Panel B of Table 3, replacing the
store fixed effects and minority worker indicator with worker fixed effects. That is, Panel B shows the results of regressing the dependent variable indicated by the
column on the manager's IAT score (in standard deviation terms) and the interaction of manager's IAT score and the minority worker indicator, controlling for worker
fixed effects.




                                                                                    48
                Appendix Table 4. Exogeneity of CP Coworkers
                                  Scheduled to Work at Minutes Scheduled
                                      Same Time          to Work Together
Minority-Minority Pair                   -0.015               -6.10
                                        (0.036)              (11.66)

Minority-Majority Pair                    -0.014                  -5.73
                                          (0.022)                 (7.26)

Store F.E.'s                                  Yes                    Yes
Observations                                15,791                 15,791
Mean Dep. Var.                               0.594                  186.7
Note: The table shows the result of regressing an indicator for whether two
CPs in the same store were scheduled to work together on a given day
(Column 1) and the number of minutes they were scheduled to work together
on a given day (Column 2) on an indicator for both CPs being minorities and an
indicator for one worker being a minority and the other being a majority. The
omitted category is both workers being majorities. Observations are CP pair-
days. Store fixed effects are included and standard errors are clustered at the
store level.




                                                      49
                  Appendix Table 5. Effect of Manager Bias on Payment Time
                       Dependent Variable: Payment Time (Seconds)

Minority Worker ×                    -0.188          -0.091         -0.064          -0.011
Manager Bias                         (0.457)         (0.413)        (0.361)         (0.341)

Manager Bias                          0.046           0.049         -0.453         -0.506*
                                     (0.314)         (0.281)        (0.325)        (0.290)

Observations                          3,108          3,108           3,108          3,108
Dependent Variable Mean               50.77          50.77           50.77          50.77
R-squared                             0.000          0.039           0.159          0.159

Individual F.E.'s                         Yes              Yes            Yes              Yes
Day of the Week F.E.'s                    No               Yes            No               No
Morning/Evening F.E.'s                    No               Yes            Yes              Yes
Date F.E.'s                               No               No             Yes              Yes
Manager Minority Variables                No               No             No               Yes
Note: Each regression shows the result of regressing the dependent variable on the interaction
of the worker's minority status and the manager's IAT score (in standard deviation terms),
controlling for the manager's IAT score and worker fixed effects. The first column includes no
controls. The second column adds day of the week fixed effects, an indicator for the shift
starting at 9 am or earlier, and an indicator for the shift ending at 8 pm or later. The third
column includes date fixed effects and drops the day of the week fixed effects. The last column
adds a dummy for the manager being a minority and the interaction of the worker's and the
manager’s minority status. Observations are worker-days and standard errors are clustered at
the store level. * denotes significance at the 10% level.




                                                       50
             Appendix Table 6. Effect of Manager Bias on Time at Work and Work Performance
                          Including Controls for Other Manager Characteristics

                                Absence         Minutes Worked in       Articles Scanned     Inter-Customer
                                Indicator       Excess of Schedule        per Minute         Time (Seconds)

Minority Worker ×               0.0139**               -2.101               -0.277**            1.523**
Manager Bias                    (0.0058)              (1.639)                (0.123)            (0.743)

Manager Bias                     -0.0064               1.007                 0.1011              -0.269
                                 (0.0043)             (1.082)                (0.078)             (0.428)

Observations                       4,371                4,163                  3,601              3,287
Dependent Variable Mean           0.0162                -0.068                 18.53              28.70
R-squared                          0.088                0.131                  0.196              0.241
Note: The regressions in this table replicate the regressions in the final columns of Table 4A, 4B, 6A, and 6B,
respectively, adding additional control variables. The regressions include individual and date fixed effects,
dummies for early morning and late evening shifts, an indicator for manager minority status, and the
interaction of the worker's and manager's minority status. The regressions also include a dummy for the
manager having a Level 4 position, a dummy for the manager being male, manager age as of January 1,
2012, and the interaction of each of these variables with the worker's minority status. ** denotes
significance at the 5% level.




                                                         51
             Appendix Table 7. Effect of Manager Bias on Time at Work and Work Performance
                                  Different Definitions of Minority Status

                                   Absence       Minutes Worked in      Articles Scanned      Inter-Customer
                                   Indicator     Excess of Schedule       per Minute          Time (Seconds)

                                           A. Minorities as Workers with North African Names
Minority Worker ×                 0.0150**             -2.437              -0.228             1.305
Manager Bias                      (0.0060)            (1.791)             (0.153)            (0.890)

Manager Bias                       -0.0053              1.238                 0.075                -0.516
                                   (0.0039)            (0.934)               (0.065)              (0.503)

Observations                        3,994               3,795                 3,277                3,012
Dependent Variable Mean             0.0168              -0.725                18.51                28.46
R-squared                           0.091               0.141                 0.206                0.237

                                         B. Minorities as Workers with Sub-Saharan African Names
Minority Worker ×                  0.0082*              -6.010              -0.225            1.506*
Manager Bias                       (0.0044)            (3.786)             (0.138)            (0.854)

Manager Bias                       -0.0043              0.982                 0.067                -0.701
                                   (0.0038)            (1.001)               (0.062)              (0.545)

Observations                        3,561               3,380                 2,906                2,670
Dependent Variable Mean             0.0177              -0.346                18.59                28.47
R-squared                           0.100               0.131                 0.217                0.249

                                      C. Workers of Indeterminate, Mixed, or Other Origin Excluded
Minority Worker ×                 0.0116**            -3.166*           -0.181**               1.282*
Manager Bias                      (0.0053)            (1.755)            (0.076)              (0.627)

Manager Bias                       -0.0052              0.812                 0.030                -0.565
                                   (0.0045)            (0.984)               (0.064)              (0.465)

Observations                         4,000               3,824                 3,301                3,033
Dependent Variable Mean              0.0173              -0.020                18.61                28.69
R-squared                            0.093               0.139                 0.231                0.235
Note: The regressions in this table replicate the regressions in the final columns of Table 4A, 4B, 6A, and 6B,
respectively. Regressions in Panel A define as minorities workers with a first or last name of North African
origin. Remaining workers with a Sub-Saharan African first or last name are eliminated. Regressions in Panel
B define as minorities workers with a first or last name of Sub-Saharan African origin, eliminating other
workers with North African names. Regressions in Panel C use the original definition of minority (a first or
last name of Sub-Saharan or North African origin), but eliminate workers with names of indeterminate,
mixed, or other origin. *, ** denote significance at the 10% and 5% levels, respectively.




                                                         52
           Appendix Table 8. Effect of Manager Bias on Time at Work and Work Performance
                                Controlling for Within-Store Shift Effects

                                  Absence      Minutes Worked in Articles Scanned       Inter-Customer
                                  Indicator    Excess of Schedule  per Minute           Time (Seconds)
Minority Worker × Manager        0.0139***          -3.366*          -0.276**               1.326*
Bias                               (0.0046)         (1.871)           (0.128)               (0.755)

Manager Bias                        -0.0086           1.062               0.022              -0.699
                                   (0.0057)          (1.568)             (0.098)            (0.547)

Observations                          4,371             3,221                3,601             3,287
Dependent Variable Mean               0.016             0.509               18.530             28.700
R-squared                             0.227             0.423                0.382             0.393
Note: The regressions in this table replicate the regressions in the second-to-last columns of Table 4A,
4B, 6A, and 6B, respectively. These regressions add controls for the shift (day of the week × morning or
evening) within each store separately . *, **,*** denote significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels,
respectively.




                                                    53
                                  Appendix Table 9. Comparing Observations by Time During the Contract and Store Diversity

                                                   A. Time During Contract                                         B. Fraction ZUS in the Store
                                   Early Weeks          Late Weeks      p-value of Difference      Below Median       Above Median       p-value of Difference
                                        (1)                 (2)                  (3)                    (4)                 (5)                   (6)
Minority Worker                       0.273                0.292                0.764                  0.179              0.410                  0.000
Male Worker                           0.078                0.056                0.533                  0.047              0.115                  0.085

Minority Manager                      0.055               0.059                 0.906                   0.040             0.089                  0.242
Male Manager                          0.110               0.118                 0.864                   0.071             0.178                  0.052
Level 4 Manager                       0.174               0.167                 0.883                   0.192             0.133                  0.393
Manager Age                           40.9                41.4                  0.742                   42.5              37.2                   0.001
Manager IAT Score                     1.28                1.44                  0.315                   1.44              1.35                   0.640

Fraction ZUS in Store                   0.166              0.176                   0.458                 0.108             0.255                0.000
Note: Cells in Column 1 report the mean of the indicated characteristic for the promotions for which we have data on the early weeks (weeks 3 to 8) of the
contract. Cells in Column 2 report the mean of the indicated characteristic for the promotions for which we have data on the late weeks (weeks 18 to 23) of the
contract. Column 3 presents the p-values from a test of the hypothesis that the means of both samples are the same. Cells in Column 4 report the mean of the
indicated characteristic for stores in which managers report they managed relatively few workers from ZUS (below the median in our sample), while cells in
Column 5 report means for the remaining stores. Column 6 reports p-values from a test of the hypothesis that the means of both samples are the same.




                                                                               54
           Appendix Table 10. Effect of Manager Bias Over Different Levels of Time Aggregation

                                                       Level of Time Aggregation
                                   One Day         Two Working Days     One Calendar         Two Calendar
                                                                            Week               Weeks

                                                              A. Absences
Minority Worker ×                  0.0098**              0.0021            0.0091                0.0115
Manager Bias                       (0.0039)             (0.0043)          (0.0106)              (0.0245)

Manager Bias                        -0.0021              0.0008               -0.0051            -0.0047
                                    (0.0031)            (0.0037)             (0.0098)           (0.0223)

Observations                         4,371                2,386                1,209               651
Dependent Variable Mean             0.0162               0.0176               0.0226             0.0252
R-squared                           0.0005               0.0001               0.0004             0.0004

                                                      B. Articles Scanned per Minute
Minority Worker ×                  -0.276**            -0.305***            -0.508***            -0.604
Manager Bias                        (0.109)              (0.092)              (0.180)            (0.361)

Manager Bias                        0.140*               0.221*              0.400**            0.716**
                                    (0.083)              (0.124)             (0.159)            (0.341)

Observations                         3,601                2,149                1,111               605
Dependent Variable Mean              18.53                18.46                18.59              18.60
R-squared                           0.0015               0.0034               0.0130             0.0316

Individual F.E.'s                     Yes                  Yes                  Yes                Yes
Note: Each column in each panel shows the results of regressing the dependent variable on the
interaction of the worker's minority status and the manager's IAT score (in standard deviation terms),
controlling for the manager's IAT score and worker fixed effects. No other controls are included. The first
column reproduces results from Tables 4A and 6A, respectively. The dependent variable is an indicator
for the worker being absent (Panel A) and the number of articles per minute scanned (Panel B). The
remaining columns aggregate observations over longer time periods. In these regressions, both manager
bias and the dependent variables are averaged (by worker) over the relevant time frame, so that the
absence indicator is no longer an indicator, but a rate between 0 and 1. In the second column, the time
span is two consecutive working days, so that observations are worker-two day periods. (If the data
include an odd number of days for a given worker, one observation for the worker is a worker-one day
period.) In the third column, the time span is a calendar week (typically four working days), and in the last
column the time span is two calendar weeks. Standard errors are clustered at the store level. *, **, ***
denote significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.




                                                         55
