NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

FORWARD GUIDANCE WITHOUT COMMON KNOWLEDGE
George-Marios Angeletos
Chen Lian
Working Paper 22785
http://www.nber.org/papers/w22785

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2016, Revised February 2018

We have no financial interests or research support to disclose. We are grateful to the editor, John
Leahy, and three anonymous referees for extensive feedback, and to Marco Del Negro, Alisdair
McKay, Alexandre Kohlhas, Kristoffer Nimark, Paul Pichler, Franck Portier, and Mirko
Wiederholt for conference discussions. For helpful comments, we also thank Adrien Auclert,
Harris Dellas, Xavier Gabaix, Alessandro Pavan, Karthik Sastry, and seminar participants at the
University of Chicago, Duke University, Northwestern University, Princeton University, the 2016
and 2017 NBER Summer Institutes, the 2016 ESEM in Edinburgh, the 2017 NBER EFG and ME
meetings, the 2017 SED meeting, the 2018 AEA meeting, the NYU Stern IUB workshop, the
ECB NSM workshop, the 2017 Hydra Workshop in Sardinia, the 20th Central Bank
Macroeconomic Modeling Workshop at the Bank of France, the 2017 SNB/CEP Workshop at
Study Center Gerzensee, the 2017 Workshop on Sentiments and Beliefs at the Bank of Chile. The
views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2016 by George-Marios Angeletos and Chen Lian. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Forward Guidance without Common Knowledge
George-Marios Angeletos and Chen Lian
NBER Working Paper No. 22785
October 2016, Revised February 2018
JEL No. C72,D82,E03,E32,E43,E52,E58
ABSTRACT
How does the economy respond to news about future policies or future fundamentals? Standard
practice assumes that agents have common knowledge of such news and face no uncertainty
about how others will respond. Relaxing this assumption attenuates the general-equilibrium
effects of news and rationalizes a form of myopia at the aggregate level. We establish these
insights within a class of games which nests, but is not limited to, the New Keynesian model. Our
results help resolve the forward-guidance puzzle, offer a rationale for the front-loading of fiscal
stimuli, and illustrate more broadly the fragility of predictions that rest on long series of forwardlooking feedback loops.

George-Marios Angeletos
Department of Economics, E52-530
MIT
77 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02139
and NBER
angelet@mit.edu
Chen Lian
Department of Economics
MIT
77 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02139
lianchen@mit.edu

1

Introduction

How does aggregate demand respond to forward guidance, that is, to news about future monetary policy?
How does aggregate supply respond to news about future productivity? How do asset prices respond to
news about future earnings?
Standard practice in macroeconomics and ﬁnance is to address such questions by assuming rational
expectations along with common knowledge of the relevant news and of the structure of the economy. This
imposes that the agents have a perfect and common understanding of the effects of the news on current and
future economic outcomes. For instance, in the context of forward guidance, it is standard to assume not
only that everybody is aware of and attentive to the policy announcement, but also that nobody doubts the
awareness, the attentiveness, and the responsiveness of other agents. As a result, the agents have no doubts
about how inﬂation and income—the product of the behavior of others—will adjust.
In this paper, we accommodate such doubts by removing common knowledge of the relevant news
and introducing higher-order uncertainty, that is, by allowing the agents to be uncertain about the beliefs
and the responses of others. This friction can be the by-product of either dispersed private information, as
in Lucas (1972) and Morris and Shin (2002), or rational inattention and costly contemplation, as in Sims
(2003) and Tirole (2015). It can thus be interpreted interchangeably as a form of coordination failure that
is consistent with equilibrium uniqueness, and as a form of bounded rationality that is consistent with the
rational-expectations equilibrium concept.
Our contribution is to show that this friction attenuates general-equilibrium effects, such as those associated with the Keynesian multiplier and the inﬂation-spending feedback in the New Keynesian model, and
causes the economy to respond to news about the future as if the agents were myopic. These insights shed
new light on topical policy questions such as the power of forward guidance and the optimal timing of ﬁscal
stimuli. More generally, they highlight the fragility of predictions that rest on long series of forward-looking,
general-equilibrium feedback loops.
The New Keynesian Model without Common Knowledge. In Sections 3 and 4, we revisit the New Keynesian model, relax its common-knowledge assumptions, and show how its building blocks, the modern
versions of the IS and Philips curves, can be embedded into a class of games that we call dynamic beauty
contests. This serves three goals. First, it clariﬁes the three general-equilibrium (GE) mechanisms that operate within the New Keynesian model: the spending-income multiplier running within the demand block, the
strategic complementarity in price-setting running within the supply block, and the inﬂation-spending feedback running across the two blocks. Second, it unearths the role of higher-order beliefs that lie underneath
these mechanisms. Third, it motivates the more abstract analysis of Section 5.
GE Attenuation and the Horizon Effect in Dynamic Beauty Contests. Section 5 studies a class of games
in which optimal decisions today depend positively on expectations of the future decisions of others. It nests
the building blocks of the New Keynesian model, but is not limited to them.1
1

Note the crucial difference from the static beauty contests studied in Morris and Shin (2002), Woodford (2003a), Angeletos
and Pavan (2007), and Bergemann and Morris (2013): in these works, behavior is not forward-looking.

1

Within this framework, we ask the following question: How does the aggregate outcome today (at t = 0)
respond to the news about the fundamental in a future date (at t = T ≥ 1)? In our leading application
(forward guidance), this question refers to the response of aggregate spending and employment to the news
about the policy rate T periods later.
Clearly, the answer to this question depends on how precise and credible the news is, because these
factors control how much the forecasts of the policy instrument, or other fundamentals, vary in the ﬁrst
place. But this is not what we are after in this paper. Instead, we study the response of the aggregate
outcome relative to that of the aforementioned forecasts.
Denote this relative response by ϕT . Next, let ϕ∗T be the value that obtains in the frictionless, commonknowledge benchmark. This can be decomposed into two components:

ϕ∗T = ϕPT E + ϕGE
T ,
where ϕPT E captures the direct or partial-equilibrium (PE) effect, namely the response of the typical agent
2
holding constant the response of others, and ϕGE
T captures the additional, general-equilibrium (GE) effect.

Under quite general assumptions on the information structure, we establish the following three properties
about the value of ϕT that obtains away from the common-knowledge benchmark.
1. The lack of common knowledge dulls the GE effect. As a result, ϕT is bounded between ϕPT E and ϕ∗T ,
and is closer to ϕPT E when there is more higher-order uncertainty. We refer to this property as “GE
attenuation.”
2. This attenuation is stronger the longer the horizon of the news or, equivalently, the longer the series of
forward-looking, general-equilibrium feedback loops. As a result, the ratio ϕT /ϕ∗T decreases with T.
We refer to this property as the “horizon effect.”
3. Under a mild condition, the attenuation grows without bound, and ϕT becomes vanishingly small
relative to ϕ∗T , as T → ∞. This is our “limit result.”
Let us explain the reasoning behind these ﬁndings. To begin with, note that the GE effect is driven by beliefs
of the future behavior of others. In equilibrium, these beliefs can be expressed as functions of the hierarchy
of beliefs of the future fundamental (e.g., the future policy rate). Understanding the GE effect is therefore
akin to understanding the hierarchy of beliefs.
In the common-knowledge benchmark, the role of higher-order beliefs is concealed due to the property
that higher-order beliefs co-move perfectly with ﬁrst-order beliefs. But this property is degenerate: away
from that benchmark, higher-order beliefs tend to move less than lower-order beliefs, because they are
more anchored to the common prior. By the same token, the expectations of future endogenous outcomes
adjust relatively little to the news and the GE effect is attenuated. This proves our ﬁrst result.
2

In our framework, the two components have the same sign, meaning that the GE effect reinforces the PE effect. Furthermore,
P ET can decrease with T , because of the discounting embedded in individual preferences. Yet, GET can increase with T, and
may even explode as T → ∞, because of powerful general-equilibrium feedback loops.

2

Our second result, the horizon effect, follows from the combination of the aforementioned anchoring of
higher-order beliefs with a property that is embedded in the class of forward-looking games studied in this
paper. In this class, longer horizons raise the relative importance of higher-order beliefs in equilibrium outcomes, thus also reinforcing the attenuation effect. This is because longer horizons involve more iterations
of the forward-looking, Euler-like equations of the model, which in turn map to beliefs of higher order. In a
nutshell, iterating on dynamic GE feedback loops is akin to ascending the hierarchy of beliefs.
Finally, our limit result follows from combining the above insight with the fact that inﬁnite-order beliefs
are pegged at the common prior and are therefore unresponsive to the news, even if the level of inattentiveness, or the idiosyncratic noise in the observation and interpretation of the news, is arbitrarily small.
This result can be seen as a sharp illustration of the horizon effect. But it also contains the following lesson: predictions that hinge on long series of GE feedback loops are particularly fragile to relaxations of the
complete-information, rational-expectations benchmark.3
We complement these results with another, which recasts the informational friction as a form of myopia:
accommodating higher-order uncertainty is akin to having the representative agent discount the future more
heavily at the aggregate level than what is rational at the individual level. Furthermore, the as-if discounting
is larger the stronger the underlying GE effect.4
Policy Lessons. Suppose that the economy is in a liquidity trap and the zero lower bound (ZLB) on the
nominal interest rate binds between today, t = 0, and some future date, t = T − 1 for some known T ≥ 2.
Because of this constraint, the monetary authority is unable to stimulate the economy by reducing its current
policy rate. It can nevertheless try to achieve the same goal by committing to low rates at t = T (or later).
The baseline New Keynesian model predicts that the effectiveness of this kind of forward guidance increases
with T and explodes as T → ∞. What is more, the effect is quantitatively huge even for modest T .
These predictions constitute the so-called forward guidance puzzle (Del Negro, Giannoni and Patterson,
2015; McKay, Nakamura and Steinsson, 2016b). They are at odds not only with the available evidence
(Campbell et al., 2012), but also with the logic that news regarding the distant future should be heavily
discounted. This logic is based on PE reasoning. The puzzling predictions are driven by GE effects.
As noted earlier, there are three GE mechanisms at work: the modern version of the Keynesian multiplier, which runs inside the demand block; the dynamic strategic complementarity in the price-setting
decisions of the ﬁrms, which runs inside the supply block; and the inﬂation-spending feedback, which runs
across the two blocks. There mechanisms act as multipliers of the PE effects of monetary policy. Removing
common knowledge arrests these multipliers, thus also bringing the predictions of the model closer to the
aforementioned PE logic.
To illustrate, suppose that each agent worries that any other agent is unaware of, or inattentive to, the
policy news with a 25 percent probability. Under a textbook parameterization (Galí, 2008), this kind of
3
In the New Keynesian model, examples of such predictions include not only those regarding the power of forward guidance,
but also those regarding the indeterminacy of interest-rate pegs and the so-called neo-Fisherian effects.
4
Apart from offering a sharp representation of how the absence of common knowledge modiﬁes the forward-looking behavior
of the economy, this result also rationalizes the kind of myopia assumed in Gabaix (2016).

3

doubt reduces the power of forward guidance by about 90 percent at the 5-year horizon. Importantly, this
attenuation is relative to the movements in expectations of interest rates. Our theory therefore helps explain
why forward guidance may have a modest effect on expectations of inﬂation and income, and on actual
activity, relative to its effect on the yield curve.
Turning to ﬁscal policy, the standard New Keynesian model predicts that, in the presence of a binding ZLB
constraint, a ﬁscal stimulus of a given size is more effective when it is back-loaded, i.e. when it is announced
now but implemented later on. This prediction hinges on the same GE feedback loops as those that govern
the power of forward guidance. A variant of the aforementioned results therefore offers a rationale for the
front-loading of ﬁscal stimuli: such front-loading improves coordination in the sense of reducing the bite of
higher-order uncertainty.
Remark. Our work invites the analyst to study the role of higher-order beliefs. It does not, however,
require that the agents themselves engage in higher-order reasoning. Instead, as in any rational-expectations
context, it sufﬁces that their expectations of the relevant economic outcomes, such as inﬂation and income,
are consistent with actual behavior. From this perspective, our analysis is a revision of the predictions that
the analyst can make, once she liberates the rational-expectations hypothesis from the auxiliary assumption
that the agents face no doubts about the information, or the attentiveness, of others.
Layout. Section 2 discusses the related literature. Section 3 introduces our version of the New Keynesian
model. Section 4 nests the demand and supply blocks of that model within the class of dynamic beauty
contests that we consider. Section 5, which is self-contained, studies this class of games and develops the
key theoretical results. Sections 6 and 7 work out the implications for, respectively, monetary and ﬁscal
policy. Section 8 concludes the main text. The Appendix contains the proofs and additional results.

2

Related Literature

On the theoretical side, our paper builds heavily on the macroeconomic literature on incomplete information
and beauty contests.5 Some of this literature, including Morris and Shin (2002) and Woodford (2003a),
focuses on static beauty contests, namely settings in which the agents only have to forecast the concurrent
actions of others. By contrast, Allen, Morris and Shin (2006), Bacchetta and van Wincoop (2006), Morris and
Shin (2006), and Nimark (2008, 2017) study dynamic beauty contests, namely settings in which the agents
must forecast the future actions of others. Our paper shares with the latter set of works the emphasis on
forward-looking expectations. But whereas these works focus on the effects of learning, our paper focuses
on the horizon of the events that the agents have to forecast.
On the applied side, our paper adds to the recent literature on the forward-guidance puzzle. Del Negro,
Giannoni and Patterson (2015) and McKay, Nakamura and Steinsson (2016b) seek to resolve the puzzle
by introducing short horizons and liquidity constraints, and Andrade et al. (2015) do so by letting forward
guidance confound good news about the future policy instrument with bad news about other fundamen5

See Angeletos and Lian (2016c) for a survey.

4

tals. We make an orthogonal point: we show how higher-order uncertainty anchors income and inﬂation
expectations, thus attenuating the GE effects of forward guidance.
Related forms of GE attenuation can be found in Farhi and Werning (2017) and Gabaix (2016). Farhi and
Werning (2017) obtain such attenuation by replacing Rational Expectations Equilibrium (REE) with Levelk Thinking, an approach that follows the lead of Garcıa-Schmidt and Woodford (2015). Gabaix (2016)
achieves the same goal by assuming that beliefs are biased in the direction of underestimating the persistence
of the underlying shocks and of their effects on the economy. We refer the interested reader to Angeletos
and Lian (2016a) for a detailed exposition of how these approaches connect to and differ from ours.6
Closely related is the earlier work of Wiederholt (2015). That paper notes that higher-order uncertainty
can dull the inﬂation-spending feedback of the New Keynesian model, thus also reducing the power of
forward guidance. However, that paper does not consider how higher-order uncertainty can attenuate the
GE effects that run inside each block of the model. Most importantly, it does not consider how the impact
of higher-order uncertainty on equilibrium outcomes and the resulting weakening of forward guidance vary
with the horizon of the events that the agents need to forecast, which is the core contribution of our paper.
Finally, Chung, Herbst and Kiley (2015) and Kiley (2016) argue that some of the paradoxical predictions
of the New Keynesian model are resolved once the nominal rigidity is attributed to sticky information as in
Mankiw and Reis (2002). But this is largely because these works abstract entirely from the price stickiness
seen at the micro data and from the forward-looking aspect in the ﬁrms’ price-setting decisions. These works
also rule out information frictions among the consumers. They therefore do not share our insights regarding
the anchoring of forward-looking expectations and the attenuation of the associated GE effects.

3

Framework

In this section, we introduce the framework used for the applied purposes of the paper. This is the same as
the textbook New Keynesian model (Woodford, 2003b; Galí, 2008), except that we allow the agents to face
uncertainty about the information, the beliefs, and the behavior of others.
Consumers. There is a measure-one continuum of ex-ante identical consumers in the economy, indexed
by i ∈ Ic = [0, 1]. Preferences are given by

Ui,0 =

+∞
∑

β t U (ci,t , ni,t ),

(1)

t=0

where ci,t and ni,t denote the consumer’s consumption and labor supply at period t, β ∈ (0, 1) is the discount
6

Let us brieﬂy note the key differences. Because our approach is compatible with the REE concept, it bypasses a challenge
faced by the aforementioned works, namely what the agents do when they experience again and again a reality that is inconsistent
with their beliefs. Our approach is also easier to reconcile with the evidence in Coibion and Gorodnichenko (2012, 2015) and
Vellekoop and Wiederholt (2017), which indicate that the dynamics of expectations, as measured in surveys, is broadly consistent
with models that maintain the REE concept but allow for informational frictions and slow learning. Finally, while the form of GE
attenuation captured by our approach is robust to settings in which GE effects offset PE effects (think of settings featuring strategic
substitutability), this is not the case for Level-k Thinking.

5

factor, and U is the per-period utility function. The latter is speciﬁed as

U (c, n) =

1−1/σ
1
1−1/σ c

−

1+ϵ
1
,
1+ϵ n

where σ > 0 is the elasticity of intertemporal substitution and ϵ > 0 is the inverse of the Frisch elasticity.
The budget constraint in period t is given, in real terms, by the following:

ci,t + si,t =

Rt−1
si,t−1 + wi,t ni,t + ei,t ,
πt

(2)

where si,t is the consumer’s saving in period t, Rt−1 is the nominal gross interest rate between t − 1 and

t, πt ≡ pt /pt−1 is the gross inﬂation rate, pt is the aggregate price level at t, and wi,t and ei,t are the
real wage and the real dividend received by the consumer. The wage and the dividend are allowed to be
consumer-speciﬁc for reasons that will be explained shortly. We ﬁnally denote aggregate consumption by
∫
∫
ct = Ic ci,t di, aggregate labor supply by nt = Ic ni,t di, and so on.
Firms. There is a measure-one continuum of ex-ante identical ﬁrms, indexed by j ∈ If = (1, 2]. Each
of these ﬁrms is a monopolist that produces a differentiated intermediate-good variety. The output of ﬁrm j
is denoted by ytj , its nominal price is denoted by pjt , and its real proﬁt is denoted by ejt . The technology is
assumed to be linear in labor and productivity is ﬁxed to one, so that

ytj = ltj ,

(3)

where ltj is the labor input. These intermediate goods are used by a competitive sector as inputs in the
production of the ﬁnal good. The technology is CES with elasticity ς > 1. Aggregate output is thus given by

(∫
yt =

If

( ) ς−1
ς
ytj
dj

)

ς
ς−1

,

(4)

The corresponding price index—that is, the nominal price level—is denoted by pt .
Sticky Prices. Nominal rigidity takes the familiar, Calvo-like, form: in each period, a randomly selected
fraction θ ∈ (0, 1] of the ﬁrms must keep prices unchanged, while the rest can reset them.
Monetary Policy. For the time being, we do not need to specify how monetary policy is conducted. To
ﬁx ideas, however, it is useful to think of a situation where the agents know what the policy will be in the
short run (say, because the ZLB is binding) but face uncertainty about the policy in the more distant future.
In this context, the question of interest is how outcomes today vary with the expectations of the future policy.
Rational Expectations and Common Knowledge. Throughout, we impose Rational Expectations Equilibrium (REE). We nevertheless depart from standard practice by removing common knowledge of the state
of Nature, accommodating higher-order uncertainty, and preventing the agents from reaching a consensus
on the future path of the economy.7
7

By deﬁnition, the state of Nature contains the entire proﬁle of the information sets in the population. Furthermore, in any given

6

In abstract games, such as those studied in Morris and Shin (2002, 2003) or in Section 5 of our paper,
lack of common knowledge can be directly imposed by endowing each agent with exogenous private information (or different Harsanyi types). In macro and ﬁnance applications, however, there is the complication
that market signals, such as prices, aggregate information. To preserve the absence of common knowledge, we either have to make sure there is “noise” in the available market signals (Grossman and Stiglitz,
1980), or assume that the observation of all the relevant variables, including the available market signals, is
contaminated by idiosyncratic noise due to rational inattention (Sims, 2003).
We follow the ﬁrst approach in our New Keynesian application in order to make clear that our policy
lessons are robust to allowing each consumer to observe her own income, each ﬁrm to observe her own
demand and supply conditions, and everybody to have common knowledge of the current monetary policy
and the current price level. We nevertheless like the second approach, too, because it bypasses the need for
the auxiliary shocks described below and because it allows the re-interpretation of the assumed friction as
“costly contemplation” (Tirole, 2015). Section 5 therefore allows for a ﬂexible interpretation of the friction
under consideration and Appendix B sketches in more detail how our insights can be recast under the lenses
of rational inattention.
The Auxiliary Shocks. Take any period t and let wt , et , and µt denote, respectively, the average real
wage, the average ﬁrm proﬁt, and the average markup in the economy. The real wage and the dividend
received by consumer i at t are given by, respectively, wi,t = wt ξi,t and ei,t = et ζi,t , where ξi,t and ζi,t are
i.i.d. across i and t, independent of one another, and independent of any other random variable in the
economy. On the other hand, the real wage paid by ﬁrm j is wtj = wt ujt , and the markup charged by it is

µjt = µt νtj , where ujt and νtj are i.i.d. across both j and t, independent of one another, and independent of
any other random variable in the economy. One can interpret ujt and νtj as idiosyncratic shocks to a ﬁrm’s
marginal cost and her optimal markup, and ξi,t and ζi,t as idiosyncratic shocks to a consumer’s labor and
ﬁnancial income.8 Finally, the aggregate markup shock, µt , is also i.i.d. over time and independent of any
other variable.
As anticipated, the sole modeling role of all these shocks is to “noise up” the information that each
agent can extract from the available market signals. We can thus accommodate the desired friction while
allowing, in every t, each consumer i to have private knowledge of (wi,t , ei,t ), each monopolist j to have
private knowledge of (wtj , µjt ), and everybody to have common knowledge of the current interest rate, Rt ,
of the current prices, (pjt )j∈[0,1] , and therefore also of the price level.
equilibrium, information sets pin down beliefs of all the endogenous outcomes. It follows that the state of Nature can encode
arbitrary news about the future, and that the agents can lack a common belief about the future outcomes only if they lack common
knowledge of the state of Nature.
8
Although we treat these shocks as exogenous, it is not hard to ﬁll in the missing micro-foundations. For instance, ﬁrm-speciﬁc
markup shocks can be micro-founded by allowing for good-speciﬁc shocks to the elasticity of the demand faced by each monopolist.
Similarly, consumer- and ﬁrm-speciﬁc wage shocks can be justiﬁed by introducing idiosyncratic taste and productivity shocks,
letting labor markets be segmented, and allocating the agents in such a way that there is market-speciﬁc random variation in the
equilibrium wage, translating to idiosyncratic variation in the wage received by a consumer or the wage paid by a ﬁrm.

7

4

The New Keynesian Model as a Pair of Beauty Contests

In this section, we develop our beauty-contest representation of the New Keynesian model. Apart from
motivating the class of games studied in Section 5, this representation reveals how the GE effects of that
model are related to higher-order beliefs.
To keep the analysis tractable, we work with the log-linearization of the model around a steady state in
which inﬂation is zero and the nominal interest rate equals the natural rate (i.e. βR = 1). With abuse of
notation, we henceforth reinterpret all the variables as the log-deviations from their steady-state counterparts
and concentrate on the joint determination of πt and ct (or, equivalently, of πt and yt ).
Proposition 1 (Beauty Contests) In any equilibrium, and regardless of the level of higher-order uncertainty,
the following properties are true. First, aggregate spending satisﬁes

ct = −σ

{ +∞
∑

}
β k−1 Ētc [rt+k ]

+

1−β
β

{ +∞
∑

}
β k Ētc [ct+k ] ,

(5)

k=1

k=1

where Ētc [·] denotes the average expectation of the consumers and rt ≡ Rt−1 − πt denotes the real interest
rate between t − 1 and t. Second, inﬂation satisﬁes

{
πt = κ

mct +

+∞
∑

}
(βθ)k Ētf

[mct+k ]

+

k=1

1−θ
θ

{ +∞
∑

}
(βθ)k Ētf

[πt+k ]

+ κ µt ,

(6)

k=1

where Ētf [·] denotes the average expectation of the ﬁrms, mct denotes the real marginal cost in period t,
and κ ≡ (1 − θ) (1 − βθ) /θ. Finally, mct = (ϵ + 1/σ)yt and yt = ct .
Condition (5) is a GE variant of the textbook version of the Permanent Income Hypothesis. It follows
from log-linearizing the individual consumption functions, aggregating them, and using market clearing in
the product, labor, and debt markets. It gives aggregate consumption in any given period as an increasing
function of the consumers’ expectations of future aggregate income, which in equilibrium coincides with
aggregate consumption, and as a decreasing function of their expectations of future real interest rates. Condition (6), on the other hand, follows from the optimal price-resetting behavior of the ﬁrms. It gives the
rate of inﬂation as a function of the current real marginal cost and of the ﬁrms’ expectations of the future
marginal costs and the future inﬂation.
In the rest of this section, we ﬁrst show that conditions (5) and (6) reduce to, respectively, the representative consumer’s Euler condition and the New Keynesian Philips Curve (NKPC) once higher-order uncertainty
is assumed away. This clariﬁes the sense in which our result “opens up” these familiar equations away from
the common-knowledge benchmark. We then expand on the three GE mechanisms that are embedded in
the model and on their relation to higher-order beliefs.

8

Relation to the Euler Condition and the NKPC. To begin with, rearrange condition (5) as follows:

ct = −σ Ētc [rt+1 ] + (1 − β)Ētc [ct+1 ]+
{
}
+∞
+∞
∑
∑
β −σ
β k−1 Ētc [rt+1+k ] + 1−β
β k Ētc [ct+1+k ] .
β
k=1

(7)

k=1

Next, compute ct+1 by applying condition (5) in period t + 1, and take the period-t average expectation of
it:

Ētc [ct+1 ] = −σ

+∞
∑

[ c
]
β k−1 Ētc Ēt+1
[rt+1+k ] +

k=1

1−β
β

+∞
∑

[ c
]
β k Ētc Ēt+1
[ct+1+k ] .

(8)

k=1

Clearly, the term inside the big brackets in condition (7) is the same as the one in the right-hand side of
condition (8), except for the difference in the expectation operators. Can we use this observation to recover
the Euler equation of a representative consumer?
In the common-knowledge benchmark, the answer is yes. Because, in any period, all agents are assumed
to share the same information and the same belief, we have Ētc [·] = Et [·], where Et [·] denotes the rational
expectation conditional on the common information set, i.e. the information of the representative agent.
Using this fact and applying the Law of Iterated Expectations for the representative agent, we infer that, for
every k ≥ 1,

[ c
]
Ētc Ēt+1
[rt+1+k ] = Et [Et+1 [rt+1+k ]] = Et [rt+1+k ] = Ētc [rt+1+k ] ,

]
[ c
[ct+1+k ] = Ētc [ct+1+k ]. That is, second-order beliefs coincide with ﬁrst-order beliefs.
and similarly Ētc Ēt+1
It follows that Ētc [ct+1 ] coincides with the term inside the brackets in condition (7). Therefore, this condition
reduces to the familiar, representative-agent Euler condition:

ct = −σ Et [rt+1 ] + Et [ct+1 ].

(9)

A similar argument establishes that, in the common-knowledge benchmark, condition (6) reduces to

πt = κ mct + β Et [π t+1 ] + κ µt ,

(10)

which is the familiar NKPC.9
Away from the common-knowledge benchmark, the above argument breaks because the Law of Iterated
Expectations no longer holds for the average beliefs. In particular, as it will become clear in the next section,
the second-order beliefs of either the exogenous fundamentals or the endogenous outcomes do not coincide
with the corresponding ﬁrst-order beliefs. In the present context, this means that

]
[ c
[rt+1+k ] ̸= Ētc [rt+1+k ]
Ētc Ēt+1

and

9

]
[ c
[ct+1+k ] ̸= Ētc [ct+1+k ] .
Ētc Ēt+1

Using the facts that mct = (ϵ+1/σ)yt and ct = yt , the NKPC can be restated as πt = κyt +βEt [πt+1 ]+ut , where κ ≡ (ϵ+1/σ)κ
is the slope of the NKPC with respect to output and ut ≡ κµt is the so-called cost-push shock.

9

It follows that the term in the bracket in condition (7) does not coincide with Ētc [ct+1 ] and therefore
condition (5) does not reduce to the familiar Euler condition. The same logic explains why condition (6)
cannot be reduced to the familiar NKPC.
To recap, the key lesson so far is that the familiar representation of the New Keynesian model hinges
on the assumption that the agents share the same beliefs, not only about the exogenous impulses, such as
news about current or future monetary policy, but also about the future path of aggregate spending and
inﬂation. When this assumption is imposed, one can understand the equilibrium of the economy as the
solution to a single-agent decision problem: think of a ﬁctitious agent, who controls the vector (ct , πt ) and
whose optimal behavior is described by the dynamic system (9)-(10). When, instead, this assumption is
relaxed, the equilibrium of the economy is better understood as the solution to a complex, multi-layer game
among a large number of differentially informed players.10
The Economy as a Pair of Dynamic Beauty Contests. Consider ﬁrst the behavior of the consumers and,
momentarily, treat the process for the real interest rate as exogenous. Condition (5) then deﬁnes a game in
which the players are the consumers, the actions are the consumers’ spending levels at different periods, and
the payoff-relevant fundamental is the path of real interest rates. This game is a dynamic beauty contest in
the sense that each consumer has an incentive to spend more now when she expects the other consumers to
spend more in the future. This is because higher aggregate consumption translates to higher income, which
in turn justiﬁes more consumption today. Condition (5) therefore isolates the GE mechanism that runs inside
the demand block of the model that is known as the Keynesian multiplier.
Consider next the behavior of the ﬁrms and, momentarily, treat the process of mct as exogenous. Condition (6) then deﬁnes a beauty-contest game in which the players are the ﬁrms, the actions are the prices, and
the relevant fundamental is the average real marginal cost. A dynamic strategic complementary is present in
this game because the optimal reset price of a ﬁrm depends on her expectation of the future path of the nominal price level, which in turn depends on the decisions of other ﬁrms. Condition (6) therefore encapsulates
the GE mechanism that runs inside the supply block.
Finally, consider the interaction of the demand and the supply blocks, that is, the interaction of conditions
(5) and (6). This interaction can be understood as a meta-game between the consumers and the ﬁrms. This
meta-game features dynamic strategic complementarity in the following sense: the consumers ﬁnd it optimal
to spend more now when they expect the ﬁrms to raise their prices in the future, because high inﬂation means
low real returns to saving; and, symmetrically, the ﬁrms ﬁnd it optimal to raise their prices now when they
expect the consumers to spend more in the future, because high aggregate output means high marginal
costs. This GE mechanism is known as the inﬂation-spending feedback.
PE vs GE. Let us momentarily treat the process for the real rate as exogenous and concentrate on the
consumption beauty contest deﬁned by condition (5).
Next, ﬁx a t ≥ 0 and a k ≥ 2, and ask the following question: how does ct varies with the period-t
beliefs of rt+k , holding constant the beliefs of rt+k′ for all k ′ ̸= k ? This formalizes the question of how much
10

These points explain the sense in which higher-order uncertainty can be interpreted as frictional coordination.

10

aggregate spending moves in response to news about future real rates.
From condition (5), we readily see that, if we also hold constant Ēt [ct+k′ ] for all k ′ ≥ 1, a one-unit
reduction in Ēt [rt+k ] raises ct by β k−1 σ. This can be interpreted as a PE effect because it measures the
response of the typical consumer to the interest rate faced by himself, holding constant his beliefs about
the future behavior of all other consumers, thus also holding constant his expectations of future income.11
By the same token, the GE effect is tied to how much the typical consumer expects the other consumers to
adjust their spending in the future.
From GE to Higher-Order Beliefs. Understanding the adjustment in the expectations of aggregate spending and the associated GE effect is formally equivalent to understanding the hierarchy of beliefs.
For instance, consider Ētc [ct+1 ], the average expectation of the next-period aggregate spending. From
condition (5), ct+1 can be expressed as a function of the period-(t + 1) ﬁrst-order beliefs of the future real
rates and the future aggregate spending. It follows that Ētc [ct+1 ] is a function of the period-t second-order
beliefs of the future rates and the future aggregate spending, a fact already shown in condition (8). Using
the same logic again and again, we can express the second-order beliefs of future spending—the last term
in condition (8)—as functions of third- and higher-order beliefs of the future real rates. We conclude that
understanding how the rational expectations of future aggregate spending and income adjust to news about
future real rates is formally the same as understanding how the ﬁrst- and higher-order beliefs of the future
rates adjust to the news.
A similar point applies if we focus on the beauty contest deﬁned by condition (6), or if we consider the
meta-game between the demand and the supply blocks of the economy: understanding the GE adjustment
to any news is equivalent to understanding the associated movement in the relevant higher-order beliefs.
This explains where we are heading next: by recasting the GE effects of news about the future in terms
of higher-order beliefs, we explain why these effects lose steam once one departs from the familiar but
unrealistic common-knowledge benchmark.

5

Dynamic Beauty Contests
This section contains the broader theoretical contribution of our paper. In this section, we side-step the

micro-foundations and establish our main insights within a more abstract class of dynamic beauty contests.
This class nests not only the two blocks of the New Keynesian model, but also other applications, such
as incomplete-information asset-pricing models in the tradition of Singleton (1987). Moreover, we remain
agnostic about the origins of higher-order uncertainty. This helps clarify that our lessons do not hinge on
whether such uncertainty is the product of dispersed private information or of cognitive constraints along
11

Strictly speaking, this is the PE effect plus the “within-period” GE effect, namely, the feedback effect between aggregate spending
and the contemporaneous level of income. In the version of the model we have considered, this within-period GE effect is not
attenuated because each consumer knows perfectly her current income and each ﬁrm knows perfectly her current marginal cost.
Had we relaxed these assumptions, we could have attenuated this effect as well. In any event, this effect is of little interest since it
vanishes as the length of the time interval shrinks to zero, which justiﬁes the interpretation of β T −1 σ as the PE effect.

11

the line of Sims (2003) and Tirole (2015).12

5.1

Set up

Time is discrete, indexed by t ∈ {0, 1, ...}, and there is a continuum of players, indexed by i ∈ [0, 1]. In each
period t, each agent i chooses an action ai,t ∈ R. We denote the corresponding average action by at and
let Θt ∈ R denote an exogenous fundamental that becomes commonly known in period t.
We specify the best response of player i in period t as follows:
(11)

ai,t = Θt + γEi,t [ai,t+1 ] + αEi,t [at+1 ] ,

where α, γ > 0 are ﬁxed parameters. Note that a player’s optimal action in any given period depends on her
expectation of both her own and the aggregate action in the next period. The former effect is parameterized
by γ , the latter by α.
By iterating condition (11) forward, aggregating across i, and letting Ēt [·] denote the average expectation
in period t, we reach the following representation of the beauty contest under consideration:

at = Θ t + γ

{ +∞
∑

}
γ k−1 Ēt [Θt+k ]

+α

{ +∞
∑

}
γ k−1 Ēt [at+k ]

∀t ≥ 0.

(12)

k=1

k=1

This is the key equation we work with in this section. It relates the aggregate outcome in any given period
to the concurrent fundamental, the average forecasts of the future fundamentals, and the average forecasts
of the future aggregate outcomes. The ﬁrst two terms capture the direct or PE effect of the current and future
fundamentals; the GE effect is captured by the last term, which regards the actions of others. Under this
interpretation, α parameterizes the importance of the GE effect.
When all agents share the same information, so that Ēt [·] = Et [·] is the rational expectation of a representative agent, we can use the Law of Iterated Expectations to restate condition (12) as follows:

at = Θt + δEt [at+1 ]

∀t ≥ 0,

(13)

where δ ≡ γ + α. The above can be thought of as an aggregate-level Euler condition and δ as the effective
discount factor that governs how much current outcomes depend on expectations of future outcomes. This
dependence reﬂects the combination of PE and GE effects, as indicated by the fact that δ is given by the sum
of γ and α. Yet, by looking at equation (13) alone, it is impossible to tell these effects apart. This explains
why it is important to “open up” this equation to (12), just as we did with the representative agent’s Euler
condition and the NKPC in the previous section: the distinction between PE and GE effects becomes crucial
12

By sidestepping the micro-foundations, we not only speak to a larger class of environments, but also abstract from the kind of
auxiliary shocks that were necessary before in order to limit the endogenous aggregation of information through markets. This rules
out the possibility that agents confuse one kind of fundamental for another (say, the news about future monetary policy with news
about the idiosyncratic components of wage and markups), isolates the role of higher-order uncertainty about the fundamental of
interest, and clariﬁes why our contribution is orthogonal to that of Lucas (1972). It also rules out the ampliﬁcation mechanism
studied in Chahrour and Gaballo (2017), which rests on such confusion.

12

once the common-knowledge assumption is dropped.
Interpretation. Condition (12) directly nests the supply block of our New Keynesian model: just interpret

Θt as the real marginal cost scaled by κ , interpret at as inﬂation, and set γ = βθ and α = β(1 − θ). Similarly,
to nest the demand block, interpret Θt as the real interest rate scaled by −σ , interpret at as the aggregate
level of spending, and set γ = β and α = 1 − β .13 Moving to a different application, consider the class
of incomplete-information asset-pricing models studied in Singleton (1987), Allen, Morris and Shin (2006),
Bacchetta and van Wincoop (2006), and Nimark (2017). These models feature a single asset (“stock market”)
and overlapping generations of differentially informed traders. The equilibrium asset price is shown to satisfy
the following condition:

pt = dt − st + β Ēt [pt+1 ],
where pt , dt , and st denote the period-t price, dividend, and supply, respectively, and Ēt [·] is the average
expectation of the period-t traders. The above can be nested in condition (12) by letting Θt = dt − st ,

at = pt , α = β and γ = 0.14 This indicates, not only the broader applicability of the insights we develop in
the rest of this section, but also that the aggregate outcome at can be a market-clearing price in a Walrasian
setting rather than the average action of a set of players.
The Question of Interest. How does aggregate spending respond to news about future real interest rates?
How does inﬂation respond to news about future real marginal costs? How do asset prices respond to news
about future dividends? In the rest of this section, we seek to answer this kind of questions without taking
a speciﬁc stand on how precise or credible the available news is, or how exactly it has to be modeled. We
achieve this by focusing on how the aggregate outcome covaries with the concurrent forecasts of future
fundamentals, and by abstracting from the exact source and magnitude of the variation in these forecasts.
More speciﬁcally, we ﬁx an arbitrary T ≥ 2 and isolate the role of news about the period-T fundamental,

ΘT , by shutting down the uncertainty about the fundamentals in any other period. Without any loss, we
then let Θt = 0 for all t ̸= T and treat ΘT as the only random fundamental.15 We also anchor the beliefs of
the aggregate outcome “at inﬁnity” by imposing that limk→∞ γ k Ei,t [at+k ] = 0 with probability one. This is
akin to ruling out inﬁnite-horizon bubbles and can be justiﬁed either by letting the game end at any ﬁnite
period T ′ > T, or by imposing that γ < 1 and that at is bounded. We ﬁnally state the question of interest as
13
A minor qualiﬁcation is needed here. In our version of the New Keynesian model, the consumers do not know the real
interest rate between today and tomorrow because they have to forecast tomorrow’s inﬂation. It follows that we cannot simply let
Θt = −σrt+1 . That said, we can nest the demand block in condition (12) as it is if we assume that prices are completely rigid
(θ = 1), ﬁx inﬂation at zero, and let Θt = −σRt . For the more general case in which inﬂation is variable, we can either modify the
model so that rt+1 is observed, or nest the existing version of the demand block in the variant of (12) that replaces Θt with Ēt [Θt ] .
The results developed in the sequel are robust to such modiﬁcations.
14
The restriction γ = 0 means that the aggregate outcome today depends only on the average expectation of the aggregate
outcome tomorrow, as opposed to the entire path of the aggregate outcome in the future. Relative to the more general case we
study here, this restriction decreases dramatically the dimensionality of the higher-order beliefs that the aforementioned works had
to deal with. The most essential difference, however, between these works and ours is that they focus on the effects of learning
whereas we focus on the effects of different horizons.
15
Setting Θt = 0 for all t ̸= T is equivalent to isolating the variation in hierarchy of beliefs about the period-T fundamental
that is orthogonal to variations in belief hierarchy about the fundamentals in other periods. Our result can thus be read as an
“orthogonalization” of the effects of different horizons. Without any loss, we also normalize the unconditional mean of ΘT to be
zero.

13

follows: how does a0 , the current outcome, covary with Ē0 [ΘT ], the current average forecast of the future
fundamental?

5.2

Complete vs. Incomplete Information

In what follows, we study how the answer to the aforementioned question varies as we move from the
frictionless benchmark typically studied in applied work to the more realistic scenario in which the agents
are uncertain about one another’s beliefs and actions. To ﬁx language, and to rule out trivial cases in which
the informational friction relates only to variables that are immaterial for our purposes, we introduce the
following deﬁnitions.
Deﬁnition 1 We say that information is complete, or that the agents have common knowledge of the available news, if Ei,t [ΘT ] = Ej,t [ΘT ] with probability one for all (i, j, t) such that i ̸= j and t ≤ T − 1. (And
when the converse is true, we say that information is incomplete.)
Deﬁnition 2 We say that the agents are able to reach a consensus about the future trajectory of the economy
if Ei,t [aτ ] = Ej,t [aτ ] with probability one for all (i, j, t, τ ) such that i ̸= j and t < τ ≤ T .
Note that the ﬁrst notion regards the beliefs the agents hold about the exogenous fundamental, whereas
the second notion regards the beliefs the agents form about the endogenous outcomes. While conceptually
distinct, the two notions are tied together under the rational-expectations hypothesis.
Proposition 2 Along any rational-expectations equilibrium, lack of consensus about the future outcomes is
possible only when information is incomplete.
This clariﬁes the modeling role, and our preferred interpretation, of the introduced friction. What is at
stake here is not how much the agents know about the fundamentals, but rather the ability to coordinate their
beliefs and their responses to the exogenous impulses (the news). Accordingly, the comparisons we develop
in the sequel between complete- and incomplete-information economies hold true even if the agents in the
incomplete-information economy are better informed than their counterparts in the complete-information
economy, in the sense of facing less ﬁrst-order uncertainty about ΘT .16
The Frictionless Benchmark. As a reference point for our subsequent analysis, we ﬁrst answer the question of interest in the absence of higher-order uncertainty, that is, under complete information.
Lemma 1 Suppose that information is complete. For all states of Nature,

a0 = ϕ∗T · E0 [ΘT ],
16

(14)

In line with this point, the obtained lessons are also robust to replacing Θt in condition (11) with θi,t = Θt + vi,t , where vi,t is
i.i.d. across agents, and letting each agent i know at t = 0 the entire path of θi,t ; that is, we could have eliminated the uncertainty
the typical agent faces about the fundamentals that matter for her own decisions (e.g., the uncertainty a consumer faces about her
own interest rates), and yet preserve her uncertainty about the beliefs and the decisions of others (e.g., the consumer’s uncertainty
about aggregate spending and inﬂation).

14

where ϕ∗T = δ T ≡ (γ + α)T .
The scalar ϕ∗T measures how much the aggregate outcome covaries with the average forecast of the
fundamental T periods later. This scalar is easily computed by iterating on condition (13), which is the
aggregate-level Euler condition of the complete-information economy. Indeed, since Θt = 0 for all t ̸= T,
−1
we have aT = ΘT and at = ϕ∗T −t Et [ΘT ] for every t ≤ T −1, where {ϕ∗T −t }Tt=0
solves the following recursion:

ϕ∗T −t = δϕ∗T −t−1

∀t ≤ T − 1,

(15)

with terminal condition ϕ∗0 = 1. It follows that ϕ∗T = δ T , where, recall, δ ≡ γ + α and where γ and α
parameterize, respectively, PE and GE effects.
The exact interpretation of ϕ∗T and its magnitude depend, of course, on the application under consideration. Consider, for example, the demand block of the New Keynesian model, in isolation of the supply
block. In this context, ϕ∗T measures the response of aggregate spending in period 0 to the concurrent expectation of the real interest rate in period T , holding constant the expectations of the real interest rate in all
other periods. In the textbook version of the New Keynesian model, this object is the same regardless of T.17
In the variant studied by McKay, Nakamura and Steinsson (2016a), on the other hand, the corresponding
object is decaying with T, due to liquidity constraints.
What is of interest to us, however, is not how ϕ∗T varies as we move from one complete-information
application to another, but rather how it compares to its incomplete-information counterpart. We address
this question in the rest of the section. But lets us ﬁrst note three facts about ϕ∗T . First, ϕ∗T is invariant to
the precision of the representative agent’s information that is available at t = 0. Second, ϕ∗T is the same
regardless of whether the representative agent expects to receive additional information between t = 0 and

t = T or not. Finally, the decomposition between PE and GE effects is irrelevant; all that matters is the
combined effect, herein parameterized by δ ≡ γ + α.
The Frictional Case. We henceforth focus on the scenario in which the agents face higher-order uncertainty and are therefore unable to reach a perfect consensus about the response of the economy to any given
news about ΘT . This raises the delicate question of whether and how the level of higher-order uncertainty
evolves over time. For the time being, we bypass this complication by making the following simplifying
assumption.
Assumption 1 There is no learning between t = 0 and t = T, at which point ΘT becomes commonly known.
As noted a moment ago, learning is inconsequential in the complete-information benchmark. This is
no more true when information is incomplete, for reasons discussed later. Nevertheless, Assumption 1 is a
useful starting point for three reasons. First, it affords an otherwise general speciﬁcation of the information
structure and yields the sharpest version of our results. Second, it separates our results from prior works that
study the implications of learning. Third, it can be relaxed without compromising our main lessons.
17
This is readily seen by iterating the Euler condition of the representative consumer. It also follows from our earlier observation
that the demand block is nested with γ = β and α = 1 − β, which means that δ = 1 and hence that ϕ∗T does not vary with T.

15

Let us ﬁll in the remaining details. Notwithstanding Assumption 1, we accommodate an otherwise arbitrary information structure. We ﬁrst let a random variable s encapsulate the realization of the fundamental

ΘT along with any other aggregate shock that inﬂuences the information and the beliefs of the agents; we
refer to s as the underlying state of Nature. We next represent the information of agent i by a random variable ωi , which is itself correlated with s. Along with the fact that there is no learning, this means that, for all

t ≤ T − 1, Ei,t [·] = Ei,0 [·] = E[·|ωi ], where E[·|ωi ] is the rational expectation conditional on ωi . We refer to
s as the aggregate state of Nature and to ωi as the signal of agent i. Conditional on s, this signal is an i.i.d.
draw from a ﬁxed distribution, whose p.d.f. is given by ϕ(ω|s). This signal therefore encodes the information
that agent i has, not only about the fundamental ΘT , but also about the entire state of Nature and thereby
about the beliefs of other agents. In short, ωi is the Harsanyi type of agent i, that is, an object that governs the
agent’s expectations of all the endogenous outcomes along any given equilibrium. We ﬁnally assume that
a law of large number applies in the sense that ϕ(ω|s) is also the cross-sectional distribution of the signals
in the population when the aggregate state is s.
Because the state s can be an arbitrary random variable, the speciﬁcation we have introduced above
allows for rich ﬁrst- and higher-order uncertainty and nests a variety of examples that can be found in
the literature. For instance, we may let the aggregate state be s = (ΘT , u), where ΘT ∼ N (0, σθ2 ) and

u ∼ N (0, σu2 ) are independent of one another, and specify the signal as ωi = (z, xi ), where z = ΘT + u,
xi = ΘT + vi , and vi ∼ N (0, σv2 ) is independent of s and i.i.d. across i. This case nests the information
structure assumed in Morris and Shin (2002): each agent receives two signals about ΘT , a private one
given by xi , and a public one given by z . Alternatively, we may modify the aforementioned case by letting

ωi = (zi , xi ), with xi as before and zi = z + ηi , ηi ∼ N (0, ση2 ). In this case, there is a public signal z , whose
observation is, however, contaminated by idiosyncratic noise, perhaps due to rational inattention a la Sims
(2003). As yet another example, we could let the aggregate state be s = (ΘT , σ), where ΘT ∼ N (0, σθ2 ) and

σ ∼ U [σ, σ̄], and specify the signal as ωi = (xi , σi ), where xi = ΘT +vi , vi ∼ N (0, σi2 ), σi ∼ U [σ −∆, σ +∆],
and ∆, σ, σ̄ being known scalars such that 0 < ∆ < σ < σ̄. In this case, some agents are better informed
than others, and each agent is uncertain about how informed or uninformed the other agents are.
By adopting this level of generality, we seek, not only to clarify the robustness of our insights, but also
to bypass the need for taking a speciﬁc stand on what the available signals are and how the higher-order
uncertainty is generated. This also explains why most of our results in this section are formulated in terms of
how outcomes depend on the belief hierarchy, as opposed to how they depend on a speciﬁc set of signals.
A concrete example, however, will also be considered.

5.3

Attenuation and the Horizon Effect

An instrumental step towards addressing the question of interest is to understand the role of higher-order
beliefs. Since Θt is ﬁxed at zero for all t ̸= T and ΘT becomes commonly known at t = T, we have at = 0

16

for all t ≥ T + 1, aT = ΘT , and, for all t ≤ T − 1,

at = γ T −t Ēt [ΘT ] + α

T −t
∑

γ k−1 Ēt [at+k ] .

(16)

k=1

By Assumption 1 (no learning), Ēt [·] = Ē0 [·] for all t ≤ T − 1. Using this fact, and iterating the above
condition backwards, we reach the following lemma, which represents the period-0 outcome as a linear
function of the concurrent average ﬁrst- and higher-order expectations of ΘT .
Lemma 2 For every (α, γ, T ), there exist positive scalars {χh,T }Th=1 such that, regardless of the information
structure,

T {
}
∑
a0 =
χh,T · Ē0h [ΘT ] ,

(17)

h=1

where Ē0h [·] is deﬁned recursively by Ē01 [·] = Ē0 [·] and Ē0h [·] = Ē0 [Ē0h−1 [·]] for every h ≥ 2.
The weights χh,T can be constructed recursively, as functions of α, γ, h, and T alone; see Appendix A
for details. Here, we focus on the interpretation and the implications of Lemma 2.
Applied to the demand block of the New Keynesian model, this lemma means that today’s aggregate
spending is determined by the hierarchy of beliefs about future real interest rates. Applied to the supply
block, it means that today’s inﬂation is determined by the hierarchy of beliefs about future real marginal
costs. In both the textbook version of the New Keynesian model and in the richer DSGE versions used
for quantitative policy evaluation, this kind of higher-order beliefs is “swept under the carpet” because the
complete-information assumption lets higher-order beliefs collapse to ﬁrst-order beliefs.
To see this point in the abstract context under consideration, note that when higher-order beliefs coincide
)
(∑
T
χ
· Ē0 [ΘT ] . Along with Lemma 1, this
with ﬁrst-order beliefs, condition (17) reduces to a0 =
h,T
h=1
also means that the complete-information outcome satisﬁes the following restriction:

ϕ∗T =

T
∑

χh,T .

(18)

h=1

By the same token, the weights {χh,T } do not matter per se: all that matters for equilibrium behavior is their
sum, ϕ∗T .
When, instead, information is incomplete, higher-order beliefs no longer coincide with ﬁrst-order beliefs.
To understand how a0 covaries with Ē0 [ΘT ] , we must therefore understand two things: ﬁrst, how higherorder beliefs covary with ﬁrst-order beliefs; and second, how the beliefs of different order load into a0 , that
is, what the structure of the weights {χh,T } is. We complete these tasks in the sequel—but ﬁrst we state the
ultimate lesson.
Theorem 1 Suppose that information is incomplete. There exists a positive scalar ϕT , which depends on
both T and the information structure, such that the following properties hold:
17

(i) For all states of Nature,

a0 = ϕT · Ē0 [ΘT ] + ϵ,

(19)

where ϵ is either identically zero or is random but orthogonal to Ē0 [ΘT ].
(ii) The ratio ϕT /ϕ∗T is strictly less than 1.
(iii) The ratio ϕT /ϕ∗T is strictly decreasing in T.
Part (i) identiﬁes ϕT as the incomplete-information counterpart of ϕ∗T . Part (ii) establishes that the absence
of common knowledge reduces the extent to which the aggregate outcome covaries with the average forecast
of the fundamental, regardless of how precise the latter is. We refer to this ﬁnding as the “attenuation effect.”
Part (iii) establishes that this kind of attenuation increases with T : the longer the horizon, the larger the
reduction in the responsiveness of the aggregate outcome to the forecasts of the fundamental relative to the
frictionless benchmark. We refer to this ﬁnding as the “horizon effect.”
Let us now sketch the proof of the result. Part (i) is trivial: it follows directly from projecting a0 on Ē0 [ΘT ]
and letting ϕT be the coefﬁcient of this projection and ϵ the residual. The latter captures any variation in
higher-order beliefs that is orthogonal to the variation in ﬁrst-order beliefs, such as the kind of “sentiment
shocks” studied in Angeletos and La’O (2013).
To prove parts (ii) and (iii), note ﬁrst that Lemma 2 implies that the following condition holds regardless
of the information structure:

ϕT =

T
∑

χh,T βh ,

(20)

h=1

where {χh,T } are the same scalars as those appearing in Lemma 2 and

(
)
Cov Ē0h [ΘT ], Ē01 [ΘT ]
(
)
βh ≡
V ar Ē01 [ΘT ]

(21)

is the coefﬁcient of the projection of Ē0h [ΘT ] on Ē01 [ΘT ] , for any h ≥ 1. When information is complete,

Ē0h [ΘT ] coincides with Ē01 [ΘT ] for all h and all realizations of uncertainty, which in turn means that β h is
identically 1 for all h. Away from this fragile benchmark, the following is true:
Proposition 3 With incomplete information, βh is bounded in (0, 1) for all h ≥ 2 and is strictly decreasing
in h.18
In words, higher-order beliefs co-move less with ﬁrst-order beliefs than lower-order beliefs. This result is
easy to establish for the speciﬁc information structure studied in Morris and Shin (2002), but requires more
work for the more general structure allowed here. It has a similar ﬂavor as the result found in Samet (1998),
which essentially states that higher-order beliefs are anchored to the common prior, but is distinct from it,
because Samet’s result regards only the asymptotic properties of higher-order beliefs as h → ∞ and contains
18

Obviously, for h = 1, we have β1 = 1.

18

no information on whether the comovement between ﬁrst- and h-order forecasts varies monotonically with

h.
Let us now go back to the proof of parts (ii) and (iii) of Theorem 1. Part (ii) now follows directly from the
fact that βh ∈ (0, 1), along with conditions (18) and (20). In a nutshell, ϕT is less than ϕ∗T simply because
higher-order beliefs move less than one-to-one with ﬁrst-order beliefs when, and only when, information is
incomplete. Importantly, this is true regardless of how much the ﬁrst-order beliefs themselves co-move with
the fundamental. The following is therefore also true, underscoring once again that the introduced friction
has to do only with the accommodation of higher-order uncertainty and frictional coordination, not with
the ﬁrst-order uncertainty about ΘT .
Corollary 1 Fix (α, γ, T ). An incomplete-information economy features a lower response to expectations of
future fundamentals (i.e., a lower ϕT ) than a complete-information economy, even if the agents have more
precise information about ΘT in the former than in the latter.
What remains to prove is part (iii), namely, the property that ϕT decreases with T relative to ϕ∗T . This
follows from combining our result that the comovement between ﬁrst- and higher-order beliefs decreases
with the belief order h (Proposition 3), with another result, which we establish next and which sheds light
on how the horizon T affects the relative importance of higher-order beliefs in the period-0 outcome.
Theorem 2 Fix (α, γ). For any (h, T ) such that 1 ≤ h ≤ T, let sh,T be the total weight on beliefs of order up
∑
to, and including, h; that is, sh,T ≡ hr=1 χr,T , where the χs are the same coefﬁcients as those appearing in
condition (17). The ratio sh,T /sT,T , which measures the relative contribution of the ﬁrst h orders of beliefs
to the aggregate outcome, strictly decreases with the horizon T and converges to 0 as T → ∞.
This result is crucial (which is why it qualiﬁes, at least in our eyes, to be called a “theorem”). Longer
horizons increase the number of loops from future aggregate actions to current actions. But when one
increases the number of loops, one is effectively walking down the hierarchy of beliefs: forecasting outcomes
further and further into the future maps to forecasting the forecasts of others at higher and higher orders.
This in turn explains why longer horizons increase the relative importance of higher-order beliefs. Part (iii) of
Theorem 1 then follows from combining this ﬁnding with the fact that high-order beliefs themselves covary
less with ﬁrst-order beliefs than do lower-order beliefs.
To sum up: the attenuation effect (ϕT /ϕ∗T < 1) follows merely from the fact that incomplete information
dampens the comovement of higher-order beliefs with ﬁrst-order beliefs (βh < 1 for all h). The horizon
effect (ϕT /ϕ∗T decreases with T ), on the other hand, follows from the fact that this dampening increases
with the order of belief (βh decreases with h), together with the fact that longer horizons raise the relative
importance of higher-order beliefs (Theorem 2).

19

5.4

The Limit as T → ∞.

We complement the preceding results by establishing that, as long as higher-order beliefs are sufﬁciently anchored in the sense made precise below, ϕT becomes vanishingly small relative to its complete-information
counterpart as the horizon gets larger and larger.

(
)
Proposition 4 (Limit) If limh→∞ V ar Ē h [ΘT ] = 0, then
ϕT
= 0.
T →∞ ϕ∗
T
lim

To understand this result, note ﬁrst that, by Theorem 1, the ratio ϕT /ϕ∗T is strictly decreasing in T and
bounded in (0, 1). It follows that this ratio necessarily converges to a constant φ ∈ [0, 1) as T → ∞. In
Appendix A, we show that φ = limh→∞ βh , where βh is deﬁned as before. This fact is, essentially, a
corollary of Theorem 2: in the limit as T → ∞, only the inﬁnite-order beliefs matter. Establishing that ϕT /ϕ∗T
converges to zero as T → ∞ is therefore equivalent to establishing that βh converges to zero as h → ∞. A
(
)
sufﬁcient (in fact, also a necessary) condition for this to be the case is that limh→∞ V ar Ē h [ΘT ] = 0.
This condition need not hold for every information structure, but can be said to be generic in the following
sense. Take, as a reference point, the familiar case in which ΘT is Normal and each agent observes a noisy
private signal and a noisy public signal, as in Morris and Shin (2002). In this case, limh→∞ β h is strictly
positive and is pinned down by the precision of the public signal. But now let us perturb this economy
by allowing each agent’s observation of the public signal to be contaminated by an idiosyncratic noise,
perhaps due to rational inattention or some other cognitive limitation. Then, limh→∞ β h is necessarily 0,
even if the aforementioned noise is arbitrarily small.19 In short, it takes a tiny perturbation to break the
common-knowledge nature of a public signal and to guarantee the limit result in Proposition 4 holds.
As noted in the Introduction, this result illustrates how predictions that depend on long series of forwardlooking, general-equilibrium, feedback loops can be particularly fragile to relaxations of common knowledge. It also builds a bridge between our results and the uniqueness result in global games (Morris and
Shin, 1998, 2003): the common thread is the disproportionate effect of the (very) high orders of belief and
the resulting discontinuity in small perturbations of common knowledge. Finally, it is worth noting that the
result holds true even if ϕ∗T itself explodes to inﬁnity as T → ∞. This case is relevant in the context of
forward guidance, which we study in Section 6.

5.5

The Friction as Extra Discounting at the Aggregate level

The preceding analysis established our main results under a general speciﬁcation of the information structure. We now use a tractable example to recast the friction under consideration as a certain form of myopia.
19

This case is formalized by letting agent i observe zi = z + ηi , where z = ΘT + u is the underlying public signal and ηi is the
contaminating idiosyncratic noise. Our statement is that limh→∞ βh = 0 as long as V ar(ηi ) is not exactly zero.

20

This sheds further light on how the absence of common knowledge interacts with the underlying GE mechanisms and how it modiﬁes forward-looking behavior at the aggregate level.
For this example, we let ΘT = z + η , where z ∼ N (0, σz2 ) and η ∼ N (0, ση2 ) are independent of one
another. We interpret z as the component of ΘT that is realized at t = 0 and η as a residual that is realized
at t = T. Finally, we let the signal of agent i received at t = 0 be ωi = z + vi , where vi ∼ N (0, σv2 ) is i.i.d
across i and orthogonal to both z and η. We can then think of z as news about ΘT and vi as an idiosyncratic
noise in the observation, or interpretation, of this news by agent i.20
Regardless of its interpretation, the key property of this example is that it imposes an exponential structure
in the belief hierarchy. By this we mean that, for every h ≥ 2,

Ē0h [ΘT ] = λĒ0h−1 [ΘT ],
(
)
where λ ≡ σv−2 / σv−2 + σz−2 ∈ (0, 1). This scalar therefore controls the speed with which the comovement
between ﬁrst and h-order beliefs decay with h. A lower λ captures a lower degree of common knowledge;
the frictionless, complete-information benchmark is nested in the limit as λ → 1.
The following result can then be shown.
Proposition 5 (Discounting) The elasticity ϕT in the incomplete-information economy described above is
the same as the elasticity ϕ∗T in a representative-agent economy in which, for all t ≤ T −2, the Euler condition
(13) holds with δ ≡ γ + α replaced by δ ′ ≡ γ + αλ.
This result illustrates that, under appropriate conditions, the object of interest can be calculated with the
same ease as in the complete-information benchmark: all one has to do is to hold the PE effect constant and
to discount the GE effect by the factor λ ∈ (0, 1). It also offers a sharp formalization of the idea that removing
common knowledge causes the economy to act as if the representative agent is myopic and discounts the
future more heavily than in the frictionless benchmark (the effective δ is reduced). The extent of this kind of
myopia is inversely related to λ, the degree of common knowledge.
The logic behind this result is simple. In the example we consider, all the average higher-order forecasts
are linear transformations of the average ﬁrst-order forecast. This guarantees that, for all t ∈ {1, ..., T − 1},
the aggregate outcome can be expressed as a multiple of the average ﬁrst-order forecast: at = ϕT −t Ē0 [ΘT ],
for some known scalar ϕT −t . It follows that Ēt−1 [at ] = ϕT −t Ē02 [ΘT ]. And since Ē02 [ΘT ] = λĒ0 [ΘT ], we conclude that Ēt−1 [at ] = λat . It is therefore as if the average agent systematically underestimates the variation
in the future aggregate outcome, which in turn explains the result in Proposition 5. Clearly, the exact result
relies on the particular information structure assumed above. The logic, however, applies more generally.
As already mentioned, the key feature of the example we consider is that λ controls the speed with which

βh decays with h. The kind of myopia, or discounting, reported above is merely a manifestation of the more
general property that βh decays with h. Theorem 1 and Proposition 5 are therefore mirror images of each
20
The interpretation of this noise as the product of rational inattention is discussed at Appendix B. For another complementary
interpretation, see the discussion of Assumption 3 in Section 6.

21

other: saying that there is more attenuation at longer horizons is the same as saying that the agents are,
effectively, myopic.
Finally, note that, for any λ < 1, the gap between δ and δ ′ increases with α, which proves the following.
Corollary 2 The documented GE attenuation and the associated as-if discounting are larger, the stronger
the underlying GE effect.
This result offers a sharp illustration of how the friction accommodated in this paper interacts with GE
mechanisms. It also suggests that the applied lessons delivered in Sections 6 and 7 are likely to be reinforced
if one extends the analysis to more realistic versions of the New Keynesian model that strengthen the relevant
GE mechanisms by introducing short horizons, borrowing constraints and hand-to-mouth consumers.21

5.6

Allowing for Learning

We now return to the role played by Assumption 1. Relaxing this assumption does not appear to invalidate
the insights we have developed, but complicates the analysis and precludes us from establishing Theorem
1 for arbitrary information structures. This is due to the increased complexity of the kind of higher-order
beliefs that emerge once information is changing between 0 and T .
To appreciate what we mean by this, note that the absence of Assumption 1 guarantees that the following
properties hold for any h ∈ {2, ..., T } and any {t2 , t3 , ...th } such that 0 < t2 < ... < th < T :

Ē0 [Ēt2 [· · · [Ēth [ΘT ] · · · ]] = Ē0h [·].
That is, Assumption 1 helps collapse the “cross-period” higher-order beliefs to the “within-period” higherorder beliefs. This is the key step for obtaining the convenient representation of a0 in Lemma 2 and, thereby,
for applying Proposition 3. Without Assumption 1, we must instead express a0 as a function of all the
aforementioned kind of “cross-period” higher-order beliefs, which greatly complicates the analysis. Note,
[
]
in particular, that there are T − 1 types of second-order beliefs (namely, Ē0 Ēt [·] for all t such that 1 ≤ t ≤

T −1), plus (T −1)×(T −2)/2 types of third-order beliefs, plus (T −1)×(T −2)×(T − 3) /6 types of fourthorder beliefs, and so on. What is more, the correlation structure between ﬁrst- and higher-order beliefs is
more intricate, reﬂecting the anticipation of learning. Intuitively, the ﬁrst-order belief Ē0 [Θ10 ] can be less
]]
]
[ [
[
correlated with the second-order belief Ē0 Ē1 [Θ10 ] than with the third-order belief Ē0 Ē8 Ē9 [Θ10 ] if
there is little or no learning between periods 0 and 1 but a lot of learning between periods 1 and 8. While
this possibility does not invalidate our lessons,22 it precludes us from extending Theorem 1 to arbitrary forms
of learning.
21

Recall that the demand block of the New Keynesian model is nested with γ = β and α = 1 − β. The results of Galí, LópezSalido and Vallés (2007), Del Negro, Giannoni and Patterson (2015), Werning (2015), Kaplan, Moll and Violante (2016) and McKay,
Nakamura and Steinsson (2016b,a) indicate that the aforementioned frictions map to a lower γ (weaker PE effect) but also a higher
α (stronger GE effect). Corollary 2 then implies that these frictions are likely to reinforce our attenuation and horizon effects.
22
This possibility is indeed allowed in the cases studied in Appendix B, where the theorem continues to apply.

22

It is possible, however, to overcome this caveat for two leading forms of learning studied in the literature.
In the one, we let the agents become gradually aware of ΘT , as in Mankiw and Reis (2002) and Wiederholt
(2015). In the other, we allow the agents to receive a new private signal about ΘT in each period prior to

T , as in Woodford (2003a), Nimark (2008), and Mackowiak and Wiederholt (2009). In these two cases, we
can not only recover Theorem 1, but also obtain a variant of Proposition 5. See Appendix B for details.
Also note that Theorem 2, which establishes that longer horizons raise the relative importance of higherorder beliefs, follows directly from the best-response structure and is therefore independent of the information structure. This is suggestive of why our horizon effect may extend beyond the aforementioned cases. In
line with this idea, we are able to show that the result of Proposition 4, namely the property that ϕT becomes
vanishingly small relative to ϕ∗T as T → ∞, extends to arbitrary forms of learning as long as the higher-order
uncertainty remains bounded way from zero, in a sense made precise in Appendix B.
On the basis of these ﬁndings, we conclude that our lessons regarding the interaction of horizons and
lack of common knowledge are robust to the introduction of learning. Two additional lessons, however,
emerge once we take into account learning.
The ﬁrst is that, holding the period-0 information constant, ϕT is closer to ϕ∗T in the scenario in which
subsequent learning is allowed relative to the scenario in which such learning is ruled out. Intuitively, the
anticipation of more (less) information in the future eases (exacerbates) the friction in the present. Note that
this effect hinges on the agents being forward-looking and is therefore absent in static beauty contests, such
as those studied in Morris and Shin (2002), Woodford (2003a), and Angeletos and La’O (2010).
The second lesson is that, as time passes and agents accumulate more information, higher-order beliefs
converge to ﬁrst-order beliefs, causing the anchoring of the expectations and the attenuation of GE effects
to decay with the lag of time since the news has arrived.23 Although this prediction is not a core theme
of our paper, it is worth noting that it is consistent with the available evidence on the impulse responses
of expectations to identiﬁed shocks (Coibion and Gorodnichenko, 2012; Vellekoop and Wiederholt, 2017).
By contrast, this evidence seems incompatible with the theories developed in Gabaix (2016) and Farhi and
Werning (2017): by design, these theories attenuate the response of expectations to shocks but do not allow
this attenuation to decay with the lag since the shock has hit the economy.

6

Revisiting Forward Guidance

In this section, we return to the New Keynesian model and study the implications of our insights for the
effectiveness of forward guidance.24
23

Formally, consider the setting with learning studied in Appendix B, pick any τ ∈ {1, ..., T − 2}, and look at the response of at at
t = τ rather than at t = 0. It is easy to check that this response increases with the precision of the information that arrives between
t = 0 and t = τ. A variant of this property is at the core of Woodford (2003a), Bacchetta and van Wincoop (2006), Nimark (2008,
2017), and Angeletos and La’O (2010): these papers show how, following persistent shocks to the underlying fundamentals, there
is initially a large “wedge” between ﬁrst- and higher-order beliefs, but this wedge decays as time passes and learning occurs.
24
Campbell et al. (2012) distinguish two types of forward guidance, “Delphic” and “Odyssean,” depending on whether the central
bank communication is interpreted partly as a signal of the underlying state of the economy or exclusively as a commitment about
future policy. Throughout our analysis, we are concerned with the second kind of forward guidance.

23

To begin with, suppose either that the monetary authority commits on implementing a speciﬁc path
for the real interest rate, or that prices are inﬁnitely rigid (θ = 1) so that inﬂation is identically zero and
the real interest rate coincides with the nominal one. In either case, we can characterize the response of
the economy to news about future rates by studying the demand block alone. The results of the previous
section then directly imply that the absence of common knowledge reduces this response, and the more so
the further into the future the change in the real rate is. In this sense, the effectiveness of forward guidance
is reduced.
The obvious caveat is that this argument treats the path of the real interest rate as the exogenous impulse
or, equivalently, that it shuts down inﬂation. While this is useful for understanding how monetary policy
controls aggregate demand holding constant inﬂation expectations, it is inappropriate for understanding
how forward guidance matters during a liquidity trap. In that context, it is essential to treat the real interest
rate as endogenous and to capture the feedback loop between aggregate spending and inﬂation.25
As noted before, this feedback loop is a GE mechanism that runs between the two blocks of the model.
This means that the analysis of Section 5, which effectively dealt with each block in isolation, is not directly
applicable. To address this complication, let us assume momentarily that information is complete among the
ﬁrms, even though it is incomplete among the consumers. In this special case, the standard NKPC remains
valid, implying that inﬂation can be expressed as the present value of the future real marginal costs and,
thereby, of future aggregate spending. Using this fact to substitute away inﬂation from condition (5), and
letting yt = ct , we arrive at the following representation of the equilibrium.
Lemma 3 Suppose the ﬁrms have complete information. The equilibrium level of aggregate output (also,
spending) satisﬁes the following condition at every t:

yt = −σRt − σ

∞
∑
k=1

β k Ētc [Rt+k ] +

∞
∑

(1 − β + kσκ) β k−1 Ētc [yt+k ],

(22)

k=1

where κ ≡ (ϵ + 1/σ)κ = (ϵ + 1/σ) (1 − θ) (1 − βθ) /θ.
This can, once again, be understood as a beauty contest among the consumers. But unlike the one seen
earlier in condition (5), the one obtained here subsumes the feedback loop between inﬂation and spending.
This in turn explains why the expectations of income show up with different weights from those in condition
(5), as well as why these weights depend on κ, which is the slope of the NKPC with respect to aggregate
output.
Although the beauty contest obtained in Lemma 3 is not directly nested in the framework of Section 5,
all the lessons continue to hold. Proposition 3, which regards the belief hierarchy, remains intact, while
Lemma 2 and Theorem 2, which hinge on the dynamic structure, are extended in Appendix C. It follows
that Theorem 1 and all the other results of Section 5 can be directly applied to the present context.
25

Accordingly, for the rest of the analysis, we let θ < 1 (equivalently, κ > 0).

24

A Concrete Example. To make things more concrete, and to accommodate the possibility that the ﬁrms,
too, have incomplete information, we henceforth impose the following assumptions.
Assumption 2 (Monetary Policy) There exists a known T ≥ 2 such that:
(i) At any t < T, the nominal interest rate is pegged at zero.26
(ii) At any t > T, monetary policy replicates ﬂexible-price outcomes.
(iii) The period-T nominal rate is such that

RT = z + η,

(23)

where z and η are random variables, independent of one another and of any other shock in the economy,
with z ∼ N (0, σz2 ) and η ∼ N (0, ση2 ). The former is realized at t = 0; the latter is realized at t = T and is
unpredictable prior to that point.
Assumption 3 (Information) (i) At t = 0, each agent i, be it a consumer or a ﬁrm, observes a private signal
of z, given by

ωi = z + vi ,
where vi is an idiosyncratic noise, Normally distributed, with mean zero and variance σc2 ≥ 0 or σf2 ≥ 0,
depending on whether the agent is, respectively, a consumer or a ﬁrm.
(ii) No other exogenous information arrives till t = T, at which point RT becomes common knowledge.
(iii) The volatilities of the markup and idiosyncratic shocks are arbitrarily large relative to that of z .
Assumption 2 speciﬁes the monetary policy and identiﬁes T as the horizon of forward guidance. Part (i)
is motivated by the idea that the ZLB constraint is binding during a liquidity trap. Part (ii), on the other hand,
permits us to concentrate on expectations of RT , the nominal interest rate that the monetary authority will
implement in the ﬁrst period after the ZLB has ceased to bind.27 Finally, part (iii) splits the randomness of RT
into two orthogonal components, along the lines of the example considered in the end of the last section.
The ﬁrst component, z, can be interpreted as the anticipated component of RT , or as the news about future
monetary policy; such news could be the product of a policy announcement. The second component, η,
captures the residual uncertainty, or the unanticipated component, which is revealed at t = T.
Assumption 3 turns to the information structure. Part (i) lets each agent’s observation of z be contaminated
by an idiosyncratic noise, thereby introducing higher-order uncertainty. Part (ii) shuts down any exogenous
learning. Finally, part (iii) shuts down the endogenous learning that obtains through the observation of the
realized market outcomes (wages, prices, etc) in every period.
Part (i) of Assumption 3 may appear to be at odds with the fact that central bank communications enjoy
ample coverage in the ﬁnancial press; one may instead be tempted to treat forward guidance as a public
26

Since Rt is the log-deviation from steady state gross nominal rate, this means Rt = −ρ, where ρ is the discount rate deﬁned
by β = e−ρ .
27
Needless to say, we let the central bank keep the interest rate low for just one period after the ZLB has ceased to bind, as
opposed to many periods, only to simplify the exposition.

25

signal. But it is one thing to say that something is “public news” in the real world and it is a different thing to
assume that something is a “public signal” in the theory. Doing the latter requires, not only that every agent
herself is aware of and attentive to the news, but also that she is fully conﬁdent that every other agent is
also aware of and attentive to the news, and so on. Clearly, that kind of common knowledge does not have
an obvious counterpart in the real world. What is more, even if one insists on modeling the central bank
communications as a perfectly public signal, we can recast the required idiosyncratic noise as idiosyncratic
variation in the interpretation of such communications.28
To sum up, part (i) of Assumption 3 captures the friction we are interested in. Parts (ii) and (iii), on the
other hand, are mostly for convenience: they facilitate a sharp characterization of the belief hierarchy.29
In particular, similarly to the example studied in Section 5, the higher-order beliefs of, respectively, the
consumers and the ﬁrms satisfy, for all h ≥ 2,

Ē0c,h [RT ] = λh−1
· Ē0c [RT ]
c
where

σ −2
λc ≡ −2 c −2 ∈ (0, 1]
σc + σz

and

and

Ē0f,h [RT ] = λh−1
· Ē0f [RT ],
f

λf ≡

σf−2
σf−2 + σz−2

∈ (0, 1].

Note that λc and λf control how much higher-order beliefs co-move with ﬁrst-order beliefs; they therefore
parameterize the friction of interest. The frictionless, complete-information benchmark is nested with λc =

λf = 1, and a larger friction corresponds to lower values for the λ’s.
We are now ready to study how variation in expectations of RT (triggered by variation in z) translates
into variation in equilibrium output. We start with the common-knowledge benchmark.
Proposition 6 (Forward Guidance with CK) Suppose λc = λf = 1, which means that z is common knowledge. There exists a scalar ϕ∗T > σ such that, for all realizations of uncertainty,

y0 = y0trap − ϕ∗T · E0 [RT ],

(24)

where y0trap is the liquidity-trap level of output (i.e., the one obtained when the period-T nominal interest
rate is ﬁxed at the steady-state value). Furthermore, ϕ∗T is strictly increasing in T and ϕ∗T → ∞ as T → ∞.
This result contains the predictions of the textbook New Keynesian model regarding the power of forward
guidance during a liquidity trap: this power, as measured by ϕ∗T , is predicted to increase without bound as
the time of action is pushed further and further into the future. It is this prediction, along with its quantitative
evaluation, that constitutes the forward-guidance puzzle.30
28
Formally, this can be done by modeling the central bank communication itself as a public signal and by letting each agent have
private information about the noise in that signal.
29
Learning can be accommodated along the lines of Appendix B and was indeed allowed in the ﬁrst NBER version of our paper,
Angeletos and Lian (2016b).
30
It is worth noting that the scalar ϕ∗T is invariant to the ratio σz /ση , which parameterizes the precision of the available news:

26

Contrast this prediction with the PE effect of future interest rates: as evident in condition (5), the PE
effect is decreasing in T, simply because of the discounting embedded in intertemporal preferences. The
reason that ϕ∗T exhibits the opposite pattern is because of the GE effects that run within and between the
two blocks of the model. In particular, the feedback loop between aggregate spending and income implies
that ϕ∗T would stay constant with T even if we were to shut down the inﬂation response. The feedback loop
between aggregate spending and inﬂation then explains why ϕ∗T actually increases with T.
Let us elaborate. Reducing the interest rate at t = T increases spending and causes inﬂation at t = T.
Because the nominal interest rate is pegged prior to T, this translates to a low real interest rate between T − 1
and T. This stimulates demand at T − 1, contributing to even higher inﬂation at T − 1, which feeds to even
higher demand at T − 2, and so on. A longer horizon therefore maps to a larger number of iterations in this
feedback loop and, thereby, to a stronger cumulative effect at t = 0. Finally, as T → ∞, this feedback loop
explodes, which explains why ϕ∗T increases without bound.
The fact that the forward-guidance puzzle is driven by GE effects is already recognized in the literature;
see, for example, the discussions in Del Negro, Giannoni and Patterson (2015) and McKay, Nakamura and
Steinsson (2016b). Our contribution is to explain how these GE effects depend on higher-order beliefs, which
in turn explains why these effects are not as potent once one moves away from the common-knowledge
benchmark.
Proposition 7 (Forward Guidance without CK) Suppose that λc < 1 and/or λf < 1, which means that at
least one group of agents lacks common knowledge of the news. There exists a scalar ϕT such that, for all
realizations of uncertainty,

y0 = y0trap − ϕT · Ē0c [RT ].

(25)

Furthermore, the following properties hold:
(i) ϕT is bounded between the PE effect and the complete-information counterpart: σβ T < ϕT < ϕ∗T .
(ii) ϕT is strictly increasing in both λc and λf ; the ratio ϕT /ϕ∗T is strictly decreasing in T and converges
to 0 as T → ∞; ﬁnally, when λc is sufﬁciently low, ϕT also converges to 0 as T → ∞.
Part (i) formalizes the sense in which the standard model “maximizes” the power of forward guidance:

ϕ∗T

is an upper bound to the prediction that the analyst can make if she maintains the rational-expectations

hypothesis but is agnostic about the degree of common knowledge in the economy. By varying the degree of
common knowledge, we effectively span the range between this upper bound and the underlying PE effect.
Part (ii) is a version of our earlier horizon effect: by attenuating the feedback loop between inﬂation and
spending, as well as the GE effects that run within each block of the model, lack of common knowledge
reduces the power of forward guidance by a factor that increases with T . This attenuation increases without
bound in the sense that ϕT becomes vanishingly small relative to ϕ∗T as T → ∞, even if the friction is small
varying the ratio σz /ση affects how much E0 [RT ] varies with RT , but does not affect how much either y0 or π0 vary with E0 [RT ].
This property extends to the incomplete-information scenario studied next and explains the sense in which both the puzzle and the
resolution we offer are orthogonal to the question of how accurate or credible the news about the future interest rates might be.

27

1

λ c =λ f =0.75
λ c =0.75, λ f =1

0.9

λ =1, λ =0.75

attenuation effect, φ/φ*

0.8

c

f

0.7

0.6

0.5

0.4

0.3

0.2

0.1

0
0

5

10

15

20

25

30

35

40

horizon, T, in quarters

Figure 1: Attenuation effect at different horizons.
(i.e., if λc and λf are arbitrarily close to 1). Finally, if the friction is large enough, the documented effect can
be strong enough that ϕT is decreasing in T , not only relative to ϕ∗T , but also in absolute value.
A Numerical Illustration. We now use a numerical example to illustrate our ﬁndings. We interpret the
period length as a quarter and adopt the calibration of the textbook New Keynesian model found in Galí
(2008). That is, we set the discount factor to 0.99, the Frisch elasticity to 1, the elasticity of intertemporal
substitution to 1, and the price revision rate to 1/3.
What remains is to pick the values of λc and λf , that is, the departure from common knowledge. The
existing literature offers little guidance on how to make this choice. In want of a better alternative, we let

λc = λf = 0.75 and interpret this as a situation in which every agent who has heard the policy announcement
believes that any other agent has failed to hear, or “trust,” the announcement with a probability equal to 25
percent. This is arguably a modest “grain of doubt” in the minds of people about their ability to coordinate
the adjustment in their beliefs and their behavior.31 , 32
The solid line in Figure 1 plots the resulting attenuation effect, as measured by the ratio ϕT /ϕ∗T , against
the horizon length, T. By setting λc = λf , this line assumes that the consumers and the ﬁrms are subject
to the same informational friction. The dashed line isolates the friction in the consumer side (λc = .75) by
shutting it down in the ﬁrm side (λf = 1). The dotted line does the converse.
The attenuation is strongest when the friction is present in both sides. Furthermore, the effect is quanti31

The proposed re-interpretation of the informational friction is exact: if we let the signal of an agent be binary, revealing the true
z with probability λ, we obtain exactly the same characterization for ϕT as the one under the signal structure assumed above.
32
Although Coibion and Gorodnichenko (2012) provide evidence in support of the kind of informational friction we have accommodated here, that evidence does not directly relate to forward guidance. Yet, taking that evidence at face value could justify an
even larger departure from common knowledge: whenever a shock hits the economy, the average forecast error in the expectations
of inﬂation appears to be half as large as the actual response in inﬂation, which translates to a value for λ close to 0.5.

28

tatively signiﬁcant. For example, at a horizon of 5 years (T = 20), the power of forward guidance is only
one tenth of its common-knowledge counterpart. This is on top of any mechanical effect that the noise may
have on the size of the shift of the expectations of future interest rates: by construction, the documented
attenuation effect is normalized by the size of the variation in the ﬁrst-order beliefs of RT .33
This illustrates the following broader point: by anchoring the movements in the expectations of economic
outcomes relative to the movements in the expectations of the policy instrument, our paper helps operationalize the idea that policy makers may have a harder time managing the former kind of expectations than
the latter. This may help explain, for example, why forward guidance may trigger a large movement in the
term structure without a commensurate movement in expectations of inﬂation and income.
Appendix C elaborates on the mechanics behind Figure 1. We ﬁrst show how the documented effects can
be understood through the lenses of a discounted Euler condition and a discounted NKPC, along the lines
of our earlier, more abstract, result in Proposition 5. This representation helps connect our paper to McKay,
Nakamura and Steinsson (2016b,a) and Gabaix (2016). It also helps explain why almost all of the effect seen
in Figure 1 comes from the attenuation of two GE mechanisms: the price-setting complementarity inside the
supply block; and the inﬂation-spending feedback between the two blocks. By contrast, the attenuation of
the Keynesian multiplier that runs inside the demand block plays a small role.
Let us explain the last point. In the textbook version of the New Keynesian model, consumers have
inﬁnite horizons and their spending depends on aggregate spending only through the present value of permanent income. What is more, the discount rate is close to zero. This means that varying the expectations
of income in the next, say, 5 years has a small effect on current spending. It follows that the attenuation
of this particular GE mechanism cannot possibly be quantitatively signiﬁcant in the textbook version of the
model. But now note that the Keynesian multiplier can be reinforced by short horizons, hand-to-mouth consumers, counter-cyclical precautionary motives, and feedback effects between housing prices and consumer
spending. By Corollary 2, we expect this to reinforce also the associated attenuation effect.34
The following clariﬁcation is also worth making. In our analysis, we have abstracted incomplete markets
in the sense of borrowing constraints, but have allowed incomplete markets in the sense of ruling out risk
sharing. Had we allowed the consumers to pool their resources at the end of the liquidity trap and to enjoy
the same level of consumption thereafter, we would have effectively eliminated the coordination friction
among them, thus also abstracting from the attenuation of the GE effect that runs inside the demand block
of the model. This is the scenario considered in Wiederholt (2015).
33

Estimated DSGE models typically assume a higher degree of price stickiness than the one assumed here. This tends to reduce
the attenuation effect. For instance, raising the value of θ from 2/3, the value in Galí (2008), to 0.85, the value in Christiano,
Eichenbaum and Rebelo (2011), implies that the ratio ϕT /ϕ∗T increases from about 0.1 to about 0.3 at T = 20. That said, note that
menu-cost models calibrated to micro data indicate that the “right” value for θ is probably even smaller than 2/3. In any event, our
goal here is only to illustrate; a more comprehensive quantitative evaluation is left for future work.
34
Farhi and Werning (2017) make a similar point with regard to the interaction of borrowing constraints with Level-k Thinking.

29

7

Revisiting Fiscal Multipliers

We now introduce government spending in the model and study how aggregate income responds to news
about government spending in the future. As usual, we treat the level of government spending as exogenous
and assume that it is ﬁnanced with lump-sum taxation. But unlike the standard practice, we remove common
knowledge of the future level of government spending and of its macroeconomic effects.
The equilibrium characterization given in Proposition 1 still holds, except that the real marginal cost
is now given by mct = Ωc ct + (1 − Ωc ) gt , where gt is the level of government spending and Ωc ∈ (0, 1)
is a constant that increases with the steady-state fraction of GDP absorbed by private consumption. Note
then that gt enters the joint dynamics of ct and πt only through the aforementioned formula for mct . An
exogenous shock to government spending is therefore akin to an exogenous shock in real marginal costs.
Pick now any pair (T, T ′ ) such that 2 ≤ T ≤ T ′ . We want T ′ to capture the length of the liquidity trap
and T the period during which a ﬁscal stimulus is going to be enacted.35 Accordingly, we let monetary
policy satisfy Assumption 2, with T replaced by T ′ . We also ﬁx RT ′ = 0, so as to focus on ﬁscal policy.
Finally, we assume that gt = 0 for all t ̸= T so as to focus on beliefs about gT , and specify the information
structure in the same way as in Assumption 3. We can then show the following.
Proposition 8 Propositions 6 and 7 hold true with ϕ∗T and ϕT reinterpreted as, respectively, the completeand the incomplete-information slope of y0 with respect to Ē0 [gT ].
The part of this result that regards ϕ∗T is the ﬁscal analogue of the forward-guidance puzzle: in the
common-knowledge benchmark, the current impact of a ﬁscal stimulus of a given size increases as the
stimulus is pushed further into the future. The underlying logic is essentially the same as before: the PE
effect of a ﬁscal stimulus, which is its direct effect on the concurrent real marginal costs, decays with the
horizon T , but the GE effects that run within and between the two blocks of the model overturn this property.
The other part of the result, which regards ϕT , contains the policy lesson of this section: once we relax the
assumption that there is common knowledge of the size and the consequences of the ﬁscal stimulus, the
ﬁscal multiplier is reduced at every T , and the more so the larger T is.
In short, while the standard model predicts that ﬁscal stimuli must be back-loaded in order to pile up
the feedback effects between aggregate spending and inﬂation, our approach offers a rationale for frontloading them. Such front-loading eases the coordination friction in the economy: the sooner the ﬁscal
stimulus is enacted, the less concerned the agents would be about the beliefs and the responses of others
at long horizons, and, thereby, the easier it is to coordinate on a large response today.36 An interesting
35

Similarly to Christiano, Eichenbaum and Rebelo (2011), Woodford (2011), and Werning (2012), the ﬁscal multipliers we are
concerned with are those that obtain when the ZLB constraint binds. The investigation of how our insights extend, when the
economy is away from this constraint and monetary policy follows a Taylor rule, is the subject of ongoing work.
36
Of course, whether the provided rationale for front-loading is sufﬁciently strong to offset the standard back-loading property
depends on the severity of the informational friction and all the parameters that govern the magnitude of the GE feedback loops,
such as κ, the slope of the NKPC. Letting λ or κ be small enough guarantees that the ﬁscal multiplier decreases with T, not only
relative to its common-knowledge counterpart, but also in absolute value.

30

question, which we leave open for future research, is how this insight interacts with borrowing constraints
and hand-to-mouth consumers, which is the more standard rationale for the front-loading of ﬁscal stimuli.

8

Conclusion

Modern macroeconomics assigns a crucial role to forward-looking expectations, such as consumer expectations of future income and future real interest rates or ﬁrm expectations of future inﬂation and future real
marginal costs. This property seems desirable and realistic. However, by assuming common knowledge
along with rational expectations, the dominant modeling practice hardwires a certain kind of perfection
in the ability of economic agents to understand what happens around them, to align their forward-looking
beliefs, and to coordinate their responses to any exogenous impulse. In so doing, it also maximizes the
general-equilibrium multipliers on ﬁscal and monetary policies.
Conversely, allowing for higher-order uncertainty helps accommodate a realistic friction in the ability
of economic agents to forecast, or comprehend, the macroeconomic effects of policy news. This in turn
arrests the underlying general-equilibrium feedback loops and reduces the ability of policy makers to steer
the economy, especially when the policy news regards longer horizons.
We ﬁrst formalized these ideas within an abstract framework, which was ﬂexible enough to nest the
demand and the supply block of the New Keynesian model along with other applications. We next showed
how these ideas lessen the forward-guidance puzzle and offer a rationale for the front-loading of ﬁscal
stimuli. As shown in Appendix C, the same logic also helps moderate the paradox of ﬂexibility, namely the
prediction that, under certain conditions, a higher degree of price ﬂexibility can amplify demand shocks
and raise the effectiveness of monetary policy.
By anchoring the movements in the expectations of economic outcomes relative to the movements in
the expectations of the policy instrument, our paper helps operationalize the idea that policy makers may
have a harder time managing the former kind of expectations than the latter. But it also hints to the following
possibility: especially when it comes to longer horizons, it may be more important for the policy maker to
communicate her intended path for the economy (e.g., for output and inﬂation) than her intended path for
the policy instrument. What is more, these communications must be loud and clear, not only in the ears
of Wall Street (ﬁnancial markets), but also in the ears of Main Street (ﬁrms and consumers). We leave the
exploration of these ideas open for future research.
Another interesting research question, which we are pursuing in ongoing work, is the investigation of
the implications of our insights for equilibrium selection and for the “neo-Fisherian” effects discussed in,
inter alia, Garcıa-Schmidt and Woodford (2015) and Cochrane (2016, 2017). As already noted, these issues
hinge on the same kind of higher-order beliefs as the ones we have unearthed in this paper.
Finally, it is worth clarifying the following point. In the present paper, we focused on environments in
which GE effects reinforce PE effects. In this case, GE attenuation translates to under-reaction. In other contexts, GE effects mitigate PE effects. For example, this is the case when agents compete for limited resources
31

and their actions are strategic substitutes. In this case, our insights remain valid, but their empirical implication is reversed: GE attenuation now translates to over-reaction. In a companion paper (Angeletos and Lian,
2016a) we discuss how this observation offers a uniﬁed explanation to seemingly disparate phenomena.

32

Appendix A: Proofs
In this Appendix, we prove the results stated in the main text. For all the proofs that regard the NewKeynesian model (as opposed to the abstract analysis in Section 5), we use a tilde over a variable to denote
the log-deviation of this variable from its steady-state counterpart, and reserve the non-tilde notation for the
original variables. The only exception to this rule is that we let ãi,t ≡
asset position at period-t and

c∗

ai,t
c∗ ,

where ai,t is consumer i’s initial

is steady-state spending. This takes care of the issue that the log-deviation of

the asset position is not well deﬁned because the steady-state value is a∗ = 0 and is standard in the literature
(e.g., Woodford, 2011).
Proof of Proposition 1. We proceed in four steps, starting with the behavior of the consumers, proceeding
with the behavior of the ﬁrms, and concluding with market clearing and with the derivation of the two beauty
contests shown in the main text.
Step 1: Consumers. Consider an arbitrary consumer i ∈ Ic . Let ai,t = Rt−1 si,t−1 /πt denote consumer

i’s initial asset position at period-t. By condition (2), the following intertemporal budget constraint holds in
all periods and all states of Nature:37







+∞  ∏
k (
+∞  ∏
k (


)−1
)−1
∑
∑
Rt+j−1
Rt+j−1


 ci,t+k
 (wi,t+k ni,t+k + ei,t+k )
=
a
+
.
i,t
πt+j
πt+j




k=0

j=1

k=0

(26)

j=1

Taking the log-linear approximation of the above around the steady state, we get the following:
+∞
∑
k=0

β k c̃i,t+k = ãi,t +

+∞
∑

β k {Ω (w̃i,t+k + ñi,t+k ) + (1 − Ω) ẽi,t+k } ,

(27)

k=0

where Ω is the ratio of labor income to total income in steady state. The consumer’s optimality conditions,
on the other hand, can be expressed as follows:

ñi,t

1
=
ϵ

(
)
1
w̃i,t − c̃i,t ,
σ

[
(
)]
c̃i,t = Ei,t c̃i,t+1 − σ R̃t − π̃t+1 = Ei,t [c̃i,t+1 − σr̃t+1 ] ,

(28)
(29)

where Ei,t [·] is the expectation of consumer i in period t. The ﬁrst condition describes optimal labor supply;
the second is the individual-level Euler condition, which describes optimal consumption and saving.
At this point, it is worth emphasizing that our analysis preserves the standard Euler condition at the
individual level. This contrasts with McKay, Nakamura and Steinsson (2016b,a) and Werning (2015), where
liquidity constraints cause this condition to be violated for some agents, as well as with Gabaix (2016), where
a cognitive friction causes this condition to be violated for every agent. We revisit this point in Appendix C,
37
One should think of the state of Nature as a realization of the exogenous payoff relevant shocks along with the cross-sectional
distribution of the exogenous signals (information) received by the agents.

33

when we show that our analysis rationalizes a discounted Euler condition at the aggregate level, in spite of
the preservation of the standard condition at the individual level.
Combining conditions (27), (28) and (29), we obtain the optimal expenditure of consumer i in period t
as a function of the current and the expected future values of wages, dividends, and real interest rates:

c̃i,t =

(1−β)ϵσ
ϵσ+Ω ãi,t

−σ

+∞
∑

β k Ei,t [r̃t+k ]

(30)

k=1

+ (1 − β)

[

(ϵ+1)σΩ
ϵσ+Ω w̃i,t

+

ϵσ(1−Ω)
ϵσ+Ω ẽi,t

]

+ (1 − β)

+∞
∑

β k Ei,t

[

(ϵ+1)σΩ
ϵσ+Ω w̃i,t+k

+

ϵσ(1−Ω)
ϵσ+Ω ẽi,t+k

]
.

k=1

This condition, which is a variant of the consumption function seen in textbook treatments of the Permanent
Income Hypothesis,38 contains two elementary insights. First, all future variables—wages, dividends, and
real interest rates—are discounted. Second, the current spending of a consumer depends on the present
value of her income, which in turn depends, in equilibrium, on the future spending of other consumers.
The ﬁrst property guarantees that the decision-theoretic, or partial-equilibrium, effect of forward guidance diminishes with the horizon at which interest rates are changed; the second represents a dynamic
strategic complementarity, which is the modern reincarnation what was known as the “income multiplier”
in the IS-LM framework. We elaborate on these two points more in the main text. For the time being, we
aggregate condition (30), and use the facts that assets average to zero and that future idiosyncratic shocks
are unpredictable, to obtain the following condition for aggregate spending:

c̃t = −σ

+∞
∑

β

k

Ētc [r̃t+k ]

+ (1 − β)

[

(ϵ+1)σΩ
ϵσ+Ω w̃t

+

ϵσ(1−Ω)
ϵσ+Ω ẽt

]

(31)

k=1

+ (1 − β)

+∞
∑

β k Ētc

[

(ϵ+1)σΩ
ϵσ+Ω w̃t+k

+

ϵσ(1−Ω)
ϵσ+Ω ẽt+k

]
,

k=1

where Ētc [·] henceforth denotes the average expectation of the consumers in period t.
Step 2: Firms. Consider a ﬁrm j ∈ If that gets the chance to reset its price during period t. The optimal
reset price, denoted by pj∗
t , is given by the following:

{
j
p̃j∗
t = (1 − βθ) (m̃ct + p̃t ) +

+∞
∑

[

(βθ)k Ej,t m̃cjt+k + p̃t+k

]

}
+ (1 − βθ) µ̃jt ,

(32)

k=1
f
where Ej,t
[·] denotes the ﬁrm’s expectations in period t, m̃cjt = w̃tj is its real marginal cost in period t, and

µ̃jt is the corresponding markup shock. The interpretation of this condition is familiar: the optimal “reset”
38

To see this more clearly, suppose that initial assets are zero, that the real interest rate is expected to equal the discount rate
at all periods,
and that labor supply is ﬁxed (ϵ → ∞). Condition (30) then reduces to c̃i,t = (1 − β) [Ωw̃i,t + (1 − Ω) ẽi,t ] +
∑
k
(1 − β) +∞
k=1 β Ei,t [Ωw̃i,t+k + (1 − Ω) ẽi,t+k ] , which means that optimal consumption equals “permanent income” (the annuity
value of current and future income). Relative to this benchmark, condition (30) adjusts for three factors: for the endogeneity of labor
supply, which explains the different weights on wages and dividends; for initial assets, which explains the ﬁrst term in condition
(30); and for the potential gap between the real interest rate and the subjective discount rate, which explains the second term.

34

price is given by the expected nominal marginal cost over the expected lifespan of the new price, plus
the markup.39 Aggregating the above condition, using the fact that the past price level is known and that
∫
inﬂation is given by π̃t = (1 − θ) (p̃∗t − p̃t−1 ), where p̃∗t ≡ If p̃j∗
t dj, we obtain the following condition for
the level of inﬂation in period t:

π̃t = κ m̃ct + κ

+∞
∑

k

(βθ)

Ētf [m̃ct+k ]

+

1−θ
θ

k=1

where κ ≡

(1−θ)(1−βθ)
θ

+∞
∑

(βθ)k Ētf [π̃t+k ] + κ µ̃t ,

(33)

k=1

and Ētf [·] henceforth denotes the average expectation of the ﬁrms. The latter may or

may not be the same as the average expectation of the consumers.
Step 3: Market Clearing, Wages, and Proﬁts. Because the ﬁnal-good sector is competitive and observes
∫
all the relevant prices,40 and because the technology satisﬁes (3) and (4), we have that p̃t = If p̃jt dj and ỹ t =
∫
∫ j
∫
˜l dj. The latter, together with market clearing in the labor market, gives ỹt = ñt ≡
ỹ j dj =
ñi,t di.
If

t

If t

Ic

Market clearing in the market for the ﬁnal good, on the other hand, gives

∫
ỹt = c̃t ≡

Ic

c̃i,t di.

Finally, note that the real proﬁt of monopolist j at period t is given by ejt =

(

pjt
pt

)
− wtj ytj . Log-linearizing

Ω
and aggregating it gives ẽt = − 1−Ω
w̃t + ỹ t . Combining all these facts with (28), the optimality condition for

labor supply, we arrive at the following characterization of the aggregate wages and the proﬁts:

(
w̃t = m̃ct =

1
ϵ+
σ

)

[
ỹt ,

ẽt = 1 −

Ω(ϵ+ σ1 )
1−Ω

]
ỹt ,

and

(ϵ+1)σΩ
ϵσ+Ω w̃t

+

ϵσ(1−Ω)
ϵσ+Ω ẽt

= ỹt .

(34)

Step 4: Beauty Contests. Condition (31), which follows merely from consumer optimality, pins down
aggregate spending as a function of the average beliefs of wages, proﬁts, interest rates, and inﬂation. As we
impose REE, a consumer can infer that (34) holds, aggregate spending can then be expressed as a function of
the consumers’ average beliefs of interest rates, of inﬂation, and of aggregate spending itself. This is condition
(5), the consumption beauty contest. Similarly, combining (33) and (34), we can express aggregate inﬂation
as a function of the ﬁrms’ average beliefs of aggregate spending and of inﬂation itself. This is condition (6),
the inﬂation beauty contest.
Proof of Proposition 2. Because Θt is zero for all t > T, at is also zero for all t > T.41 Using this fact
along with the fact that Θt is zero also for t < T, and iterating on condition (12), we can obtain at for all

t < T as a linear function of the average ﬁrst- and higher-order beliefs about ΘT ; see, e.g., Lemma 2 below
for an explicit characterization in the case without learning. When information is complete, all agents share
the same ﬁrst-order beliefs about ΘT with probability one, and this fact is itself common knowledge. It
39

Note that future markups are unpredictable.
Recall that the we have allowed the entire price vector, (pjt )j∈[0,1] , to be common knowledge at period t.
41
As mentioned in main text, we assume limk→∞ γ k Ei,t [at+k ] = 0 and rule out “extrinsic bubbles.”

40

35

follows that higher-order beliefs collapse to ﬁrst-order beliefs and, therefore, at becomes a linear function
of Et [ΘT ], the commonly shared expectation of ΘT . Now take any t < τ ≤ T and any pair of agents i, j .
Complete information guarantees that Ei,t [Eτ [ΘT ]] = Et [ΘT ] = Ej,t [Eτ [ΘT ]] with probability one. And
since we already argued that, in equilibrium, aτ is a known linear function of Eτ [ΘT ], it is also the case

Ei,t [aτ ] = Ej,t [aτ ]. That is, complete information (in the sense of Deﬁnition 1) rules out imperfect consensus
(in the sense of Deﬁnition 2).
Proof of Lemma 1. Lemma 1 directly follows from the argument in main text.
Proof of Lemma 2. We prove the following stronger result: there exists positively-valued coefﬁcients

{χh,k }k≥1,1≤h≤k , such that, for any t ≤ T − 1,
T −t {
}
∑
at =
χh,T −t Ēth [ΘT ] ,

(35)

h=1

where each χh,k is a function of (α, γ, h, k) and Ēth [·] is deﬁned recursively by Ēt1 [·] = Ēt [·] and Ēth [·] =
[
]
Ēt Ēth−1 [·] for every h ≥ 2. We now prove this claim by induction. First, consider t = T − 1. From

aT = ΘT 42 and condition (16), we have aT −1 = (γ + α) ĒT −1 [ΘT ]. It follows that condition (35) holds for
χ1,1 = γ + α.
Now, pick an arbitrary t ≤ T − 2, assume that condition (35) holds for all τ ∈ {t + 1, ..., T − 1}, and let
us prove that it also holds for t. From condition (16), we have

at = γ T −t−1 (γ + α) Ēt [ΘT ] + α
= γ T −t−1 (γ + α) Ēt [ΘT ] +

T∑
−t−1

]
[T −t−k
}
∑ {
h
[ΘT ]
χh,T −t−k Ēt+k
γ k−1 Ēt

k=1
T∑
−t−1 T ∑
−t−h (
h=1

(36)

h=1

)
αγ k−1 χh,T −t−k Ēth+1 [ΘT ] ,

k=1

where the second line uses Assumption 1 (no learning). As a result, condition (35) holds for

χ1,T −t = γ

T −t−1

(γ + α)

and χh+1,T −t =

T∑
−t−h

αγ k−1 χh,T −t−k h ∈ {1, · · · T − t − 1} .

(37)

k=1

This ﬁnishes the proof.
Proof of Theorem 1. This theorem builds on Proposition 3 and Theorem 2, which are proved in the
sequel. We invite the reader to read ﬁrst the proofs of these two results. Here, we prove Theorem 1 taking
for granted these results.
Part (i) follows directly from projecting a0 on Ē0 [ΘT ] and letting ϕT be the coefﬁcient of this projection
and ϵ the residual.
42

As mentioned in main text, we assumelimk→∞ γ k Ei,t [at+k ] = 0 and rule out “extrinsic bubbles.” Together with the fact Θt is
zero for all t > T, at is also zero for all t > T. As a result, aT = ΘT from condition (12).

36

To prove part (ii), note that from Lemma 2, we have ϕT =

∑T

h=1 χh,T βh ,

which is condition (20) in the

main text. Together with the expression of ϕ∗T , condition (18), and the fact that βh < 1 for all h ≥ 2 (from
Proposition 3), we have ϕT /ϕ∗T < 1 for all T ≥ 2.

[∑
]
T −1
To prove part (iii), from condition (20), we have ϕT /ϕ∗T =
s
(β
−
β
)
+
s
β
T,T T /sT,T and
h
h+1
h=1 h,T
[∑
]
T −1
ϕT +1 /ϕ∗T +1 =
h=1 sh,T +1 (βh − βh+1 ) + sT,T +1 (βT − βT +1 ) + sT +1,T +1 βT +1 /sT +1,T +1 . From Proposition 3 we know βh > βh+1 for all h. Together with Theorem 2, we have, for all T ≥ 1,

ϕT +1 /ϕ∗T +1

<

=

[T −1
∑
h=1
[T −1
∑

]
sh,T +1 (βh − βh+1 ) + sT +1,T +1 (βT − βT +1 ) + sT +1,T +1 βT +1 /sT +1,T +1
]
sh,T +1 (βh − βh+1 ) + sT +1,T +1 βT /sT +1,T +1

h=1

≤

[T −1
∑

]
sh,T (βh − βh+1 ) + sT,T βT /sT,T = ϕT /ϕ∗T .

h=1

Proof of Proposition 3. Note that every agent i’s information set at period 0 is drawn i.i.d. from the
aggregate state of the Nature (for simplicity, we call this property “symmetry” in the rest of this proof), we
have, for all h ≥ 2,

]
]
)
(
[
(
)
(
[
])
[
Cov Ē0h [ΘT ], Ē01 [ΘT ] = Cov Ei,0 Ē0h−1 [ΘT ] , Ē01 [ΘT ] = Cov Ei,0 Ē0h−1 [ΘT ] , Ei,0 Ē01 [ΘT ] ,
)
(
(
])
[
= Cov Ē0h−1 [ΘT ], Ei,0 Ē01 [ΘT ] = Cov Ē0h−1 [ΘT ], Ē02 [ΘT ] ,
where the second and the third equality come from the law of iterated expectations. By the same argument,
we have, for all h ≥ 2 and j ∈ {1, 2, · · · h − 1} ,

(
)
(
)
Cov Ē0h [ΘT ], Ē01 [ΘT ] = Cov Ē0h−j [ΘT ], Ē01+j [ΘT ] .

(38)

From the previous condition, for k ≥ 1, we have43

β2k

)
(
(
[
])
(
[
])
Cov Ē0k [ΘT ], Ē0k+1 [ΘT ]
Cov Ē0k [ΘT ], Ei,0 Ē0k [ΘT ]
V ar Ei,0 Ē0k [ΘT ]
(
)
(
)
(
)
=
=
=
≥ 0 ∀i,
V ar Ē01 [ΘT ]
V ar Ē01 [ΘT ]
V ar Ē01 [ΘT ]

(39)

where the second equation follows from symmetry and the last equation follows from the law of iterated
expectations. Similarly, for k ≥ 1, we have

β2k−1

(
)
(
)
V ar Ē0k [ΘT ]
Cov Ē0k [ΘT ], Ē0k [ΘT ]
)
) ≥ 0.
(
(
=
=
V ar Ē01 [ΘT ]
V ar Ē01 [ΘT ]

(40)

( 1
)
Note
( 1 that) under incomplete information, we have V ar Ē0 [ΘT ] > 0, so all1 βk is well deﬁned. To prove it, note that if
V ar Ē0 [ΘT ] = 0, together with the fact that (the mean of Θ
) T is zero, we have Ē0 [ΘT ] = 0 almost surely. As a result, we have
V ar (Ei,0 [ΘT ]) = Cov (ΘT , Ei,0 [ΘT ]) = Cov ΘT , Ē0 [ΘT ] = 0, and Ei,0 [ΘT ] = 0 = Ej,0 [ΘT ] almost surely for all i, j. This is
inconsistent with the deﬁnition about incomplete information in Deﬁnition 1.
43

37

Now, note that for any random variable X , and any information set I , according to the law of total
variance, we have:

V ar (E[X|I]) ≤ V ar (X) .
)
( [
[
] ])
(
[
])
(
[
])
As a result, V ar Ē0k+1 [ΘT ] = V ar E Ei,0 Ē0k [ΘT ] |s ≤ V ar Ei,0 Ē0k [ΘT ] and V ar Ei,0 Ē0k [ΘT ] =
( [
])
(
)
V ar E Ē0k [ΘT ]|ωi ≤ V ar Ē0k [ΘT ] , where, as a reminder, s is the aggregate state of the Nature and ωi
(

is the information set of agent i. Together with conditions (39) and (40), we know that, for all k ≥ 1,

β2k+1 ≤ β2k ≤ β2k−1 . This proves that, for all h ≥ 2, βh ∈ [0, 1] and is weakly decreasing in h.
V ar(Ei,0 [Ē0 [ΘT ]])
≤
Now we try to prove βh is strictly decreasing in h. Note that from condition (39), β2 = V ar Ē 1 [Θ ]
( 0 T)
(
[
])
(
)
β1 = 1. If β2 = β1 = 1, we have V ar Ei,0 Ē0 [ΘT ] = V ar Ē0 [ΘT ] for all i. This means that
(
[
]
)
(
[
])
(
)
(
[
]
)
V ar Ei,0 Ē0 [ΘT ] − Ē0 [ΘT ] = V ar Ei,0 Ē0 [ΘT ] + V ar Ē0 [ΘT ] − 2Cov Ei,0 Ē0 [ΘT ] , Ē0 [ΘT ]
(
)
(
[
])
= V ar Ē0 [ΘT ] − V ar Ei,0 Ē0 [ΘT ] = 0,
(41)
[
]
where the second equality follows from the law of iterated expectations. As a result, for all i, Ei,0 Ē0 [ΘT ] =
Ē0 [ΘT ] almost surely. We henceforth have that
)
(
)
(
])
(
[
V ar Ē0 [ΘT ] = Cov ΘT , Ē02 [ΘT ] = Cov ΘT , Ei,0 Ē0 [ΘT ]
(
)
= Cov ΘT , Ē0 [ΘT ] = Cov (ΘT , Ei,0 [ΘT ]) = V ar (Ei,0 [ΘT ]) ,
where the ﬁrst equality follows a similar argument as condition (38), the second and fourth equalities follow
[
]
from symmetry, the third equality follows from Ei,0 Ē0 [ΘT ] = Ē0 [ΘT ] almost surely, and the last equality
follows from the law of iterated expectations. This means that

(
)
(
)
(
)
V ar Ei,0 [ΘT ] − Ē0 [ΘT ] = V ar (Ei,0 [ΘT ]) + V ar Ē0 [ΘT ] − Cov Ei,0 [ΘT ] , Ē0 [ΘT ]
(
)
= V ar (Ei,0 [ΘT ]) − V ar Ē0 [ΘT ] = 0,

(42)

where the second equality follows from symmetry. As a result, Ei,0 [ΘT ] = Ē0 [ΘT ] almost surely for all

i, and Ei,0 [ΘT ] = Ej,0 [ΘT ] almost surely for all i, j . This is contradictory to the deﬁnition of incomplete
information. As a result, β2 < β1 = 1.
Now, suppose it is not the case that βh is strictly decreasing in h. Then there exists a smallest h∗ > 1
such that βh∗ +1 = βh∗ .

)
(
])
(
[
If h∗ = 2k for some k ≥ 1. From conditions (39) and (40), we have V ar Ei,0 Ē0k [ΘT ] = V ar Ē0k+1 [ΘT ] .
[
]
Following a similar argument as condition (42), we have Ei,0 Ē0k [ΘT ] = Ē0k+1 [ΘT ] almost surely. We
henceforth have

])
]
[
]
)
(
[
)
(
[
(
Cov Ē0k [ΘT ], Ē0k+1 [ΘT ] = Cov Ei,0 Ē0k−1 [ΘT ] , Ē0k+1 [ΘT ] = Cov Ei,0 Ē0k−1 [ΘT ] , Ei,0 Ē0k [ΘT ]
)
]
)
(
(
[
= Cov Ei,0 Ē0k−1 [ΘT ] , Ē0k [ΘT ] = Cov Ē0k [ΘT ], Ē0k [ΘT ] ,
38

where the ﬁrst and the last equalities follow from symmetry, the second equality follows from the fact that
[
]
Ei,0 Ē0k [ΘT ] = Ē0k+1 [ΘT ] almost surely, and the third equality follows from the law of iterated expectations.
This expression means βh∗ −1 = β2k−1 = β2k = βh∗ , which contradicts the fact that h∗ is the smallest h such
that βh∗ +1 = βh∗ .

(
[
])
If h∗ = 2k − 1 for some k ≥ 2, from conditions (39) and (40), we have V ar Ei,0 Ē0k [ΘT ]
=
( k
)
[ k
]
k
V ar Ē0 [ΘT ] . Following a similar argument as condition (41) for all i, Ei,0 Ē0 [ΘT ] = Ē0 [ΘT ] almost
surely. We henceforth have

(
)
(
)
(
[
])
V ar Ē0k [ΘT ] = Cov Ē0k−1 [ΘT ] , Ē0k+1 [ΘT ] = Cov Ē0k−1 [ΘT ] , Ei,0 Ē0k [ΘT ]
(
)
(
[
])
= Cov Ē0k−1 [ΘT ] , Ē0k [ΘT ] = Cov Ē0k−1 [ΘT ] , Ei,0 Ē0k−1 [ΘT ]
(
[
])
= V ar Ei,0 Ē0k−1 [ΘT ] ,
where the ﬁrst equality follows a similar argument as condition (38), the second and forth equalities follow
[
]
from symmetry, the third equality follows from Ei,0 Ē0k [ΘT ] = Ē0k [ΘT ] almost surely, and the last equality
follows from the law of iterated expectations. This expression means that βh∗ −1 = β2k−2 = β2k−1 = βh∗ ,
which contradicts the fact that h∗ is the smallest h such that βh∗ +1 = βh∗ .
As a result, βh is strictly decreasing in h. This implies that βh < β1 = 1, ∀h ≥ 2. It also means that βh >

0 ∀h. If not, there exists a h∗ such that βh∗ = 0. From strict monotonicity, we then have βh∗ +1 < βh∗ = 0,
which contradicts βh∗ +1 ≥ 0. This ﬁnishes the proof of Proposition 3.
Proof of Corollary 1. Corollary 1 follows directly from part (ii) of Theorem 1.
∑
Proof of Theorem 2. To simplify notation, we extend the deﬁnition of sh,τ = hr=1 χr,τ for all h > τ . In
the case that h > τ , from Lemma 2, we have χh,τ = 0. As a result, sh,τ = sτ,τ for all h > τ . We also deﬁne

s0,τ = 0 for all τ ≥ 1.
From condition (16), we have

sh,τ = γ τ −1 (γ + α) +

τ −1
∑

αγ l−1 sh−1,τ −l ∀h ≥ 1 and τ ≥ 1.

(43)

l=1

Now, for all τ ≥ 1, as χh,τ = 0 for h > τ , we can use dτ = sτ,τ denote the combined effect of beliefs of
all different orders. From condition (43), we have

dτ = γ

τ −1

(γ + α) +

τ −1
∑

αγ l−1 dτ −l ∀τ ≥ 1,

(44)

l=1

where we use the fact that sh,τ = sτ,τ for all h > τ . From condition (44), we can easily verify, by induction,
that

dτ = (γ + α)τ ∀τ ≥ 1.

(45)

For any h ≥ 1, we now prove that sh,τ /sτ,τ = sh,τ /dτ , strictly decreases with τ ≥ h. Notice that from
39

condition (43), we have, for all τ ≥ h ≥ 1,
τ

sh,τ +1 = γ (γ + α) + αsh−1,τ +

τ −1
∑

αγ l sh−1,τ −l

l=1

(46)

= γsh,τ + αsh−1,τ < (γ + α) sh,τ .

Also note that from condition (45), we have sτ +1,τ +1 = dτ +1 = (γ + α) dτ = (γ + α) sτ,τ . Together, we
have sh,τ +1 /sτ +1,τ +1 < sh,τ /sτ,τ for all τ ≥ h ≥ 1.
Finally, we prove that, for any h ≥ 1, sh,τ /sτ,τ → 0 as τ → +∞. Because s1,τ = γ τ −1 (γ + α) and sτ,τ =

(γ + α)τ , limτ →∞ sh,τ /sτ,τ → 0 holds for h = 1. Suppose there is some h such that limτ →∞ sh,τ /sτ,τ → 0
does not hold, let h∗ > 1 be the smallest of such h. As sh∗ ,τ /sτ,τ is strictly decreasing in τ , there exists Γ > 0
such that limτ →∞ sh∗ ,τ /sτ,τ → Γ. From conditions (45) and (46), we have
Let τ → +∞, we have Γ =

γ
γ+α Γ.

sh∗ ,τ +1
sτ +1,τ +1

=

γ sh∗ ,τ
γ+α sτ,τ

α
+ γ+α

sh∗ −1,τ
sτ,τ .

This cannot be true as α, γ > 0. As a result, limτ →∞ sh,τ /sτ,τ → 0 for all

h ≥ 1.
ϕT
ϕ∗T

Proof of Proposition 4. By Theorem 1, the ratio
follows that

ϕT
ϕ∗T

is strictly decreasing in T and bounded in (0, 1). It

necessarily converges to some φ ∈ [0, 1) as T → ∞. Similarly, by Proposition 3, βh is strictly

decreasing in T and bounded in (0, 1). It follows that βh necessarily converges to some β ∈ [0, 1) as T → ∞.
We ﬁrst prove φ = β ≡ limh→∞ βh . We note that for, any ϑ > 0, there exists a h∗ , such that βh − β <
for all h ≥ h∗ . From Theorem 2, we can then ﬁnd T ∗ ∈ N+ such that, for all T ≥ T ∗ ,

sh∗ −1,T
sT,T

ϑ
2

≤ ϑ2 . Together

with conditions (18) and (20), we have, for all T ≥ max {h∗ , T ∗ },

ϕT
−β =
ϕ∗T
≤

∑T

h=1 χh,T

∑h∗ −1
h=1

(

βh − β

sT,T
χh,T

sT,T
ϑ ϑ
≤ + = ϑ,
2
2

+

∑T

)

∑h∗ −1
h=1

=

h=h∗

(
(
) ∑
)
χh,T βh − β + Th=h∗ χh,T βh − β
sT,T

χh,T ϑ2

sT,T

where the ﬁrst inequality we use the fact that βh − β ≤ 1 and the second inequality uses the fact that
∑T

h=h∗ χh,T
sT,T

≤

sT,T
sT,T

= 1. As a result, φ ≡ limT →∞ ϕϕ∗T = β.
T

Finally, from condition (40), we know β2h−1 =

V ar(Ē0h [ΘT ])
Ē01 [ΘT ]

V ar(
limh→∞ β2h−1 = 0. As βh is decreasing in h, we also have

)

(
)
. If limh→∞ V ar Ē h [ΘT ] = 0, we have

β = lim βh = 0.
h→∞

(47)

As a result, limT →∞ ϕϕ∗T = 0.
T

Proof of Proposition 5. Under the assumed information structure, we have for any h ∈ {1, ..., T } and

0 ≤ t1 < t2 < · · · < th < T ,
Ēt1 [Ēt2 [...[Ēth [ΘT ]...]] = λh z.
40

(48)

Now we prove by induction that, for all t ≤ T − 1,

{
}
−1
at = (γ + α) ΠTτ =t+1
(γ + λα) Ēt [ΘT ] .

(49)

Since Θt = 0 for all t ̸= T, together with condition (16), we have aT = ΘT and aT −1 = (γ + α) ĒT −1 [ΘT ].
As a result, condition (49) holds for t = T − 1. Now, pick a t ≤ T − 2, assume that the claim holds for all

τ ∈ {t + 1, ..., T − 1}, and let us prove that it also holds for t. Using the claim for all τ ∈ {t + 1, ..., T − 1},
condition (16), and condition (48), we have, for t ≤ T − 2,

at = γ T −t Ēt [ΘT ] + αĒt [at+1 ] + α

T −t
∑

γ k−1 Ēt [at+k ] ,

k=2

γ Ēt [at+1 ] = λγ T −t Ēt [ΘT ] + λα

T −t
∑

γ k−1 Ēt [at+k ] .

k=2

As a result, we have at =

(γ
λ

)
+ α Ēt [at+1 ] . Together with condition (49) for t + 1, we have
{
}
−1
at = (γ + α) ΠTτ =t+1
(γ + λα) Ēt [ΘT ] .

−1
This proves condition (49) for all t ≤ T −1. As a result, ϕT = (γ + α) ΠTt=1
(γ + λα) . This proves Proposition

5.
Proof of Corollary 2. Note that δ − δ ′ = α (1 − λ) increases with α for any given λ < 1.
Proof of Lemma 3. As ﬁrms have complete information, the canonical NKPC in condition (10) holds.
Substituting it into the consumption beauty contest, condition (5), and using the fact that future markup
shocks are unpredictable, we have

ỹt = −σ R̃t − σ

∞
∑

β k Ētc [R̃t+k ] +

k=1

∞
∑

(1 − β + kσκ) β k−1 Ētc [ỹt+k ].

k=1

{
}T
Proof of Proposition 6. Let ỹttrap , π̃ttrap

t=0

denote the liquidity-trap level of output and inﬂation (i.e.,

the one obtained when the period-T nominal interest rate is ﬁxed at the steady-state value, R̃T = 0). From
conditions (9) and (10), we have, for all t ≤ T − 1,
trap
ỹt − ỹttrap = σEt [π̃ t+1 − π̃ trap
t+1 ] + Et [ỹt+1 − ỹt+1 ],
(
)
π̃t − π̃ trap
= κ ỹt − ỹttrap + βEt [π̃ t+1 − π̃ trap
t
t+1 ].

(50)
(51)

Now we will prove the following stronger result, which nests the representation in condition (24): there
exists positive scalars {ϕ∗τ , ϖτ∗ }τ ≥0 such that, whenever Assumptions 2 hold and z is commonly known, the

41

equilibrium spending and inﬂation at any t ≤ T are given by

ỹt − ỹttrap = −ϕ∗T −t · Et [R̃T ],
(
)
π̃t − π̃ttrap = κ ỹt − ỹttrap − ϖT∗ −t · Et [R̃T ].

(52)
(53)

We prove this result by induction, starting with t = T and proceeding backwards. When t = T , under
(
)
Assumption 2, we have ỹT − ỹTtrap = −σ R̃T and π̃T − π̃Ttrap = κ ỹT − ỹTtrap . This veriﬁes (52) and (53) for

t = T , with
ϕ∗0 = σ and ϖ0∗ = 0.

(54)

Now suppose that the result holds for arbitrary t ∈ {1, ..., T } and let’s prove that it also holds for t − 1.
By the assumption that (52) and (53) hold at t along with the Law of Iterated Expectations, we have

Et−1 [ỹt − ỹttrap ] = −ϕ∗T −t · Et−1 [R̃T ],
(
)
Et−1 [π̃t − π̃ttrap ] = − κϕ∗T −t + ϖT∗ −t · Et−1 [R̃T ].
Using the above together with conditions (50) and (51) veriﬁes that (52) and (53) hold also for t − 1, with

ϕ∗T −t+1 = (1 + σκ) ϕ∗T −t + σϖT∗ −t ,

(55)

ϖT∗ −t+1 = βκϕ∗T −t + βϖT∗ −t .

(56)

This completes the proof of conditions (50) and (51), and gives a recursive formula that can be used to
compute ϕ∗T .
Now we prove the Proposition. From conditions (55) and (56), we have that, for all τ ≥ 0,

ϕ∗τ +1 = (1 + σκ) ϕ∗τ + σϖτ∗ ,

(57)

ϖτ∗+1 = βκϕ∗τ + βϖτ∗ .

(58)

Together with condition (54), we know, as κ > 0, ϖτ∗ > 0, ∀τ ≥ 1. Then, from condition (57), we have

ϕ∗τ > σ, ∀τ ≥ 1, and ϕ∗τ is strictly increasing in τ. Moreover, as 1 + σκ > 1, we know ϕ∗τ explodes to inﬁnity
as τ → ∞ from condition (57).
Finally, we prove a few more results useful for the rest of the paper. First, we prove a recursive relationship
about {ϕ∗τ }τ ≥0 .

ϕ∗τ +1
ϕ∗τ −1
+
β
= 1 + β + σκ ∀τ ≥ 1.
ϕ∗τ
ϕ∗τ

From condition (57), we have, for all τ ≥ 1,

βϕ∗τ = β (1 + σκ) ϕ∗τ −1 + σβϖτ∗−1 .

42

(59)

Together with conditions (57) and (58), we arrive at condition (59).
Second, we prove that, when κ > 0,

ϕ∗τ
is strictly increasing in τ ≥ 1.
ϕ∗τ −1

(60)

(
)
From conditions (57) and (58), we have ϕ∗1 = σ (1 + σκ) and ϕ∗2 = σ (1 + σκ)2 + σκβ . As a result, when
κ > 0,

ϕ∗2
σκβ
ϕ∗
> ∗1 .
= 1 + σκ +
∗
ϕ1
1 + σκ
ϕ0

Now we proceed by induction. Suppose that, for τ ≥ 1, we have
and τ + 1, we have

ϕ∗τ +2
ϕ∗τ +1

>

ϕ∗τ +1
ϕ∗τ .

ϕ∗τ +1
ϕ∗τ

>

ϕ∗τ
ϕ∗τ −1 .

Using condition (59) for τ

This proves (60).

Finally, from condition (59), we know

ϕ∗τ
ϕ∗τ −1

is bounded above. Together with (60),

to Γ∗ > 0, as τ → ∞. From condition (59) again, we know Γ∗ satisfy

Γ∗ + β

ϕ∗τ
ϕ∗τ −1

must converge

1
= 1 + β + σκ.
Γ∗

}T
{
Proof of Proposition 7. With ỹttrap , π̃ttrap

t=0

(61)

deﬁned as in the proof of Proposition 6, along with the

fact that it is common knowledge monetary policy replicates ﬂexible-price allocations from T + 1 and on,
we can rewrite the two beauty contests as follows:

ỹt − ỹttrap = −σβ T −t Ētc [R̃T ] +
(

)

π̃t − π̃ttrap = κ ỹt − ỹttrap + κ

T −t
∑
k=1
T −t
∑

T −t
]
]
[
[
∑
trap
trap
,
+ (1 − β)
β k−1 Ētc ỹt+k − ỹt+k
σβ k−1 Ētc π̃t+k − π̃t+k

(62)

k=1

[

]

trap
+
(βθ)k Ētf ỹt+k − ỹt+k

k=1

1−θ
θ

T −t
∑

[
]
trap
.
(βθ)k Ētf π̃t+k − π̃t+k

(63)

k=1

Consider the following claim, which nests the representation in condition (25): under Assumption 3, there
exists functions ϕ, ϖ : (0, 1] × (0, 1] × N → R+ such that, for any t ≤ T − 1,

ỹt − ỹttrap = −ϕ (λc , λf , T − t) Ētc [R̃T ],
(
)
π̃t − π̃ttrap = κ ỹt − ỹttrap − ϖ (λc , λf , T − t) Ētf [R̃T ].
We now establish this claim by induction.
First, consider t = T , as R̃T becomes common known at period T , , we have

ỹT − ỹTtrap = −σ R̃T

(
)
π̃T − π̃Ttrap = κ ỹT − ỹTtrap .

and

43

(64)
(65)

Then, consider t = T − 1. From conditions (62) and (63), we have
c
ỹT −1 − ỹTtrap
−1 = −σ(1 + σκ)ĒT −1 [R̃T ],
(
)
trap
f
π̃T −1 − π̃Ttrap
=
κ
ỹ
−
ỹ
T
−1
−1
T −1 − σκβ ĒT −1 [R̃T ].

It follows that the claim holds for t = T − 1 with

ϕ(λc , λf , 1) = σ (1 + σκ)

and

ϖ(λc , λf , 1) = σκβ.

(66)

Now, pick an arbitrary t ≤ T −2, assume that conditions (64) and (65) hold for all τ ∈ {t+1, ..., T −1}, and
let us prove that it also holds for t. Since the claim holds for τ ∈ {t+1, ...T −1}, and since ỹT − ỹTtrap = −σ R̃T
and π̃T − π̃Ttrap = −κσ R̃T , from condition (62), we have

ỹt −

ỹttrap

= −σβ

T −t−1

(1 +

σκ) Ētc [R̃T ]

− (1 − β + σκ)

T∑
−t−1

c
β k−1 ϕ (λc , λf , T − t − k) Ētc [Ēt+k
[R̃T ]]

k=1

−σ

T∑
−t−1

[
]
f
β k−1 ϖ (λc , λf , T − t − k) Ētc Ēt+k
[R̃T ] .

k=1

As a result, we have

ỹt − ỹttrap = −σβ T −t−1 (1 + σκ) Ētc [R̃T ]
−

T∑
−t−1

β k−1 [(1 − β + σκ) λc ϕ (λc , λf , T − t − k) + σλf ϖ (λc , λf , T − t − k)] Ētc [R̃T ],

k=1

where we have used the fact that, under Assumption 3, for 1 ≤ k ≤ T − t − 1,
c
[R̃T ]] = λc Ētc [R̃T ]
Ētc [Ēt+k

and

f
Ētc [Ēt+k
[R̃T ]] = λf Ētc [R̃T ].

(67)

This proves the part of the claim that regards output, condition (64), with
−t−1
(
) T∑
ϕ (λc , λf , T − t) = β T −t−1 σ + σ 2 κ +
β k−1 [(1 − β + σκ) λc ϕ (λc , λf , T − t − k) + σλf ϖ (λc , λf , T − t − k)] .
k=1

(68)

44

Similarly, the inﬂation beauty contest in condition (63) gives

(
)
π̃t − π̃ttrap = κ ỹt − ỹttrap − σ κθ (βθ)T −t Ētf [R̃T ] −

κ
θ

T∑
−t−1

c
(βθ)k ϕ (λc , λf , T − t − k) Ētf [Ēt+k
[R̃T ]]

k=1

−

1−θ
θ

T∑
−t−1

f
[R̃T ]].
(βθ)k ϖ (λc , λf , T − t − k) Ētf [Ēt+k

k=1

As a result, we have

(
)
π̃t − π̃ttrap = κ ỹt − ỹttrap
{
−

σ κθ (βθ)T −t +

T∑
−t−1

(βθ)k

[

}
]
(1−θ)λf
κλc
ϖ (λc , λf , T − t − k) Ētf [R̃T ],
θ ϕ (λc , λf , T − t − k) +
θ

k=1

where we have used the fact that, similarly to the consumers’ case, for 1 ≤ k ≤ T − t − 1,
c
[R̃T ]] = λc Ētf [R̃T ]
Ētf [Ēt+k

and

f
[R̃T ]] = λf Ētf [R̃T ].
Ētf [Ēt+k

(69)

This proves the part of the claim that regards inﬂation, condition (65) with
T∑
−t−1
(
κ
ϖ (λc , λf , T − t) = σ (βθ)T −t +
(βθ)k κλθ c ϕ (λc , λf , T − t − k) +
θ

(1−θ)λf
ϖ (λc , λf , T
θ

)
− t − k) .

k=1

(70)

We ﬁnally provide a recursive formula for computing ϕ(λc , λf , T − t) and ϖ (λc , λf , T − t), which will
be useful later. From condition (68), we have, for t ≤ T − 2,

ϕ (λc , λf , T − t) = βϕ (λc , λf , T − t − 1) + (1 − β + σκ) λc ϕ (λc , λf , T − t − 1) + σλf ϖ (λc , λf , T − t − 1)
= (β + (1 − β + σκ) λc ) ϕ (λc , λf , T − t − 1) + σλf ϖ (λc , λf , T − t − 1) .

(71)

Similarly, from condition (70), we have, for t ≤ T − 2,

ϖ (λc , λf , T − t) = βθϖ (λc , λf , T − t − 1) + βθ

(

κλc
θ ϕ (λc , λf , T

− t − 1) +

(1−θ)λf
ϖ (λc , λf , T
θ

= κβλc ϕ (λc , λf , T − t − 1) + β [θ + (1 − θ) λf ] ϖ (λc , λf , T − t − 1) .

)
− t − 1)
(72)

From now on, to simplify notation, we use ϕτ and ϖτ as shortcuts for, respectively, ϕ (λc , λf , τ ) and

ϖ (λc , λf , τ ).
We ﬁrst prove part (i) of Proposition 7. From condition (68), we know ϕτ > σβ τ . The fact that ϕτ < ϕ∗τ
is a direct corollary from the monotonicity of ϕτ with respect to λc and λf , which will be proved shorty.
We then prove part (ii) of Proposition 7. As κ > 0, from conditions (66), (71) and (72), we know that

45

ϕτ , ϖτ > 0 for all τ ≥ 1.
We will ﬁrst prove, for τ ≥ 2, ϕτ = ϕ (λc , λf , τ ) is strictly increasing in both λc and λf . We will proceed
by induction on τ. For τ = 2, from (66), (71) and (72), we have ϕ2 and ϖ2 is strictly increasing in both λc
and λf . Suppose for τ ≥ 2, ϕτ , ϖτ is strictly increasing in both λc and λf . From conditions (71) and (72),
we know ϕτ +1 and ϖτ +1 are strictly increasing in both λc and λf , where we use the fact that ϕτ , ϖτ > 0.
This proves that, for τ ≥ 2, ϕτ = ϕ (λc , λf , τ ) is strictly increasing in both λc and λf . Because of the strict
ϕτ
ϕ∗τ
ratio ϕϕ∗τ
τ

monotonicity, we have, for τ ≥ 2, whenever λc < 1 and/or λf < 1,
We now prove that, whenever λc < 1 and/or λf < 1, the

ϕ(λc ,λf ,τ )
ϕ(1,1,τ ) < 1.
ϕ(λc ,λf ,τ )
=
is strictly
ϕ∗τ

=

decreasing in

τ ≥ 1. We start by noticing, from the proof of Proposition 6, we have, for τ ≥ 3,
ϕ∗τ −2
ϕ∗τ
+
β
=1 + β + σκ .
ϕ∗τ −1
ϕ∗τ −1

(73)

Now we prove that ϕτ satisﬁes an inequality with a similar form as (73):

ϕτ
ϕτ −2
+β
≤1 + β + σκλc ≤ 1 + β + σκ
ϕτ −1
ϕτ −1

∀τ ≥ 3.

(74)

From condition (71), we have, for τ ≥ 3,

ϕτ = (β + (1 − β) λc ) ϕτ −1 + σκλc ϕτ −1 + σλf ϖτ −1 ,
β
β+(1−β)λc ϕτ −1

σβκλc
β+(1−β)λc ϕτ −2

= βϕτ −2 +

+

σβλf
β+(1−β)λc ϖτ −2 .

From the previous two conditions, we have, for τ ≥ 3,

ϕτ + βϕτ −2 = (β + (1 − β) λc ) ϕτ −1 + σκλc ϕτ −1 + σλf ϖτ −1
+

β
β+(1−β)λc ϕτ −1

−

σβκλc
β+(1−β)λc ϕτ −2

−

(75)

σβλf
β+(1−β)λc ϖτ −2 .

Note that, for τ ≥ 3 and λc , λf ∈ (0, 1], we have

[
(β + (1 − β) λc ) + σκλc +

β
β+(1−β)λc

]

ϕτ −1 ≤ (1 + β + σκλc ) ϕτ −1 ,

and, from condition (72),

σλf ϖτ −1 −

σβκλc
β+(1−β)λc ϕτ −2

−

σβλf
β+(1−β)λc ϖτ −2
σβλ

σβκλc
f
=σλf (κβλc ϕτ −2 + β [θ + (1 − θ) λf ] ϖτ −2 ) − β+(1−β)λ
ϕτ −2 − β+(1−β)λ
ϖτ −2
c
c
(
)
]
[
1
1
ϕτ −2 + σβλf θ + (1 − θ) λf − β+(1−β)λ
ϖτ −2
=σκβλc λf − β+(1−β)λ
c
c

≤0.
Together with condition (75), we arrive at condition (74).
46

Now we can prove that, whenever λc < 1 and/or λf < 1,
prove

ϕ2
ϕ∗2

ϕ1
ϕ∗1 .

<1=

We proceed by induction on τ . If

(73) and (74), we have

ϕτ +1
ϕτ

<

ϕ∗τ +1
ϕ∗τ

and thus

ϕτ +1
ϕ∗τ +1

<

ϕτ
ϕ∗τ .

ϕτ
ϕ∗τ

<

ϕτ
ϕ∗τ

ϕτ −1
ϕ∗τ −1

is strictly decreasing in τ . We already
for τ ≥ 2, we have

This ﬁnishes the proof that

ϕτ
ϕ∗τ

ϕτ −1
ϕτ

>

ϕ∗τ −1
ϕ∗τ .

From

is strictly decreasing

in τ ≥ 1, whenever λc < 1 and/or λf < 1.
Now we prove that, whenever λc < 1 and/or λf < 1,

ϕτ
ϕ∗τ

converges to 0 as τ → ∞. Because

is strictly decreasing in τ ≥ 1, there exists Γ ∈ [0, 1) such that

ϕτ
ϕ∗τ

ϕτ
ϕ∗τ

>0

→ Γ as τ → ∞. We next prove by

contradiction that Γ = 0.
Suppose ﬁrst that λc < 1. If Γ > 0, we have
ϕτ
ϕτ −1

→ Γ∗ and

ϕτ −2
ϕτ −1

→

1
Γ∗

∗
ϕτ ϕτ −1
ϕ∗τ ϕτ −1

→ 1 as τ → ∞. Because

as τ → ∞. From condition (61), we have

ϕτ
ϕτ −1

ϕ∗τ
ϕ∗τ −1

→ Γ∗ , we have

+ β ϕϕττ −2
→ 1 + β + σκ as τ → ∞.
−1

However, this is inconsistent with (74) when λc < 1. As a result, Γ = 0.
Suppose next that λc = 1 but λf < 1. We prove a stronger version of (74):

ϕτ
ϕτ −2
+ (1 + σκ (1 − λf )) β
≤ 1 + β + σκ ∀τ ≥ 3.
ϕτ −1
ϕτ −1

(76)

From conditions (71) and (72), we have, for τ ≥ 3,

ϕτ = (1 + σκ) ϕτ −1 + σλf ϖτ −1 ,
βϕτ −1 = βϕτ −2 + βσκϕτ −2 + βσλf ϖτ −2 ,
ϖτ −1 = κβϕτ −2 + β [θ + (1 − θ) λf ] ϖτ −2 .
As a result, for τ ≥ 3,

ϕτ + βϕτ −2 = (1 + σκ + β) ϕτ −1 + σλf ϖτ −1 − βσκϕτ −2 − βσλf ϖτ −2
≤ (1 + σκ + β) ϕτ −1 + σ (λf − 1) κβϕτ −2 .
This proves (76).
Now, if Γ > 0, similarly, we have
and

ϕτ −2
ϕτ −1

σκ (1 −

→

1
Γ∗
λf ) β Γ1∗

∗
ϕτ ϕτ −1
∗
ϕτ ϕτ −1

→ 1 as τ → ∞. Because

as τ → ∞. From condition (61), we have

ϕτ
ϕτ −1

ϕ∗τ
ϕ∗τ −1

→ Γ∗ , we have

ϕτ
ϕτ −1

→ Γ∗

+ (1 + σκ (1 − λf )) β ϕϕττ −2
→ 1 + β + σκ +
−1

as τ → ∞. However, this is inconsistent with equation (76) when λf < 1. As a result, Γ = 0

when λc = 1, but λf < 1.
Finally, we prove that, when λc is sufﬁciently low, ϕ(λc , λf , τ ) converges to zero as τ → ∞. The eigenvalues of the dynamic system (ϕτ , ϖτ ) based on conditions (71) and (72) are

m1 =
m2 =

√
β + (1 − β + σκ) λc + β [(1 − θ) λf + θ] − (β + (1 − β + σκ) λc − β [(1 − θ) λf + θ])2 + 4σβλf λc κ
2
√
β + (1 − β + σκ) λc + β [(1 − θ) λf + θ] + (β + (1 − β + σκ) λc − β [(1 − θ) λf + θ])2 + 4σβλf λc κ
2
47

> 0;
> m1 .

Note that limλc →0 m2 = β < 1. As a result, when λc is sufﬁciently low, both eigenvalues are below 1,
which means that ϕ(λc , λf , τ ) converges to zero as τ → ∞.
Proof of Proposition 8. We use g̃ t to denote the amount of government spending at period t. As mentioned in main text, the government spending g̃ t is ﬁnanced by lump sum tax at period t, t̃t = g̃ t . Similar
to the analysis for monetary policy, we assume g̃ t becomes commonly known at period t and only allow
higher-order uncertainty about future g̃ .
Similar to the main text, now we start to work with log-linearized representation. Because the introduction of lump-sum tax, the individual budget constraint becomes
+∞
∑

β k c̃i,t+k = ãi,t +

k=0

+∞
∑

{
}
β k Ω1 (w̃i,t+k + ñi,t+k ) + Ω2 ẽi,t+k − (Ω1 + Ω2 − 1)t̃t ,

k=0

where Ω1 is the ratio of labor income to total income (net of tax) in steady state, Ω2 is the ratio of dividend
income to total income (net of tax) in steady state, and Ω1 +Ω2 −1 is the ratio of lump sum tax to total income
(net of tax) in steady state. On the other hand, the individual optimal labor supply and Euler equation,
conditions (28) and (29), still hold here. Together, this gives rise to the optimal expenditure of consumer

i ∈ Ic in period t,
c̃i,t =

(1−β)ϵσ
ϵσ+Ω1 ãi,t

−σ

+∞
∑

β k Ei,t [r̃t+k ] + (1 − β)

k=1
+∞
∑

+ (1 − β)

β k Ei,t

[

[

(ϵ+1)σΩ1
ϵσ+Ω1 w̃i,t+k

(ϵ+1)σΩ1
ϵσ+Ω1 w̃i,t

+

+

ϵσΩ2
ϵσ+Ω1 ẽi,t+k

ϵσΩ2
ϵσ+Ω1 ẽi,t

−

−

ϵσ(Ω1 +Ω2 −1)
t̃t
ϵσ+Ω1

ϵσ(Ω1 +Ω2 −1)
t̃t+k
ϵσ+Ω1

]

(77)

]
.

k=1

Using the fact that assets average to zero and that future idiosyncratic shocks are unpredictable, we obtain
the following condition for aggregate spending:

c̃t = −σ

+∞
∑

β k Ētc [r̃t+k ] + (1 − β)

[

(ϵ+1)σΩ1
ϵσ+Ω1 w̃t

+

ϵσΩ2
ϵσ+Ω1 ẽt

−

ϵσ(Ω1 +Ω2 −1)
t̃t
ϵσ+Ω1

]

(78)

k=1

+ (1 − β)

+∞
∑

β k Ētc

[

(ϵ+1)σΩ1
ϵσ+Ω1 w̃t+k

+

ϵσΩ2
ϵσ+Ω1 ẽt+k

−

ϵσ(Ω1 +Ω2 −1)
t̃t+k
ϵσ+Ω1

]
.

k=1

The ﬁrm side, on the other hand, is essentially same as the case without government spending, as a result,
condition (6) still holds, but the formula for marginal cost are different. In particular, from the production
function (3) and the optimal labor supply condition (28), we have

∫

1
1
ñi,t di + c̃t = ϵỹt + c̃t =
m̃ct = w̃t = ϵ
σ
σ
Ic
where ỹt = Ω3 c̃t + (1 − Ω3 ) g̃t , Ω3 =

1
Ω1 +Ω2

(
)
1
ϵΩ3 +
c̃t + ϵ (1 − Ω3 ) g̃t ,
σ

(79)

is the steady state consumption to output ratio, and 1 − Ω3 =

48

Ω1 +Ω2 −1
Ω1 +Ω2

is the steady state government spending to output ratio.44 As a result, the inﬂation beauty contest

in condition (6) can be written as

π̃t = κ (Ωc c̃t + (1 − Ωc ) g̃t ) + κ

+∞
∑

(βθ)k Ētf [Ωc c̃t+k + (1 − Ωc ) g̃t+k ] +

1−θ
θ

k=1

where Ωc =

ϵΩ3 + σ1
ϵ+ σ1

+∞
∑

(βθ)k Ētf [π̃t+k ] + κ µ̃t , (80)

k=1

.

Finally, note that the real proﬁt of monopolist j at period t is given by ejt =
linearization, we have ẽt = −
all t,
(ϵ+1)σΩ1
ϵσ+Ω1 w̃t

+

ϵσΩ2
ϵσ+Ω1 ẽt

−

Ω1
Ω1 +Ω2
Ω1
1− Ω +Ω
1
2

ϵσ(Ω1 +Ω2 −1)
t̃t
ϵσ+Ω1

(

pjt
pt

)
− wtj ytj . After log-

45 Together with condition (79), we have, for
1
w̃t + ỹ t = − Ω
Ω2 w̃t + ỹ t .

ϵσΩ2
ϵσ+Ω1 ỹ t

=

σΩ1
ϵσ+Ω1 w̃t

=

ϵσ(Ω1 +Ω2 )
ϵσ+Ω1 ỹt

=

ϵσ(Ω1 +Ω2 )
ϵσ+Ω1

+
[

+

−

Ω1
ϵσ+Ω1 c̃t

1
Ω1 +Ω2 c̃t

+

ϵσ(Ω1 +Ω2 −1)
g̃t
ϵσ+Ω1

−

ϵσ(Ω1 +Ω2 −1)
g̃t
ϵσ+Ω1

Ω1 +Ω2 −1
Ω1 +Ω2 g̃t

]

+

Ω1
ϵσ+Ω1 c̃t

−

ϵσ(Ω1 +Ω2 −1)
g̃t
ϵσ+Ω1

= c̃t .

Substitute it into condition (78), we have

c̃t = −σ

+∞
∑

β k−1 Ētc [r̃t+k ] +

1−β
β

{ +∞
∑

k=1

}
β k Ētc [c̃t+k ] .

(81)

k=1

This is exactly the same form of the consumption beauty contest, as condition (5).
Now let us state Proposition 8 formally here. Similar to Assumption 2, we assume g̃T = z + η, where

z and η are random variables, independent of one another and of any other shock in the economy, with
z ∼ N (0, σz2 ) and η ∼ N (0, ση2 ). The former is realized at t = 0, and could be interpreted as news about
government spending; the latter is realized at t = T and is unpredictable prior to that point.
First consider the complete information outcome. Suppose z is commonly known starting at t = 0, we

= ϕ∗g,T E0 [g̃T ], where c̃trap
denotes the “liquidity trap” level of
can ﬁnd a scalar ϕ∗g,T such that c̃0 − c̃trap
0
0
consumption (i.e., the one obtained when it is common knowledge that g̃T = 0.) We have, when κ > 0,

ϕ∗g,T > 0, is strictly increasing in T, and diverges to inﬁnity as T → ∞.

(82)

Now consider the case in which z is not common knowledge. Similar to Section 6, we consider the
information structure speciﬁed in Assumption 3, in which let each agent receives a private signal about z at
period 0. We can then ﬁnd a scalar ϕg,T such that c̃0 − c̃trap
= ϕg,T Ē c0 [g̃T ]. We have, as long as κ > 0 and
0
44

In steady state, the ratio of government spending to consumption will be equal to ratio of lump sum tax to total income (net of
tax), Ω1 + Ω2 − 1. This explains the formula for Ω3 .
)
(
∫
45
˜
This expression is equivalent to Ω2 ẽt + Ω1 (w̃t + ỹ t ) = Ω2 ẽt + Ω1
w̃t +
lj dj = ỹ t . The last equation is
Ω1 +Ω2

Ω1 +Ω2

Ω1 +Ω2

Ω1 +Ω2

If t

1
true because Ω1Ω+Ω
is steady state labor income to total income ratio (before deducting tax) and
2
income to total income ratio (before deducting tax).

49

Ω2
Ω1 +Ω2

is steady state dividend

information is incomplete, that is λc < 1,46

(
)
ϕg,T ∈ 0, ϕ∗g,T , is strictly increasing in λc and λf ;
the ratio ϕg,T /ϕ∗g,T is strictly decreasing in T and converges to 0 as T → ∞;
ﬁnally, when λc is sufﬁciently low, ϕg,T also converges to 0 as T → ∞.

(83)

We start from the proof of condition (82). Similar to the proof Proposition 6, we can establish that there
{
}
∗
exists non-negative scalars ϕ∗g,τ , ϖg,τ
such that, when z is commonly known, the equilibrium spending
τ ≥0
and inﬂation at any t ≤ T are given by

c̃t − c̃trap
= ϕ∗g,T −t · Et [g̃T ],
t
( (
)
)
∗
π̃t − π̃ttrap = κ Ωc c̃t − c̃trap
+
(1
−
Ω
)
g̃
c t + ϖg,T −t · Et [g̃T ],
t

(84)
(85)

where c̃trap
and π̃ttrap denotes the “liquidity trap” level of consumption and inﬂation (i.e., the one obtained
t
when it is common knowledge that g̃T = 0.) Note that the Euler condition and NKPC with government
spending under complete information can be written as:

{
}
c̃t = −σ R̃t − Et [π̃ t+1 ] + Et [c̃t+1 ] ,

(86)

π̃ t = κ (Ωc c̃t + (1 − Ωc ) g̃t ) + βEt [π̃ t+1 ] + κ µ̃t .

(87)

∗ = 0,
Using the above expressions, similar to the proof of Proposition 6, we can establish that ϕ∗g,0 = 0, ϖg,0
∗ = βκ (1 − Ω ), and for all τ ≥ 1,
ϕ∗g,1 = σκ (1 − Ωc ), ϖg,1
c
∗
ϕ∗g,τ +1 = (1 + σκΩc ) ϕ∗g,τ + σϖg,τ
,
∗
∗
∗
ϖg,τ
+1 = βκΩc ϕg,τ + βϖg,τ .

(88)
(89)

From condition (88), we can see when κ > 0, ϕ∗g,τ is positive, strictly increasing in τ and diverges to inﬁnity.
This proves condition (82). Similar to condition (59, one can also prove the following recursive relationship
about ϕ∗g :

ϕ∗g,τ +1
ϕ∗g,τ −1
+β ∗
= 1 + β + σκΩc ∀τ ≥ 1.
ϕ∗g,τ
ϕg,τ

Moreover, as condition (61), we know

ϕ∗g,τ
ϕ∗g,τ −1

(90)

must converge to Γ∗g > 0, as τ → ∞:

Γ∗g + β

1
= 1 + β + σκΩc .
Γ∗g

(91)

We now turn to the case of incomplete information and establish the proof of condition (83). Similar to
46
For simplicity here, we always remove common knowledge about z among consumer here. We allow λf ∈ (0, 1]. In other
words, we nest the case in which ﬁrms have perfect knowledge about z .

50

the proof of Proposition 7, we can ﬁnd ϕg , ϖg : (0, 1] × (0, 1] × N → R≥0 such that, for any t ≤ T − 1,

c̃t − c̃trap
= ϕg (λc , λf , T − t) Ētc [g̃T ],
t
( (
)
)
π̃t − π̃ttrap = κ Ωc c̃t − c̃trap
+
(1
−
Ω
)
g̃
+ ϖg (λc , λf , T − t) Ētf [g̃T ].
c
t
t

(92)
(93)

Using conditions (80) and (81), we have ϕg (λc , λf , 1) = σκ (1 − Ωc ), ϖg (λc , λf , 1) = βκ (1 − Ωc ) and, for
all τ ≥ 2,

ϕg (λc , λf , τ ) = σβ τ −1 (1 − Ωc ) κ +

τ −1
∑

β k−1 [(1 − β + σκΩc ) λc ϕg (λc , λf , τ − k) + σλf ϖg (λc , λf , τ − k)] ;

k=1

(94)

(
∑
κ
ϖg (λc , λf , τ ) = (1 − Ωc ) (βθ)T −t +
(βθ)k κλθc Ωc ϕg (λc , λf , τ − k) +
θ
τ −1

(1−θ)λf
ϖg
θ

)
(λc , λf , τ − k) .

k=1

(95)
Together, we can establish, for all τ ≥ 2,

ϕg (λc , λf , τ ) = (β + (1 − β + σκΩc ) λc ) ϕg (λc , λf , τ − 1) + σλf ϖg (λc , λf , τ − 1) ;

(96)

ϖg (λc , λf , τ ) = κβλc Ωc ϕg (λc , λf , τ − 1) + β [θ + (1 − θ) λf ] ϖg (λc , λf , τ − 1) .

(97)

From the above conditions, we can see that for for all τ ≥ 2, ϕg,τ = ϕg (λc , λf , τ ) is strictly increasing in λc and λf .
(
)
As ϕ∗g,τ = ϕg (1, 1, T ), we also have ϕg,τ ∈ 0, ϕ∗g,τ .
Now, we now prove that, whenever λc < 1, the ratio

ϕg,τ
ϕ∗g,τ

=

ϕg (λc ,λf ,τ )
ϕ∗g,τ

is strictly decreasing in τ ≥ 1 and

converges to 0 as τ → ∞. To this goal, similar to condition (74), we try to establish that

ϕg,τ
ϕg,τ −2
+β
≤ 1 + β + σκΩc λc < 1 + β + σκΩc ∀τ ≥ 3.
ϕg,τ −1
ϕg,τ −1

(98)

From condition (96), we have, for τ ≥ 3,

ϕg,τ = (β + (1 − β) λc ) ϕg,τ −1 + σκΩc λc ϕg,τ −1 + σλf ϖg,τ −1 ,
β
β+(1−β)λc ϕg,τ −1

= βϕg,τ −2 +

σβκΩc λc
β+(1−β)λc ϕg,τ −2

+

σβλf
β+(1−β)λc ϖg,τ −2 .

From the previous two conditions, we have, for τ ≥ 3,

ϕg,τ + βϕg,τ −2 = (β + (1 − β) λc ) ϕg,τ −1 + σκΩc λc ϕg,τ −1 + σλf ϖg,τ −1
+

β
β+(1−β)λc ϕg,τ −1

−

51

σβκΩc λc
β+(1−β)λc ϕg,τ −2

−

σβλf
β+(1−β)λc ϖg,τ −2 .

(99)

Note that, for τ ≥ 3 and λc , λf ∈ (0, 1], we have

[
(β + (1 − β) λc ) + σκΩc λc +

β
β+(1−β)λc

]

ϕg,τ −1 ≤ (1 + β + σκΩc λc ) ϕg,τ −1 ,

and from condition (97), we have

σλf ϖg,τ −1 −

σβκΩc λc
β+(1−β)λc ϕg,τ −2

−

σβλf
β+(1−β)λc ϖg,τ −2
σβλ

σβκΩc λc
f
ϕg,τ −2 − β+(1−β)λ
ϖg,τ −2
=σλf (κβλc Ωc ϕg,τ −2 + β [θ + (1 − θ) λf ] ϖg,τ −2 ) − β+(1−β)λ
c
c
(
[
)
]
1
1
=σκβΩc λc λf − β+(1−β)λ
ϕg,τ −2 + σβλf θ + (1 − θ) λf − β+(1−β)λ
ϖg,τ −2
c
c

≤0.
Together with condition (99), we reach at condition (98). To prove
ϕg,2
ϕ∗g,2

we already prove that
ϕg,τ −1
ϕg,τ >
ϕ
that ϕg,τ
∗
g,τ

ϕ∗g,τ −1
ϕ∗g,τ

<1=

ϕg,1
ϕ∗g,1 .

ϕg,τ
ϕ∗g,τ

is strictly decreasing in τ , note that

We proceed by induction on τ . If

. From (90) and (98), we have

ϕg,τ +1
ϕg,τ

<

ϕ∗g,τ +1
ϕ∗g,τ

and thus

ϕg,τ
ϕ∗g,τ

ϕg,τ +1
ϕ∗g,τ +1

<

<

ϕg,τ −1
ϕ∗g,τ −1

ϕg,τ
ϕ∗g,τ .

for τ ≥ 2, we have

This ﬁnishes the proof

is strictly decreasing in τ ≥ 1.

To prove that

ϕg,τ
ϕ∗g,τ

converges to 0 as τ → ∞. Because

exists Γg ∈ [0, 1) such that
ϕ∗g,τ
ϕ∗g,τ −1
ϕg,τ −2

→ Γ∗g , we have

ϕg,τ
ϕ∗g,τ

ϕg,τ
ϕg,τ −1

ϕg,τ
ϕ∗g,τ

> 0 is strictly decreasing in τ ≥ 1, there

→ Γg as τ → ∞. If Γg > 0, we have

→ Γ∗g and

ϕg,τ −2
ϕg,τ −1

→

1
Γ∗g

∗
ϕg,τ ϕg,τ −1
ϕ∗g,τ ϕg,τ −1

→ 1 as τ → ∞. Because

as τ → ∞. From condition (91), we have

ϕg,τ
ϕg,τ −1

+

β ϕg,τ −1 → 1 + β + σκΩc as τ → ∞. However, this is inconsistent with (98) as λc < 1 and κ > 0. As a result,
Γg = 0.
Finally, we prove that, when λc is sufﬁciently low, ϕg (λc , λf , τ ) converges to zero as τ → ∞. The
eigenvalues of the dynamic system (ϕg,τ , ϖg,τ ) based on conditions (96) and (97) are

m1 =

β + (1 − β + σκΩc ) λc + β [(1 − θ) λf + θ]
2
√
−

(β + (1 − β + σκΩc ) λc − β [(1 − θ) λf + θ])2 + 4σβλf λc Ωc κ

2
β + (1 − β + σκΩc ) λc + β [(1 − θ) λf + θ]
m2 =
2
√
+

(β + (1 − β + σκΩc ) λc − β [(1 − θ) λf + θ])2 + 4σβλf λc Ωc κ
2

> 0,

> m1 .

Note that limλc →0 m2 = β < 1. As a result, when λc is sufﬁciently low, both eigenvalues are below 1, which
means that ϕg (λc , λf , τ ) converges to zero as τ → ∞.

52

Appendix B. Rational Inattention and Learning
In this appendix, we ﬁrst sketch how the friction we consider can be recast as the product of rational inattention. We next extend Theorem 1 to two leading forms of learning studied in the literature. We ﬁnally
prove an asymptotic version of our horizon effect for arbitrary forms of learning.
The Friction as the Product of Rational Inattention. We now brieﬂy sketch how the friction we consider
can be recast as the product of rational inattention and, in this sense, a form of bounded rationality.47
We let ΘT be Normally distributed and, to sharpen the exposition, we assume that ΘT is realized at

t = 0 (think of ΘT as being itself the news). The typical agent is nevertheless unable to observe ΘT perfectly.
Instead, for every t, the action ai,t must be measurable in ωit ≡ {ωi,τ }τ ≤t , where ωi,τ is a noisy signal obtained
in period τ. The noise is assumed to be independent across the agent.48 This guarantees that all aggregate
outcomes are functions of ΘT and, therefore, we can reduce the rational-inattention problem faced by each
agent to the choice of a sequence of signals about ΘT . We ﬁnally let these signals be chosen optimally, that
is, so as to maximize the agent’s ex ante payoff, subject to the following constraint:

(
)
I ωi,t , ΘT | ωit−1 ≤ κRI ,

(100)

(
)
where I ωi,t , ΘT |ωit−1 is the (entropy-based) information ﬂow between the period-t signal and ΘT , conditional on the agent’s past information, and κRI > 0 is an exogenous scalar.
The usual interpretation of constraint (100) is that it captures the agent’s limited cognitive capacity in
tracking ΘT . But since beliefs about ΘT map, in equilibrium, to beliefs of future outcomes, one can also think
of (100) as a constraint on the agent’s ability to ﬁgure out the likely effects of the underlying variation in ΘT .
This echoes Tirole (2015), who interprets rational inattention in games as a form of “costly contemplation.”
As long as the prior about ΘT is Gaussian and the objective function is quadratic, which is the case
here by assumption, the optimal signal is also Gaussian. Furthermore, the noise in the signal has to be
independent across periods, or else the agent could economize on cognitive costs, that is, relax the constraint
in (100). These arguments are standard; see, e.g., Mackowiak, Matejka and Wiederholt (2017). The case
studied here is actually far simpler than the one studied in the literature, because the relevant fundamental

(ΘT ) does not vary as time passes. We infer that the optimal signal at every t ≤ T − 1 is given by ωi,t =
ΘT + vi,t , where the noise vi,t is orthogonal to both ΘT and {vi,τ }τ <t . Letting τt denotes the precision (i.e.,
the reciprocal of the variance) of this noise, we have that the period-t information ﬂow is given by

(

I ωi,t , ΘT |

ωit−1

)

=

47

1
2

(
)
τt
log2 1 +
,
ςt

For the rational inattention problem to be well-deﬁned,
we need to specify a payoff structure behind condition (11). For
∑ t
example, we can think player i’s payoff is Ui =
t β U (ai,t , ai,t+1 ; Θt , at ), where U is a reverse-engineered quadratic utility
function so that the player’s best-response condition is given by (11).
48
Although this assumption is separate the information-ﬂow constraint (100), it is standard in the literature (e.g., Woodford, 2003a,
Mackowiak and Wiederholt, 2009, Luo et al., 2017) and seems appealing if one interprets the noise as the product of cognitive
limitations. It is also broadly consistent with experimental evidence (e.g., Khaw, Stevens and Woodford, 2016).

53

where ςt denotes the precision of the agent’s prior in the beginning of period t; the latter is deﬁned recursively
by ς0 = σθ−2 and ςt+1 = ςt +τt for t ∈ {0, ..., T −1}. It follows that the information constraint (100) pins down
−1
the sequence {τt }Tt=0
as a function of κRI and σθ2 alone. All in all, the setting we have considered here is

therefore nested in the cases with learning studied in the next part of this appendix, for which Theorem 1
applies. This completes the rational-inattention interpretation of our results.49
The Horizon Effect with Sticky Information or Noisy Private Learning. We now extend Theorem 1 to
(
)
two leading forms of learning studied in the literature. Let ΘT ∼ N 0, σθ2 and consider the following two
cases of learning.
Case 1. Agents become gradually aware of ΘT , as in Mankiw and Reis (2002) and Wiederholt (2015).
In particular, at each t ∈ {0, ..., T − 1}, a fraction λsticky of agents who have not become aware about ΘT
become aware about ΘT . ΘT becomes commonly known at period T.
Case 2. Agents receive a new private signal each period, as in Woodford (2003a), Nimark (2008), and
Mackowiak and Wiederholt (2009). In particular, at at each t ∈ {0, ..., T − 1}, agent i’s new information
(
)
2
about ΘT is summarized in the private signal si,t = ΘT + vi,t , where vi,t ∼ N 0, σv,t
is i.i.d across i and t,
and independent of ΘT . ΘT becomes commonly known at period T.
−1
In both cases, there exists {λt }Tt=0
such that, for all t, λt ∈ (0, 1) and, for any h ∈ {1, ..., T } and

0 ≤ t1 < t2 < · · · < th < T ,
Ēt1 [Ēt2 [...[Ēth [ΘT ]...]] = λt1 · · · λth ΘT ,
In case 1, λt = 1 − (1 − λsticky )t+1 . In case 2, λt =

(101)

∑t
−2
σv,τ
∑t τ =0−2
−2 .
σ
+σ
τ =0 v,τ
θ

Now we prove by induction that, for all t ≤ T − 1,

{
}
−1
at = (γ + α) ΠTτ =t+1
(γ + λτ α) Ēt [ΘT ] .

(102)

Since Θt = 0 for all t ̸= T, together with condition (16), we have aT = ΘT and aT −1 = (γ + α) ĒT −1 [ΘT ].
As a result, condition (102) holds for t = T − 1. Now, pick a t ≤ T − 2, assume that the claim holds for all

τ ∈ {t + 1, ..., T − 1}, and let us prove that it also holds for t. Using the claim for all τ ∈ {t + 1, ..., T − 1},
condition (16), and condition (101), we have, for t ≤ T − 2,

at = γ T −t Ēt [ΘT ] + αĒt [at+1 ] + α

T −t
∑

γ k−1 Ēt [at+k ] ;

k=2

γ Ēt [at+1 ] = λt+1 γ T −t Ēt [ΘT ] + αλt+1

T −t
∑

γ k−1 Ēt [at+k ] .

k=2
49

Two remarks are worth making. First, suppose that the agents have a limited cognitive capacity to allocate, not per period, but
across the entire horizon. In this case,
of per-period
constraints seen in condition (100) are replaced by a single constraint
( the series
)
−1
over the entire horizon, namely I {ωi,t }Tt=0
, ΘT ≤ κRI . It then becomes optimal to allocate all capacity to the period-0 signal,
which means that this case can justify to our baseline analysis, which assumes away learning. Second, suppose that the news
about the fundamental of interest (say, monetary policy) come at the same time with news about another fundamental (say, TFP)
and that the agents can economize on cognitive effort by obtaining a joint signal of all the news. In this case, rational inattention
can contribute to confounding of one kind of news with another, a scenario not considered here.

54

As a result, we have at =

(

γ
λt+1

)
+ α Ēt [at+1 ] . Together with condition (102) for t + 1, we have
{
}
−1
at = (γ + α) ΠTτ =t+1
(γ + λτ α) Ēt [ΘT ] .

−1
This proves condition (102) for all t ≤ T − 1. As a result, ϕT = (γ + α) ΠTt=1
(γ + λt α) . Together with the

fact that λt ∈ (0, 1) and ϕ∗T = (γ + α)T , we prove Theorem 1 for the case with learning.
The Limit Property with Arbitrary Learning. As noted in the main text, it is possible to prove, under quite
general conditions, an asymptotic version of our horizon effect: as long as the higher-order uncertainty is
bounded away from zero (in a sense we make precise now), the scalar ϕT becomes vanishingly small relative
to ϕ∗T as T → ∞.
For any t ≤ T − 1 and any k ∈ {1, ..., T − t}, we henceforth let Btk collect all the relevant k -order beliefs,
as of period t :

{
}
Btk ≡ x : ∃(t1 , t2 , · · · , tk ), with t = t1 < t2 < · · · < tk ≤ T − 1, such that x = Ēt1 [Ēt2 [· · · Ētk [ΘT ] · · · ]] .
We next introduce the following assumption.
Assumption 4 (Non-Vanishing Higher-Order Uncertainty) There exists an ϵ > 0 such that:
(i) For all t ∈ {0, ...., T − 1}, there exists at least a mass ϵ of agents such that

(
)
V ar Et [x]|ωit ≥ ϵV ar (Et [x]) ,
for all x ∈ Bτk ∪ {ΘT }, τ ∈ {t + 1, ..., T − 1}, and k ∈ {1, ..., T − τ }, where ωit is agent i′ s information set
at period t and Et [x] denotes the rational expectation of variable x conditional on the union of information
sets of all agents in the economy available at period t.
(
)
(ii) V ar Ē0 [ΘT ] ≥ ϵ.
To interpret this assumption, note that complete information imposes that Et [x] is known to every
(
)
agent, and therefore that V ar Et [x]]|ωit = 0, regardless of how volatile Et [x] itself is. By contrast, let(
)
ting V ar Et [x] |ωit > 0 whenever V ar (Et [x]) > 0 is essentially tautological to assuming that agents have
incomplete information or, equivalently, that they face higher-order uncertainty. Relative to this tautology,
part (i) introduces an arbitrarily small bound on the level of higher-order uncertainty. This bound guarantees
that the higher-order uncertainty does not vanish as we let T go to inﬁnity. Part (ii), on the other hand, means
simply that there is non-trivial variation in ﬁrst-order beliefs in the ﬁrst place. The next result then formalizes
our point that our horizon effect, at least in its limit form, holds for arbitrary forms of learning.
Proposition 9 (Limit) Under Assumption 4, the ratio

ϕT
ϕ∗T

converges to zero as T → ∞.

Proof of Proposition 9. We ﬁrst prove that, under Assumption (4),

(
)k
V ar (y) ≤ 1 − ϵ2 V ar (ΘT ) .
55

(103)

for any t ≤ T − 1 and y = Ēt Ēt2 ...Ētk [ΘT ] ∈ Btk .
To simplify notation, let x = Ēt2 ...Ētk [ΘT ] for k ≥ 2, and x = ΘT for k = 1. From Assumption 4, we
have, there is at least a mass ϵ of agents such that

(
)
V ar Et [x] |ωit ≥ ϵV ar (Et [x]) .
As a result,

[
(
) ]
E V ar Et [x] |ωit |Ωt ≥ ϵ2 V ar (Et [x]) ,

where Ωt is the cross-sectional distribution of agent’s information set ωit at period t. Using the law of total
variance, we have

[
(
) ]
( [
])
[
(
) ]
( [
])
V ar (Et [x]) = E V ar Et [x] |ωit |Ωt + V ar E Et [x] |ωit = E V ar Et [x] |ωit |Ωt + V ar E x|ωit .
As a result, we have50

(
)
( [
]) (
)
)
(
V ar (y) = V ar Ēt Ēt2 ...Ētk [ΘT ] = V ar Ēt [x] ≤ V ar E x|ωit ≤ 1 − ϵ2 V ar (Et [x])
(
)
(
)
(
)
≤ 1 − ϵ2 V ar (x) = 1 − ϵ2 V ar Ēt2 ...Ētk [ΘT ] .
Iterating the previous condition proves (103).
Condition (103) provides an upper bound for the variance of all k -th order belief. Together with the fact
that ϕ∗T = sT,T and, for any random variables X, Y and scalars a, b ≥ 0,

V ar(aX + bY ) = a2 V ar(X) + 2abCov (X, Y ) + b2 V ar (Y )
√
≤ a2 V ar(X) + 2ab V ar (X) V ar (Y ) + b2 V ar (Y )
( √
)2
√
=
a V ar (X) + b V ar (Y ) ,

(104)

we have

(

ϕT
ϕ∗T

)2

(
) )2
Cov a0 , Ē0 [ΘT ]
V ar (a0 )
(
)
(
)
≤ [ ∗ ]2
=
∗
ϕT V ar Ē0 [ΘT ]
ϕT V ar Ē0 [ΘT ]
[ T (
)]2
∑ χk,T (
k √
)
1
)
(
≤
1 − ϵ2 2 V ar (ΘT )
V ar Ē0 [ΘT ] k=1 sT,T
[ T (
)]2
∑ χk,T (
k
)
V ar (ΘT )
).
(
=
1 − ϵ2 2
sT,T
V ar Ē0 [ΘT ]
k=1
(

(105)

h

Further note that, for any ϑ > 0, there exists h ∈ N+ such that

(1−ϵ2 ) 2

1

1−(1−ϵ2 ) 2

≤

ϑ
2.

From Theorem 2, there

50
We use the[ fact
] random variable X , and any information set I , V ar (E [X|I]) ≤ V ar (X) . We also use the fact
[ that ]for any
that Ē t [·] = E E · ωit |Ωt , where Ωt is the cross sectional distribution of ωit at time t,

56

exists T ∗ ∈ N+ such that, for all T ≥ T ∗ ,

∑h−1

χk,T
k=1 sT,T

≤ ϑ2 . As a result, for all T ≥ max {T ∗ , h} ,

(
)h
T
T
h−1
∑
∑
)k ∑
(
)k
1 − ϵ2 2
χk,T (
χk,T
ϑ
2 2
2 2
1−ϵ
≤
+
1−ϵ
≤ +
≤ ϑ.
sT,T
sT,T
2 1 − (1 − ϵ2 ) 12
k=1
k=h
k=1
This proves

)
T (
∑
)k
χk,T (
2 2
→ 0 as T → +∞.
1−ϵ
sT,T
k=1

(
)
Together with (105) and the fact that V ar Ē0 [ΘT ] ≥ ϵ, the proof of Proposition 9 is completed.

57

Appendix C. Additional Results for the New Keynesian Model
In this Appendix, we provide a few additional results regarding the application of our insights in the context
of a liquidity trap. We ﬁrst explain how our results regarding the forward-guidance puzzle can be understood
under the lenses of a discounted Euler condition and a discounted NKPC, and draw certain connections to
the literature. We next show how our insights help lessen the paradox of ﬂexibility. We ﬁnally show that all
the results of Section 5 extend to the new type of beauty contest seen in condition (22).
Discounted Euler Condition and Discounted NKPC. Proposition 5 has already indicated how the lack
of common knowledge is akin to introducing additional discounting in the forward-looking equations of a
macroeconomic model. We now illustrate how this helps recast our results regarding forward guidance and
ﬁscal multipliers under the lenses of a discounted Euler condition and a discounted NKPC.
For the present purposes, we make a minor modiﬁcation to the setting used in Section 6: for t ≤ T , we
let the ﬁrms lack knowledge of the concurrent level of marginal cost. For simplicity, we also let the ﬁrms
and the consumers face the same level of friction, that is, we set λc = λf = λ. These modiﬁcations are not
strictly needed but sharpen the representation offered below.51
Proposition 10 The power of forward guidance in the absence of common knowledge, ϕT , is the same as
that in a representative-agent variant in which the Euler condition and the NKPC are modiﬁed as follows, for
all t ≤ T − 1:

{
}
ỹt = −σ R̃t − λEt [π̃t+1 ] + Mc Et [ỹt+1 ]

(106)

π̃t = κ′ ỹt + βMf Et [π̃t+1 ] + κ µ̃t ,

(107)

where Mc ≡ β + (1 − β) λ ∈ (β, 1], Mf ≡ θ + (1 − θ) λ ∈ (θ, 1], and κ′ ≡ κλ.52
This result, which is analogous to Proposition 5 in our abstract setting, maps the incomplete-information

ϕT of the economy under consideration to the complete-information ϕ∗T of a variant economy, in which the
Euler condition and the NKPC have been “discounted” in the manner described above. When we remove
common knowledge, it is as if the representative consumer discounts her expectations of next period’s
aggregate income and inﬂation by a factor equal to, respectively, Mc and λ; and it is as if the representative
ﬁrm discounts the future inﬂation by a factor equal to Mf .53
Consider ﬁrst the Euler condition. When β is close to 1, the discount on future consumption, Mc , is
close to 1, even if λ is close to zero. This underscores that the multiplier inside the demand block—which
gets attenuated by the absence of common knowledge—is weak in the textbook version of the New Keynesian model. As mentioned in the main text, short horizons, counter-cyclical precautionary savings, and
51

Without these modiﬁcations, the obtained representation is a bit less elegant, but the essence remains the same; see Proposition
10 in the ﬁrst NBER version of our paper, Angeletos and Lian (2016b).
52
To be precise, condition (106) holds with Mc = 1 for t = T − 1.
53
The change in the slope of the NKPC, from κ to κ′ , is of relative little interest to us, because the effect of the informational
friction through this slope cannot be identiﬁed separately from that of a higher Frisch elasticity or less steep marginal costs.

58

feedback effects between housing prices and consumer spending tend to reinforce this multiplier, thereby
also increasing the discounting caused by the absence of common knowledge. Also note that, while future
consumption is discounted by Mc , future inﬂation is discounted by λ. Clearly, this can have a signiﬁcant
effect on the joint dynamics of spending and inﬂation even when Mc is close to 1.
Consider next the NKPC. For the textbook parameterization of the degree of price stickiness (meaning a
price revision rate, 1 − θ, equal to 1/3), the effective discount factor, Mf , falls from 1 to .9 as we move from
common knowledge (λ = 1) to the level of imperfection assumed in our numerical example (λ = .75). The
magnitude of this discount helps explain the sizable effects seen in Figure 1. Under the parameterization
we consider, the actual response of inﬂation to news about future demand is greatly reduced relative the
common-knowledge benchmark. The fact that the average consumer underestimates the inﬂation response,
as well as the spending of other consumers, reinforces this effect and helps further attenuate the feedback
loop between inﬂation and spending.
Relation to Gabaix (2016) and McKay, Nakamura and Steinsson (2016a). Related forms of discounting
appear in McKay, Nakamura and Steinsson (2016a), for the Euler condition, and in Gabaix (2016), for both
the Euler condition and the NKPC. In this regards, these papers and ours are complementary to one another.
However, the underlying theory and its empirical manifestations are different.
McKay, Nakamura and Steinsson (2016a) obtain a discounted Euler condition at the aggregate level by
introducing a speciﬁc combination of heterogeneity and market incompleteness that forces some agents to
hit their borrowing constraints and breaks the individual-level Euler condition. This theory therefore ties the
resolution of forward guidance to microeconomic evidence about the response of individual consumption
to idiosyncratic shocks. By contrast, our theory ties the resolution of forward guidance to survey evidence
about the response of average forecast errors to the underlying policy news. The two theories can therefore
be quantiﬁed independently from one another—and it’s an open question which is one is more relevant in
the context of forward guidance.
Gabaix (2016) on the other hand, assumes two kinds of friction. The ﬁrst is that agents are less responsive
to any variation in interest rates and incomes due to “sparsity” (a form of adjustment cost). The second is
that agents underestimate the response of future aggregate outcomes to exogenous shocks. The ﬁrst is of
purely decision-theoretic nature and, as the one in McKay, Nakamura and Steinsson (2016a), amounts to
a distortion of the individual-level Euler condition. The second is more closely related to the one we have
obtained here: by anchoring expectations of aggregate outcomes, it gives rise to discounting only at the
aggregate level. In this regard, Gabaix’s theory and ours have a similar empirical implication: they both
let the average forecast of future inﬂation and income respond less than the complete-information, rationalexpectations, benchmark. Yet, our theory makes the following distinct prediction, which is consistent with
the evidence in Coibion and Gorodnichenko (2012): the forecast errors, and the associated discounting,
ought to decrease as time passes, agents accumulate more information, and higher-order beliefs converge
to ﬁrst-order beliefs.
Proof of Proposition 10. Let us ﬁrst focus on the incomplete-information ϕT . When ﬁrms lack common
59

knowledge of the concurrent level of marginal cost, condition (62) continues to hold but condition (63)
becomes, for any t ≤ T ,

π̃t −

π̃ttrap

=κ

T −t
∑

k

(βθ)

Ētf

[
]
trap
ỹt+k − ỹt+k
+

k=0

1−θ
θ

T −t
∑

[
]
trap
.
(βθ)k Ētf π̃t+k − π̃t+k

k=1

Slightly different from conditions (64) and (65),54 we can ﬁnd functions ϕ, ω : (0, 1] × N → R≥0 such that,
for any t ≤ T − 1,

ỹt − ỹttrap = −ϕ (λ, T − t) Ētc [R̃T ],

(108)

π̃t − π̃ttrap = −ω (λ, T − t) Ētf [R̃T ],

(109)

where ϕ (λ, 1) = σ (1 + σλκ), ω (λ, 1) = κλσ (1 + σλκ) + κβ (θ + (1 − θ) λ) σ, and for t ≤ T − 2,

ϕ (λ, T − t) = (β + (1 − β) λ) ϕ (λ, T − t − 1) + σλω (λ, T − t − 1) ,

(110)

ω (λ, T − t) = β (θ + (1 − θ) λ) ω (λ, T − t − 1) + κλϕ (λ, T − t) .

(111)

We now derive the complete-information ϕ∗T and ωT∗ of a variant economy, where they denote how the
output and inﬂation at t = 0 responds to shocks to the representative agent’s belief about R̃T at t = 0. From
conditions (106), (107) and footnote 52 in the appendix, we have ϕ∗1 = σ (1 + σλκ), ω1∗ = κλσ (1 + σλκ) +

κβ (θ + (1 − θ) λ) σ, and, for t ≤ T − 2,
ϕ∗T −t = (β + (1 − β) λ) ϕ∗T −t−1 + σλωT∗ −t−1 ,

(112)

ωT∗ −t = β (θ + (1 − θ) λ) ωT∗ −t−1 + κλϕ∗T −t .

(113)

The previous conditions coincide with conditions (110) and (111), and prove Proposition 10.
On the Paradox of Flexibility. We now consider the implications of our insights for the paradox of
ﬂexibility. In the standard model, the power of forward guidance and the ﬁscal multiplier vis-a-vis future
government spending increase with the degree of price ﬂexibility: ϕ∗T increases with κ.55 This property is
directly related to the “paradox of ﬂexibility” (Eggertsson and Krugman, 2012). The next result proves, in
effect, that the mechanism identiﬁed in our paper helps diminish this paradox as well.
Proposition 11 (Price Flexibility) Let ϕ∗T be the scalar characterized in either Proposition 7 or Proposition 8
( ∗)
∂ϕ∗
∂ϕT
∂
and set λf = 1. We have ∂κT > 0 and ∂λ
> 0. That is, the power of forward guidance and the ﬁscal
∂κ
c
multiplier vis-a-vis future government spending increase with the degree of price ﬂexibility, but at a rate that
54

There are two differences compared to conditions (64) and (65). First, as we impose λc = λf = λ here, ϕ and ω are functions
of λ, the common parameter characterizing the degree of information friction. Second, as ﬁrms lack common knowledge of the
concurrent level of marginal cost, it is easier to let ω measure how inﬂation as a whole responds to the average ﬁrm’s belief about
R̃T .
55
Whenever we vary κ, we vary θ while keeping the Frisch elasticity constant, which means that variation in κ maps one-to-one
to variation in the degree of price ﬂexibility.

60

1

θ=0.85
θ=0.5

0.9

attenuation effect, φ/φ*

0.8

0.7

0.6

0.5

0.4

0.3

0.2

0.1

0
0

5

10

15

20

25

30

horizon, T, in quarters

Figure 2: Varying the degree of price ﬂexibility.
is slower the greater the departure from common knowledge.
This ﬁnding is an example of how lack of common knowledge reduces the paradox of ﬂexibility more
generally. In the standard model, a higher degree of price ﬂexibility raises the GE effects of all kinds
of demand shocks—whether these come in the form of forward guidance, discount rates, or borrowing
constraints—because it intensiﬁes the feedback loop between aggregate spending and inﬂation. By intensifying this kind of macroeconomic complementarity, however, a higher degree of price ﬂexibility also raises
the relative importance of higher-order beliefs, which in turn contributes to stronger attenuation effects of
the type we have documented in this paper. In a nutshell, the very same mechanism that creates the paradox of ﬂexibility within the New Keynesian framework also helps contain that paradox once we relax the
common-knowledge assumption of that framework.
Note that we have proved the above result only under the restriction λf = 1, which means that only the
consumers lack common knowledge. Whenever λf < 1, there is a conﬂicting effect, which is that higher
price ﬂexibility reduces the strategic complementarity that operates within the supply block, thereby also
reducing the role of λf itself. For the numerical example considered earlier, however, the overall effect of
higher price ﬂexibility is qualitatively the same whether λf = 1 or λf = λc .
We illustrate this in Figure 2. We let λf = λc = 0.75, use the same parameter values as those used in
Figure 1, and plot the relation between the ratio ϕT /ϕ∗T and the horizon T under two values for θ. The solid
red line corresponds to a higher value for θ, while the dashed blue line corresponds to a lower value for θ,
that is, to more price ﬂexibility. As evident in the ﬁgure, more price ﬂexibility maps, not only to a lower
ratio ϕT /ϕ∗T (i.e., stronger attenuation) for any given T, but also to a more rapid decay in that ratio as we
raise T.
61

Proof of Proposition 11. Consider ﬁrst the environment studied in Section 6 and let us study the crosspartial derivative of the power of forward guidance with respect to κ and λc . To simplify notation, we use ϕτ
and ϖτ as shortcuts for, respectively, ϕ (λc , λf , τ ) and ϖ (λc , λf , τ ), where the functions ϕ and ϖ are deﬁned
as in the proof of Proposition 7. From conditions (66), we have

∂ϕ1
∂ϕ(λc , 1, 1)
=
= σ2 > 0
∂κ
∂κ

∂ϖ1
∂ϖ(λc , 1, 1)
=
= σβ > 0.
∂κ
∂κ

and

(114)

For any τ ≥ 2, when λf = 1, conditions (71) and (72) become

ϕτ = (β + (1 − β + σκ) λc ) ϕτ −1 + σϖτ −1

and

ϖτ = κβλc ϕτ −1 + βϖτ −1 .

As a result, for all τ ≥ 2, we have

∂ϕτ
∂ϕτ −1
∂ϖτ −1
= (β + (1 − β + σκ) λc )
+ σλc ϕτ −1 + σ
,
∂κ
∂κ
∂κ
∂ϖτ
∂ϕτ −1
∂ϖτ −1
= κβλc
+ βλc ϕτ −1 + β
.
∂κ
∂κ
∂κ
From conditions (114), (115) and (116),

∂ϕτ
∂κ

and

∂ϖτ
∂κ

(115)
(116)

are strictly positive for any τ ≥ 1 by induction.

Moreover, from conditions (66), (114), (115) and (116), we have that

∂ϕ2
∂κ

and

∂ϖ2
∂κ

are strictly increasing in

λc . Then, from conditions (115), (116) and the fact that ϕτ itself is strictly increasing in λc for all τ ≥ 2, we
have

∂ϕτ
∂κ

and

∂ϖτ
∂κ

are strictly increasing in λc for all τ ≥ 2 by induction.

Consider now the environment studied in Section 7 and let us study the cross-partial derivative of the
relevant ﬁscal multiplier with respect to κ and λc when λf = 1. From the proof of Proposition 8, similarly
to conditions (114), (115) and (116), we have

∂ϕg,1
∂ϖg,1
= σ (1 − Ωc ) > 0
and
= β (1 − Ωc ) > 0,
∂κ
∂κ
∂ϕg,τ
∂ϕg,τ −1
∂ϖg,τ −1
= (β + (1 − β + σκΩc ) λc )
+ σΩc λc ϕg,τ −1 + σ
,
∂κ
∂κ
∂κ
∂ϖg,τ
∂ϕg,τ −1
∂ϖg,τ −1
= κβλc Ωc
+ βλc Ωc ϕg,τ −1 + β
.
∂κ
∂κ
∂κ
The result then follows from the same argument as before.
Extension of Lemma 2 and Theorems 1 and 2. Here we show that Lemma 2, Theorem 2 and, by implication, Theorem 1 extend to the kind of multi-layer beauty contest seen in condition (22) of Lemma 3.
Similar to Section 5, we impose Assumption 1. Similar to the proof of Lemma 2, we can ﬁnd positivelyvalued coefﬁcients {χh,τ }τ ≥1,1≤h≤τ , such that, for any t ≤ T − 1,

ỹt − ỹttrap =

T −t {
[ ]}
∑
χh,T −t Ēth R̃T ,
h=1

62

(117)

with ỹttrap deﬁned as in the proof of Proposition 6 and

χ1,τ = σ (1 + τ σκ) β τ −1 ∀τ ≥ 1,
χk,τ =

τ −k+1
∑

(118)

(1 − β + lσκ) β l−1 xk−1,τ −l ∀k ≥ 2 and τ ≥ k.

(119)

l=1

We can then characterize the combined effect of beliefs of order up to k on spending, sk,τ , as56

sk,τ = σ (1 + τ σκ) β

τ −1

+

τ −1
∑

(1 − β + lσκ) β l−1 sk−1,τ −l ∀k ≥ 1 and τ ≥ 1.

(120)

l=1

Let dτ = sτ,τ denote the combined effect of beliefs of all different orders on spending. Similar to condition (18), dτ = ϕ∗τ . Following the proof of Proposition 6, we have

d0 = σ

and

d1 = σ (1 + σκ) ,

dτ
dτ −2
+β
= 1 + β + σκ ∀τ ≥ 2.
dτ −1
dτ −1

(121)

Now we prove sk,τ satisﬁes an inequality with a similar form as condition (121):

sk,τ
sk,τ −1

+β

sk,τ −2
≤ 1 + β + σκ ∀τ ≥ 3 and k ≥ 1.
sk,τ −1

(122)

From condition (120), we have

βsk,τ −1 = σ (1 + (τ − 1) σκ) β τ −1 +

τ −1
∑

(1 − β + (l − 1) σκ) β l−1 sk−1,τ −l ∀k ≥ 1 and τ ≥ 2.

l=2

As a result, we have

sk,τ = βsk,τ −1 + (1 − β) sk−1,τ −1 + σ 2 κβ τ −1 + σκ

τ −1
∑

β l−1 sk−1,τ −l ∀k ≥ 1 and τ ≥ 2,

l=1
τ −1
∑

βsk,τ −1 = β 2 sk,τ −2 + β (1 − β) sk−1,τ −2 + σ 2 κβ τ −1 + σκ

β l−1 sk−1,τ −l ∀k ≥ 1 and τ ≥ 3.

l=2

Using the previous two conditions, we have, for all k ≥ 1 and τ ≥ 3,

sk,τ + β 2 sk,τ −2 + β (1 − β) sk−1,τ −2 = 2βsk,τ −1 + (1 − β + σκ) sk−1,τ −1 ,
sk,τ + βsk,τ −2 = (1 + β + σκ) sk,τ −1 + β (1 − β) χk,τ −2 − (1 − β + σκ) χk,τ −1 .
56

Similar to the proof of Theorem 2, for notation simplicity, we extend the deﬁnition of sh,τ =
h > τ , χh,τ = 0, we have sh,τ = sτ,τ for all h > τ . We also deﬁne s0,τ = 0 for all τ ≥ 1.

63

∑h
r=1

(123)

χr,τ for all h > τ . As for

To prove (122), we only need to prove:

β (1 − β) χk,τ −2 ≤ (1 − β + σκ) xk,τ −1 ∀k ≥ 1 and τ ≥ 3.

(124)

In fact, we prove the following stronger result:

βχk,τ −2 ≤ xk,τ −1 ∀k ≥ 1 and τ ≥ 3.

(125)

From condition (118), we know that (125) is true for k = 1 and τ ≥ 3. From condition (119), we know that

χk,τ −1 =
βχk,τ −2 =

τ∑
−k
l=1
τ∑
−k

(1 − β + σlκ) β l−1 xk−1,τ −1−l ∀k ≥ 2 and τ ≥ k + 1,

(126)

(1 − β + σ (l − 1) κ) β l−1 xk−1,τ −1−l ∀k ≥ 2 and τ ≥ k + 2.

l=2

This proves βχk,τ −2 ≤ xk,τ −1 for k ≥ 2 and τ ≥ k + 2. Together with the fact that, χk,τ −2 = 0 ∀k ≥ τ − 1,
we prove (125) and thus (124). This ﬁnishes the proof of (122).
Based on (121) and (122), we can then establish a result akin to Theorem 2. That is, for any given k ≥ 1
and τ ≥ k , the relative contribution of the ﬁrst k orders,
First, note that, for any given k ≥ 1,1 =

sk,k
dk

induction on τ ≥ k , for any ﬁxed k ≥ 1. If we
sk,τ +2
dτ +2
sk,τ +1 < dτ +1 ,
s
ratio sk,τ
, strictly
τ,τ

sk,τ
sτ,τ

s
> dk,k+1
,
k+1
sk,τ
have dτ

=

sk,τ
dτ ,

strictly decreases with τ .

because xk+1,k+1 > 0. Then, we can proceed by

>

sk,τ +1
dτ +1

sk,τ +1
dτ +1

for some τ ≥ k , we have
sk,τ +2
dτ +2 .

Using (121) and (122), we have

and thus

any k ≥ 1 and any τ ≥ k, the

decreases with the horizon τ .

>

sk,τ
sk,τ +1

>

dτ
dτ +1 .

This completes the proof that, for

Finally, we prove that, for any k ≥ 1,

sk,τ
→ 0,
sτ,τ

as τ → ∞.

(127)

In other words, we want to prove the relative contribution of the ﬁrst k orders of beliefs to aggregate spending
converges to zero when the horizon τ goes to inﬁnity.
First note that, from condition (120), we have s1,τ = σ (1 + στ κ) β τ −1 → 0, as τ → +∞. From the proof
of Proposition 6, we know sτ,τ = dτ = ϕ∗τ ≥ σ . As a result, (127) is true for k = 1.
If there exists k ≥ 2 such that (127) does not hold, we let k ∗ ≥ 2 denote the smallest of such k . Then,
(127) holds for 1 ≤ k ≤ k ∗ − 1. Because we already prove that

τ , there exists 0 < Γ < 1 such that

sk∗ ,τ
sτ,τ

=

sk∗ ,τ
ϕ∗τ

sk∗ ,τ −1

→ Γ∗ and

Note that since sk∗ ,τ = sk∗ −1,τ +χk∗ ,τ and

≥ 0 is decreasing with the horizon

→ Γ as τ → ∞. As a result,

Because we already prove that, in the proof of Proposition 6,

sk∗ ,τ

sk∗ ,τ
sτ,τ

ϕ∗τ
ϕ∗τ −1

sk∗ ,τ ϕ∗τ −1
ϕ∗τ sk∗ ,τ −1

→ Γ∗ , we have

sk∗ ,τ −2
1
→ ∗ as τ → ∞.
sk∗ ,τ −1
Γ

sk∗ −1,τ
sτ,τ

→ 0 as τ → ∞, we have
64

→ 1 as τ → ∞.

(128)
χk∗ ,τ
sτ,τ

=

χk∗ ,τ
ϕ∗τ

→ Γ as τ → ∞.

As a result,

χk∗ ,τ
χk∗ ,τ ϕ∗τ
=
→ 1 as τ → ∞.
sk∗ ,τ
ϕ∗τ sk∗ ,τ

(129)

Now we prove a stronger version of (122)

sk,τ
sk,τ −2
χk,τ −1
+β
+ σκ
≤ 1 + β + σκ ∀τ ≥ 3 and k ≥ 1.
sk,τ −1
sk,τ −1
sk,τ −1

(130)

This comes from the fact that (125) can be written as

β (1 − β) χk,τ −2 + σκχk,τ −1 ≤ (1 − β + σκ) xk,τ −1 ∀τ ≥ 3 and k ≥ 1.

(131)

Using (61), (128) and (129), we have

sk∗ ,τ
sk∗ ,τ −1

+β

sk∗ ,τ −2
χk∗ ,τ −1
1
+ σκ
→ Γ∗ + β ∗ + σκ = 1 + β + 2σκ as τ → ∞.
sk∗ ,τ −1
sk∗ ,τ −1
Γ

This contradicts (130) when κ > 0 and proves (127). This ﬁnishes the proof of the result akin to Theorem 2.
Together with Proposition 3, we then establish the “horizon effect” akin to Theorem 1. Similarly, Proposition
4 also holds here.

65

References
Allen, Franklin, Stephen Morris, and Hyun Song Shin. (2006) “Beauty Contests and Iterated Expectations in
Asset Markets.” Review of ﬁnancial Studies, 19(3): 719–752.
Andrade, Philippe, Gaballo Gaetano, Eric Mengus, and Benoit Mojon. (2015) “Forward Guidance and
Heterogeneous Beliefs.” Banque De France mimeo.
Angeletos, George-Marios, and Alessandro Pavan. (2007) “Efﬁcient Use of Information and Social Value of
Information.” Econometrica, 75(4): 1103–1142.
Angeletos, George-Marios, and Chen Lian. (2016a) “Dampening General Equilibrium: From Micro to
Macro.” NBER Working Paper No. 23379.
Angeletos, George-Marios, and Chen Lian. (2016b) “Forward Guidance without Common Knowledge.”
NBER Working Paper No. 22785.
Angeletos, George-Marios, and Chen Lian. (2016c) “Incomplete Information in Macroeconomics: Accommodating Frictions in Coordination.” Handbook of Macroeconomics, 2: 1065–1240.
Angeletos, George-Marios, and Jennifer La’O. (2010) “Noisy Business Cycles.” In NBER Macroeconomics
Annual 2009, Volume 24. 319–378. University of Chicago Press.
Angeletos, George-Marios, and Jennifer La’O. (2013) “Sentiments.” Econometrica, 81(2): 739–779.
Bacchetta, Philippe, and Eric van Wincoop. (2006) “Can Information Heterogeneity Explain the Exchange
Rate Determination Puzzle?” The American Economic Review, 96(3): 552.
Bergemann, Dirk, and Stephen Morris. (2013) “Robust Predictions in Games with Incomplete Information.”
Econometrica, 81(4): 1251–1308.
Campbell, Jeffrey R, Charles L Evans, Jonas DM Fisher, and Alejandro Justiniano. (2012) “Macroeconomic
Effects of Federal Reserve Forward Guidance.” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 2012(1): 1–80.
Chahrour, Ryan, and Gaetano Gaballo. (2017) “Learning from Prices: Ampliﬁcation and Business Fluctuations.” Boston College Mimeo.
Christiano, Lawrence, Martin Eichenbaum, and Sergio Rebelo. (2011) “When Is the Government Spending
Multiplier Large?” Journal of Political Economy, 119(1): 78–121.
Chung, Hess, Edward Herbst, and Michael T Kiley. (2015) “Effective Monetary Policy Strategies in New
Keynesian Models: A Reexamination.” NBER Macroeconomics Annual, 29(1): 289–344.
Cochrane, John. (2016) “Do Higher Interest Rates Raise or Lower Inﬂation?” Stanford University mimeo.
Cochrane, John. (2017) “The New-Keynesian Liquidity Trap.” Journal of Monetary Economics, 92: 47–63.
66

Coibion, Olivier, and Yuriy Gorodnichenko. (2012) “What Can Survey Forecasts Tell Us about Information
Rigidities?” Journal of Political Economy, 120(1): 116–159.
Coibion, Olivier, and Yuriy Gorodnichenko. (2015) “Information Rigidity and the Expectations Formation
Process: A Simple Framework and New Facts.” American Economic Review, 105(8): 2644–78.
Del Negro, Marco, Marc P Giannoni, and Christina Patterson. (2015) “The Forward Guidance Puzzle.” FRB
of New York mimeo.
Eggertsson, Gauti B, and Paul Krugman. (2012) “Debt, Deleveraging, and the Liquidity Trap: A FisherMinsky-Koo Approach.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 127(3): 1469–1513.
Farhi, Emmanuel, and Iván Werning. (2017) “Monetary Policy, Bounded Rationality, and Incomplete Markets.” NBER Working Paper No. 23281.
Gabaix, Xavier. (2016) “A Behavioral New Keynesian Model.” NBER Working Paper No. 22954.
Galí, Jordi. (2008) Monetary policy, Inﬂation, and the Business Cycle: an Introduction to the New Keynesian
Framework and its Applications. Princeton University Press.
Galí, Jordi, J David López-Salido, and Javier Vallés. (2007) “Understanding the Effects of Government Spending on Consumption.” Journal of the European Economic Association, 5(1): 227–270.
Garcıa-Schmidt, Mariana, and Michael Woodford. (2015) “Are Low Interest Rates Deﬂationary? A Paradox
of Perfect-Foresight Analysis.” NBER Working Paper No. 21614.
Grossman, Sanford J, and Joseph E Stiglitz. (1980) “On the Impossibility of Informationally Efﬁcient Markets.” The American Economic Review, 70(3): 393–408.
Kaplan, Greg, Benjamin Moll, and Giovanni L Violante. (2016) “Monetary Policy According to HANK.”
NBER Working Paper No. 21897.
Khaw, Mel Win, Luminita Stevens, and Michael Woodford. (2016) “Discrete Adjustment to a Changing
Environment: Experimental Evidence.” NBER Working Paper No. 22978.
Kiley, Michael T. (2016) “Policy Paradoxes in the New Keynesian Model.” Review of Economic Dynamics,
21: 1–15.
Lucas, Robert E. (1972) “Expectations and the Neutrality of Money.” Journal of Economic Theory, 4(2): 103–
124.
Luo, Yulei, Jun Nie, Gaowang Wang, and Eric R. Young. (2017) “Rational inattention and the dynamics of
consumption and wealth in general equilibrium.” Journal of Economic Theory, 172(C): 55 – 87.
Mackowiak, Bartosz, and Mirko Wiederholt. (2009) “Optimal Sticky Prices under Rational Inattention.”
American Economic Review, 99(3): 769–803.
67

Mackowiak, Bartosz, Filip Matejka, and Mirko Wiederholt. (2017) “The Rational Inattention Filter.” Goethe
University Frankfurt mimeo.
Mankiw, N Gregory, and Ricardo Reis. (2002) “Sticky Information Versus Sticky Prices: a Proposal to Replace
the New Keynesian Phillips Curve.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 117(4): 1295–1328.
McKay, Alisdair, Emi Nakamura, and Jón Steinsson. (2016a) “The Discounted Euler Equation: A Note.”
NBER Working Paper No. 22129.
McKay, Alisdair, Emi Nakamura, and Jón Steinsson. (2016b) “The Power of Forward Guidance Revisited.”
American Economic Review, 106(10): 3133–3158.
Morris, Stephen, and Hyun Song Shin. (1998) “Unique Equilibrium in a Model of Self-fulﬁlling Currency
Attacks.” American Economic Review, 587–597.
Morris, Stephen, and Hyun Song Shin. (2002) “Social Value of Public Information.” The American Economic
Review, 92(5): 1521–1534.
Morris, Stephen, and Hyun Song Shin. (2003) “Global games: theory and applications.” In Advances in
Economics and Econometrics (Proceedings of the Eighth World Congress of the Econometric Society).
Cambridge University Press.
Morris, Stephen, and Hyun Song Shin. (2006) “Inertia of Forward-looking Expectations.” The American
Economic Review, 152–157.
Nimark, Kristoffer. (2008) “Dynamic Pricing and Imperfect Common Knowledge.” Journal of Monetary
Economics, 55(2): 365–382.
Nimark, Kristoffer. (2017) “Dynamic Higher Order Expectations.” Cornell Univeristy mimeo.
Samet, Dov. (1998) “Iterated Expectations and Common Priors.” Games and Economic Behavior, 24(1): 131–
141.
Sims, Christopher A. (2003) “Implications of Rational Inattention.” Journal of Monetary Economics,
50(3): 665–690.
Singleton, Kenneth J. (1987) “Asset Prices in a Time-series Model with Disparately Informed, Competitive
Traders.” In New Approaches to Monetary Economics. , ed. William A. Barnett and Kenneth J. Singleton,
249–272. Cambridge University Press.
Tirole, Jean. (2015) “Cognitive Games and Cognitive Traps.” Toulouse School of Economics mimeo.
Vellekoop, Nathanael, and Mirko Wiederholt. (2017) “Inﬂation Expectations and Choices of Households.”
Goethe University Frankfurt mimeo.

68

Werning, Iván. (2012) “Managing a Liquidity Trap: Monetary and Fiscal Policy.” NBER Working Paper No.
17344.
Werning, Iván. (2015) “Incomplete Markets and Aggregate Demand.” NBER Working Paper No. 21448.
Wiederholt, Mirko. (2015) “Empirical Properties of Inﬂation Expectations and the Zero Lower Bound.”
Goethe University Frankfurt mimeo.
Woodford, Michael. (2003a) “Imperfect Common Knowledge and the Effects of Monetary Policy.” Knowledge, Information, and Expectations in Modern Macroeconomics: In Honor of Edmund S. Phelps.
Woodford, Michael. (2003b) Interest and Prices: Foundations of a Theory of Monetary Policy. Princeton
University Press.
Woodford, Michael. (2011) “Simple Analytics of the Government Expenditure Multiplier.” American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 3(1): 1–35.

69

