NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

A REAL ESTATE BOOM WITH CHINESE CHARACTERISTICS
Edward Glaeser
Wei Huang
Yueran Ma
Andrei Shleifer
Working Paper 22789
http://www.nber.org/papers/w22789

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2016

We thank the editors Enrico Moretti, Gordon Hanson, and Timothy Taylor for helpful comments,
and Kevin Chen and You Yang for research assistance. The views expressed herein are those of
the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w22789.ack
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2016 by Edward Glaeser, Wei Huang, Yueran Ma, and Andrei Shleifer. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

A Real Estate Boom with Chinese Characteristics
Edward Glaeser, Wei Huang, Yueran Ma, and Andrei Shleifer
NBER Working Paper No. 22789
October 2016, Revised November 2016
JEL No. E60,G10,R21,R28,R31
ABSTRACT
Chinese housing prices rose by over 10 percent per year in real terms between 2003 and 2014,
and are now between two and ten times higher than the construction cost of apartments. At the
same time, Chinese developers built 100 billion square feet of residential real estate. This boom
has been accompanied by a large increase in the number of vacant homes, held by both
developers and households. This boom may turn out to be a housing bubble followed by a crash,
yet that future is far from certain. The demand for real estate in China is so strong that current
prices might be sustainable, especially given the sparse alternative investments for Chinese
households, so long as the level of new supply is radically curtailed. Whether that happens
depends on the policies of the Chinese government, which must weigh the benefits of price
stability against the costs of restricting urban growth.
Edward Glaeser
Department of Economics
315A Littauer Center
Harvard University
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
eglaeser@harvard.edu
Wei Huang
Harvard University
1050 Mass. Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
huangw@nber.org

Yueran Ma
Harvard University
yueranma@g.harvard.edu
Andrei Shleifer
Department of Economics
Harvard University
Littauer Center M-9
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
ashleifer@harvard.edu

Between 2000 and 2010, American housing went through a spectacular boom/bust cycle, which
made and broke fortunes and left financial wreckage in its wake. According to Federal Housing
Finance Agency, real prices of U.S. homes grew by 5 percent per year between 1996 and 2006,
and then declined by 6.4 percent per year between 2007 and 2012. Annual construction exceeded
1.9 million housing units in 2005 and 2006, and then dropped to an average of 688,000 units per
year between 2009 and 2013.
This U.S. housing cycle looks stable and dull relative to the great Chinese real estate boom. In
China’s top cities, real prices grew by 13.1 percent annually from 2003 to 2013 (Fang et al.,
2015).

Real land prices in 35 large Chinese cities increased almost 5-fold between 2004 and

2015 (Wu, Gyourko, and Deng, 2015). As prices rose, so did construction. Between 2003 and
2014, Chinese builders added 100 billion square feet of floor space, or 74 square feet for every
person in China.1 Over this time, China built an average of 5.5 million apartments per year. In
2014, 29 million people worked in China’s construction industry, or 16 percent of urban
employment. By comparison, construction industry accounted for 8 percent of total employment
in the US and 13 percent of that in Spain at the peak of their most recent housing booms.
We begin by reviewing these facts and two other striking differences between the housing booms
in the U.S. and China. Unlike in the U.S., high vacancy rates are a distinct feature of Chinese
housing markets. Vacancies include both completed units unsold by developers, and purchased
units that remain unoccupied. We estimate that this stock of empty housing now adds up to at
least about 20 billion square feet.
The final profound difference from the U.S. is the much greater and quite distinctive public
sector engagement with real estate in China, beginning with the fact that all urban land is owned
by the government, and private individuals only buy and sell “use rights,” which were originally
bought from local governments and run for a maximum of 70 years. It is unclear what the
government will do when those use rights expire. While many U.S. local governments,
especially on the coasts, fight against new development, Chinese local governments encourage
building to boost local output and employment, as well as to raise revenue from land sales. The
1

http://www.stats.gov.cn/tjsj/ndsj/2014/indexeh.htm, and Chivakul et al. (2015).

2

U.S. government subsidizes housing through tax and credit policies, but does not have nearly as
aggressive a home-building promotion program as its Chinese counterpart.
The dramatic size of the Chinese boom has left the world wondering whether the Chinese real
estate is a bubble waiting to burst. We approach this question by analyzing the determinants of
demand and supply of housing in China. On the demand side, we examine the economic,
demographic, cultural, and speculative factors shaping demand. We also consider valuations of
apartment prices in China as a gauge of frothiness. Fang et al. (2015) find that price to income
ratios range from 6 to 10 in their sample of Chinese cities -- high but not unusually so. They also
show that Chinese price growth is not faster than income growth. Their data stop in 2012, and
relies on mortgage applicants with relatively high incomes. Since then, prices continued to rise
dramatically in some cities. As of 2016, a 90 square meter apartment in Beijing or Shanghai
fetches more than 25 times average household income. Even so, conclusions on the valuation of
Chinese housing based on demand factors turn critically on difficult-to-forecast national growth
rates. If China continues to grow very fast, high prices can be justified.
The supply-side approach to housing fundamentals is to compare housing prices to the physical
costs of construction, and an assessment of the long-run price of land. Building costs can be
precisely estimated, but land values are hard to predict in markets where supply is constrained by
geography and regulation. The supply approach to Chinese housing suggests the prices are far
too high, especially outside the few top cities. Construction costs are typically less than onethird of the selling price of finished space in these cities. Absent regulation, land is not scarce in
the country as a whole, especially away from the coast. The rapid pace of construction and the
vast number of vacant units support the view that supply is currently quite elastic.
To put our empirical results together, we simulate possible prices in 20 years. We assume that
speculative demand for housing cannot be sustained in the long run and home prices stabilize at
about 10 times income, a high but not implausible level by global standards. If income growth is
robust and housing supply growth is effectively muted, then equilibrium prices in 20 years for
apartments in top tier cities could exceed 2 million RMB. But even if income growth stays high,
real returns on housing will be negative if future supply is as ample as it has been in the past.

3

We conclude that a housing crash is not inevitable, and the outcome depends on decisions made
by the Chinese government. Only if new construction is sufficiently restricted can prices remain
high. Yet the social costs of restricting new housing supply could be enormous, because of both
the lower employment and reduced growth of China’s hyper-productive cities. This is indeed a
real estate boom with Chinese characteristics: like much of modern China, its fate rests
ultimately with government decisions.

Four Differences between the Booms in China and the U.S.
In this section, we compare four aspects of the great housing booms of China and the U.S.: prices,
construction, vacancies, and the roles of respective governments. While the U.S. may be a less
natural comparison for China than other middle income countries (like Brazil), the U.S. housing
boom is well measured and particularly well studied. It offers a benchmark that helps to put the
Chinese boom into perspective and highlight its unique features.
Housing Price Growth in China and the U.S.
Housing price growth and decline between 1996 and 2012 in the U.S. are well documented,
typically using repeat sales indices prepared both by private industry, such as the Case-Shiller
index, and by the Federal Housing Finance Agency.

Two facts about the U.S. housing prices

are well-documented and largely uncontroversial. First, housing prices grew dramatically after
1996 and then fell dramatically after 2007. Second, there was considerable heterogeneity in
price growth across metropolitan areas, which is typically related to supply elasticities (Saiz,
2010; Glaeser, 2013).
Official statistics in China show a “mere” doubling of housing prices between 2007 and 2014
(Chivakul et al., 2015) and some degree of moderation recently. These statistics are often
questioned as understating actual price growth. Fang et al. (2015) present the most compelling
work to date on quality-adjusted housing price growth in China. Their data for new homes uses
development project fixed effects to control for changing quality. They thus estimate price

4

changes by comparing sales prices of units of comparable size in the same development project
sold in different years. While this approach is only likely to yield price estimates for the newer
housing stock, it seems far more reliable than any feasible alternative.
China’s cities are typically divided into four categories or tiers, based on the level of economic
development. The first tier includes only four most developed metropolitan areas: Beijing,
Shanghai, Shenzhen, and Guangzhou. These are the areas where demand is most robust and
supply is most likely to be restricted. The second tier includes most provincial capitals and some
very developed prefecture cities. They are typically large, industrialized, and have relatively
strong local economies. Tier 3 includes prefecture cities that have medium to high levels of
income, which are smaller but still large by western standards. Tier 4 cities are further down in
economic development and size, but still very populous compared to the average western city.
As these categories are the norm in Chinese real estate analysis, for the comparison with the U.S.
we create corresponding tiers of U.S. cities. We first rank cities in the U.S. according to income
per capita in 1990, prior to the start of the U.S. housing boom.

We then draw tiers based on

income and require that each tier has the same population share as their Chinese counterpart.
Fang et al. (2015) report real annual price growth of 13.1 percent in Tier 1 cities between 2003
and 2013, despite a slowdown during 2008 and 2009.

Even the Tier 3 cities have seen an

average of 7.9 percent real annual price growth between 2003 and 2013. Figure 1 shows the real
price growth in the top three tiers of cities in China between 2003 and 2013.

It compares this

growth with real housing price growth in the top three tiers of U.S. cities between 1996 and 2006.
For each line, the start year is given a value of one. The Chinese growth is far more dramatic.
Housing price growth in U.S. Tier 1 cities was impressive from 1996 to 2006, but it was slower
than the growth of third tier cities in China over their boom period, and only 40 percent of the
growth of top tier cities in China during their boom.
With such dramatic price growth in the past fifteen years, apartments in the top Chinese cities are
currently not much cheaper than in major American cities. According to Soufun data, the average
price per square foot has risen to $550 in Beijing and Shanghai and $770 in Shenzhen. Zillow
data currently shows San Francisco apartments costing $1,000 per square foot and Boston units

5

costing $600 per square foot. This similarity in prices is remarkable given the enormous disparity
in incomes. Annual per capita income in Beijing, Shanghai, and Shenzhen is about $7,500, but
more than $50,000 in San Francisco and $40,000 in Boston. The price levels in the second and
third tier cities are about a half and a quarter respectively of those in the first tier cities, but
average incomes are also lower by a similar magnitude.
The Size of the Building Boom in China and the U.S.
A construction boom of epic proportions has accompanied the price boom in China. Across
China as a whole, construction value added came to 6.9 percent of G.D.P. in 2013. Sixteen
percent of China’s urban employment, or 29 million people, worked in the construction sector in
2014.
We compare the construction of physical, typically residential, real estate in the two countries.
In the U.S., household surveys provide estimates of the total housing stock on an annual or
quarterly basis. The U.S. Census also asks households about the year in which their home was
built, which shows that in 2000, 9.7 percent of Americans lived in homes that had been built in
the previous five years.2 In addition, the Census provides measures of the flow of new housing
construction, such as the flow of new building permits and estimates of total units completed.
Chinese census data provide snapshots of the housing stock at points in time, but are less
comprehensive than their U.S. equivalents. There are also estimates of new construction activity
at the country and provincial level on an annual basis.
Figure 2 shows the growth in floor space in China and the U.S. For China, we use the official
statistics on housing area completed nationally. For the U.S., we multiply the number of
completed single family homes by the average size of new single family homes in that year. We
then add the number of multi-family homes multiplied by the average size of new multi-family
homes in that year. Figure 2 shows a large difference in total construction, which translates into
similar scales on a per capita basis. For instance, between 2011 and 2014, China built 45.9
billion square feet of residential floor space, or 33.8 square feet per person. We estimate that the
2

https://www.census.gov/population/www/cen2000/censusatlas/pdf/14_Housing.pdf

6

U.S. produced 16 billion square feet between 2003 and 2006, or about 55 square feet per person.
China is much poorer and its housing units are much smaller, and yet it is producing about as
much floor space per person as the U.S.
One of the striking facts about U.S. growth is that more housing was built in less productive
areas, which creates a mismatch between productivity and employment discussed by Hsieh and
Moretti (2015).

Figure 3a shows a -0.29 correlation between per capita income in 1990 and

housing supply growth between 1990 and 2010. A major reason for this misallocation of
construction is supply restrictions in the most productive cities, such as zoning regulations
(Glaeser, Gyourko and Saiz, 2008).

Figure 3b shows the same striking negative relationship

across Chinese cities, with a slope coefficient of -0.45. The Chinese story here may be similar
to the American one: local governments with the weakest economies have been the most
aggressive in promoting new housing supply, perhaps as a means of generating economic growth,
while local governments in the richest cities have been slowing down development.
We have also used data provided by Matthew Khan and Siqi Zheng to examine whether air
quality is correlated with urban growth and house price growth over the past decade. There is
no correlation between initial air quality and subsequent price growth.

There is a positive

correlation between initial air quality and population growth among Tier 1 and Tier 2 cities, but
not across our full sample of cities.
Housing Inventories and Vacancies in China and the U.S.
The death knell of the U.S. housing boom was sounded by large inventories in Las Vegas which
were brought swiftly to market in 2007. When developers offered the many units they owned for
quick sale, prices quickly moved downwards and perhaps found a new equilibrium. Compared
to the U.S., inventories held by developers and unoccupied housing held by households are much
larger in the Chinese boom. Unsurprisingly, this raised concerns about the viability of the boom.
At the height of the U.S. boom, developers owned 573,000 unsold and unoccupied homes
according to the National Association of Home Builders. Vacancy rate among owner-occupied

7

homes reached a high of 3 percent in 2008, and this statistic does not include “temporarily”
vacant units. Overall, relative to the stock of 130 million American homes as of 2010, U.S. has
relatively few vacant homes.
For China, our primary source for developers’ inventory is Soufun, which compiles data from
local housing bureaus (Fangguanju). The data covers developers’ inventories for 32 major
Chinese cities. We combine this data with statistics on vacant homes held by households, which
is based on the Chinese Urban Household Survey (UHS). Figure 4 shows estimates of inventory
by tier over time. We estimate inventories for each tier using the tier’s inventory per capita in the
Soufun data multiplied by the tier’s urban population.3 The total inventory numbers show an
increase from just over 4 billion square feet in 2011 to over 10 billion square feet in 2015. The
bulk of this growth occurred in the lower tier cities. For example, inventories in Tier 1 cities
grew from 310 million square feet in 2011 to 390 million square feet in 2014, followed by a
slight decline in 2015. Total estimated inventory in Tier 3 cities increased from 940 million
square feet to 3.45 billion square feet over the same time period.
To put these quantities into perspective, occupied housing space in urban area is 111 billion
square feet based on the 2010 census, with 7.7, 32.1, 32.2, and 39.5 billion square feet in the 1st
to 4th tier cities respectively. We can also compare developer inventory in China and the U.S. on
a per capita basis. The average new home in the U.S. in 2006 was 2,500 square feet and the U.S.
population was almost 300 million. The 527,000 new housing units in the developers’ inventory
in the U.S. in 2006 thus translate to about 4.5 square feet per capita. By 2015, developer
inventory reached about 6 square feet per capita in China’s Tier 1 cities, and 20 square feet per
capita in Tier 2 and Tier 3 cities. The developers’ stock is much higher in China than in the U.S.,
and is concentrated not in the most successful cities, but in the less developed ones.
Visitors to Chinese cities are sometimes struck by the number of vacant apartments. Many of
these units are owned by investors who just leave their properties empty. We can get some sense
of this stock of purchased but vacant units by looking at the Urban Household Survey.

3

We

The data on developer inventory from Soufun does not cover many 4th tier cities. We assume that inventory per capita is the
same in the 3rd and 4th tier cities in our estimates in Table 4.

8

compute a vacancy rate across 36 cities by calculating the total number of vacant units owned by
the residents of each city and then dividing by the total number of housing units owned or
occupied by the city’s residents. Anecdotal evidence suggests that owning properties outside
one’s own metropolitan area is rare.
Figure 5 shows these sold but vacant figures from 2002 to 2012 for a sample of 36 cities.
vacancy rates look relatively flat from 2002 to 2008 and then rise sharply after 2009.

The

In 2012,

the vacancy rate drew close to 20 percent in Tier 1 cities. The rates for lower tier cities were
about 13 percent.
In Table 1, we combine estimates of total developer inventories with estimates of total household
vacancies. To ensure representativeness, we use vacancy estimates based on the 2009 UHS.4 We
take the average vacant space per capita in each tier and estimate total vacant space in that tier by
multiplying by its urban population. This estimate is conservative, as vacancy rates increased
since then. We pair the vacancy estimates with inventory estimates for 2014 to provide an up-todate picture, as total developer inventories almost doubled from 2011 to 2014. Data for 2014 also
covers the largest set of cities in our developer inventory dataset.
The estimates imply that there are 16 square feet per capita of vacant real estate in Tier 1 cities,
of which 10 square feet is owned by private investors and 5.5 square feet is owned by developers.
The total would be 20 square feet per capita if we instead used the Urban Household Survey
from 2012. In Tier 2 cities, there is 37 square feet per capita of vacant real estate, split more or
less evenly between developers and private investors. There are 30 square feet per capita in Tier
3 cities. In the cross section of cities, both developer inventories and household vacancies on a
per capita basis are highly positively correlated with past price growth.
These data provide a picture of an enormous stock of unoccupied new housing in China, which
dwarfs the U.S. equivalent in 2006.

The combination of crowded cities and empty housing

stock is a highly distinctive feature of Chinese housing today.

4

Up to 2009, the Urban Household Survey provides data on household vacancies for up to 120 cities (but data are only available
for 36 cities from 2010 to 2012).

9

A Regulated Bubble? The Greater Role of the Public Sector in China
The American real estate sector is hardly a bastion of laissez-faire capitalism. A web of local
land use controls regulate the industry and restricts supply, while national policies, including the
Low Income Housing Tax Credit, the home mortgage interest deduction and the GovernmentSponsored Enterprises subsidize construction. Still, the dynamics of the industry are only
modestly shaped by the national and local governments.
In China, the public sector retains far more control over future prices and construction. Most
importantly and dramatically, all land in China is owned by the state and the central government
decides which land can be auctioned to private developers. Land auctions do not confer
permanent ownership, but rather the right to use the land for several decades (up to 70 years).
Article 70 of the Chinese Property Rights Law of 2007 does grant the ability to own the
structures on the land, but not the land itself.

Article 149 suggests that use rights will be

automatically renewed. The government has not extracted additional fees for the relatively
unconstrained rights to use the land after the first land sale, but it is unclear what compensation
local governments will require for use right renewals. Anyone buying real estate for the long
haul must trust the Chinese government to roll over their land leases at a reasonable cost.
Back in 2000, 70 percent of Chinese floor space was built by state owned enterprises and
housing collectives. In 2013, such public entities only built 13 percent of China’s floor space.
But the decline of formal public construction activity does not mean that the private construction
operates without public guidance. Both the central and local governments are deeply involved in
the housing market, and government incentives play a key role in shaping market outcomes.
Since Deng Xiaoping declared that “to get rich is glorious,” China’s leaders have promoted
economic growth with remarkable success, with construction playing a pivotal role in these
efforts. Leaders of local governments are promoted or penalized depending upon their ability to
attain national growth objectives (Li and Zhou, 2005). With ample credit and low construction
costs, developers build towers that add to the G.D.P.

10

The construction activity itself is

measurable economic output, and ideally the buildings then attract commercial and residential
tenants who further boost local growth.
Another important incentive that pushes Chinese governments, particularly the local
governments, towards real estate development comes from the Chinese tax system. The tax
system in China leaves local governments with a limited stream of ongoing fiscal revenues. A
key source of fiscal income is land sales revenue, which is collected in the transfer of stateowned land to developers. Taxation of real estate development and apartment sales also
contributes to local fiscal revenue. In some years, revenues from land sales accounted for as
much as 40 percent of local government fiscal revenue (Wu, 2015). This revenue system helps
explain why Chinese local governments are very enthusiastic about new construction.
Since the late 2000s, the central government has increasingly shifted focus to housing market
stability, and has held the local governments accountable for price stability targets. Under the
central government’s guidance, local governments have sought to stabilize housing prices, using
restrictions or subsidies on home purchases and tightening or loosening controls on new
development. The goals of economic growth and price stability, however, are often in conflict:
maintaining high prices by restricting supply undermines the growth coming from construction.
Government interventions impact all players in the Chinese housing market. When it comes to
developers, the Chinese local governments, like their U.S. counterparts, regularly impose land
use restrictions such as maximum floor-area ratios, although developers sometimes manage to
exceed the originally mandated limit (Cai et al., forthcoming). Unlike in the U.S., the Chinese
central government also frequently intervenes to regulate local land development. Such
interventions restrict the conversion of land from agricultural to urban uses, limit the use of land
for golf courses and luxury housing, and mandate development of apartment with certain sizes.
When it comes to home buyers, American and Chinese governments have pursued very different
policies. Despite some local land regulations, the US promotes homeownership through tax and
credit policies. China is much more cautious. Interest rates on mortgages, as well as minimum
down payments, tend to be high. To curtail speculation, Chinese governments have also tried to

11

directly restrict second and third home purchases, and to limit the resale of homes in less than
five years. Property taxation on home owners is strikingly different in the U.S. and China. U.S.
governments tax real estate on an annual basis, which creates a sizable cost to holding real estate.
Chinese real estate taxes are imposed only on transactions, creating an incentive to buy-and-hold.
When it comes to banks, state-owned institutions have historically dominated China’s banking
system, and at every level, banks’ policies towards the housing market follow the government’s
lead. The financing for developers by government controlled banks is critical for understanding
housing in China. Historically, China had very favorable credit policies toward developers, and
banks are pushed to lend. Developers are highly leveraged, and to some extent enjoy the heads I
win tails the bank loses situation. On the mortgage side, banks are also under government
direction to adjust mortgage rates to discourage or occasionally subsidize home purchases, as
part of housing market stability management. But banks have not been required to systematically
support home ownership as they have been required to support construction. Although the
government has become increasingly careful of risks in development loans and tightened them in
recent years, the stockpile of debt is still enormous. According to official statistics, Chinese
developers had $6.2 trillion of debt by 2014, whereas households had $3.8 trillion.
In sum, the main U.S. housing market policies encourage mortgage borrowing and restrict new
development with local land use regulations. The most important Chinese housing market
interventions boost local development and reduce home-related borrowing.

With these policies,

it is unsurprising that China builds much more than the U.S. It is perhaps more surprising that
Chinese housing price growth has been so much greater, given the discouragement of home
borrowing and the encouragement of new supply. This strong demand for housing, as we discuss
below, is mostly coming from Chinese households who flood the real estate market with their
savings and investment demand, as opposed to a levered play on a “house of debt”.

Does China Have a Real Estate Bubble?
Will China’s real estate boom end in a bust? We discuss two approaches to assessing whether
housing is in a bubble. The demand-side approach focuses on the motivations and the behavior
12

of buyers, but also considers whether prices seem reasonable given proxies for the demand for
housing services, such as income.

The supply-side approach asks whether prices seem

reasonable given the cost of delivering new real estate. Here we present some facts bearing on
these two ways of thinking about China’s housing boom, as before frequently comparing China
and the U.S.
The Demand-Side Approach to Assessing Bubbles
In the U.S., many home buyers during the boom were young and highly leveraged.

Mian and

Sufi (2008) document the role of subprime lending is fueling the U.S. housing boom. Glaeser,
Gottlieb and Gyourko (2010) use DataQuick loan data and find that the median U.S. buyer in
2006 had a loan-to-value ratio of 90 percent.

Over one-quarter of the buyers put no money

down, by using multiple mortgages.5 The U.S. boom featured a huge rise in the share of single
home buyers, and in 2006, almost 60 percent of loan applications came from one person
households.

The National Association of Realtors data show that in 2005 and 2007, 67 percent

of new homes and 40 percent of all homes were bought by people under the age of 35.
In China, housing investment is fueled by middle aged households saving for retirement or for
their children’s marriage. Home ownership has always played a prominent role in the Chinese
society, and is remarkably high, standing at roughly 90 percent compared to about 65 percent in
the US.
Chinese households are well known for high saving rates, motivated by many factors from
economics to culture (Chamon and Prasad, 2010). Chinese savers have been pushed towards
housing as a crucial form of investment, not because it is easy to borrow but because it is
difficult to invest. Chinese mortgage rates have often been much higher than in the U.S., and
down payment requirements have rarely fallen below 20 percent. For Chinese savers buying real
estate as investment assets, however, the more relevant cost of capital is not the mortgage rate
but the opportunity cost of putting their funds elsewhere. Average real interest rate on bank
5

From 1998 to 2007, the 75th percentile of the loan-to-value distribution for new buyers never fell below 95 percent in the U.S.
The mean loan-to-value level was 74 percent in 2006 (over the first three mortgages on the home) reflecting the significant
number of U.S. buyers who borrowed far less.

13

deposits is about zero over the past decade. The Shanghai Stock Exchange Index has average
annual real returns of zero from 2001 to 2016, which are anemic relative to more than 10%
annual real returns to Shanghai real estate over the same period. Tight capital controls also
restrict investing abroad. Moreover, traditional agrarian culture in China cultivates a strong
preference for owning land and real estate. Painter, Yang, and Yu (2003) find that home
ownership 18 percentage points higher among Chinese than among white households in the U.S.
controlling for household characteristics.
In addition to investing for wealth preservation, many Chinese households find it important to
purchase real estate for their children, as home ownership is considered close to a necessity for
marriage (and required especially for successful marriage of young men). This is reflected in a
high home ownership rate among young Chinese households, most of whom bought their
properties with funds that to a significant extent came from their parents. Home ownership rate
for Chinese households below 35 in 2013 is around 55% based on data from the China
Household Finance Survey, compared to 37% in the US. Wei and Zhang (2011) provide detailed
evidence of competitive savings motive in China for children’s marriage, and the China
Household Finance Survey also indicates that ownership of multiple residences and vacant
residences is higher among families with unmarried young men.
Both the investment motive and the marriage motive contribute to Chinese households buying
second homes if they can afford them even without occupying them. The Chinese Urban
Household Survey for 2009 contains data on ownership of second homes. The data show that
these owners are richer and better educated than the average survey respondent. Owners of
vacant homes have 34 percent higher earnings than average, and .9 more years of education. The
average age of the investors is 49 and 95 percent of them are married.

Chinese investors are

mature and prosperous. Estimates from several sources suggest that housing accounts for 70 to
85 percent of urban households’ total assets in China (Huang, 2013; Xie and Jin, 2015). Despite
the heaving investment in real estate, the ratio of total Chinese household debt to G.D.P. is still

14

under 40 percent by the end of 2015.6 In comparison, in the first quarter of 2008, U.S. household
debt reached 99 percent of G.D.P.7
Are the Chinese investors overly optimistic? Case, Shiller and Thompson (2012) use survey
evidence to document the extremely strong over-optimism of U.S. home buyers.

Simple

extrapolative models do seem to fit the stylized facts of the U.S. real estate market, such as the
strong positive serial correlation in price changes, remarkably well (Glaeser and Nathanson,
2016).

There is also a robust correlation between past price growth and stated expectations

about future price growth in the U.S. (Williams, 2013). On the other hand, U.S. optimism about
real estate prices during the boom had little justification other than past price growth. Chinese
investors in their 50s, in contrast, have lived through a national economic growth miracle. Their
optimism about future price growth is surely understandable, although not necessarily correct.
Whether or not their buying decisions are based on over-optimism, the portfolios of the Chinese
middle class are highly skewed towards real estate. Significant changes in housing values will
have a significant impact on their future well-being.
An alternative way to ask whether demand for housing is speculative and excessive is to assess
whether the price of the asset is roughly equal to the value of the flow of services that the asset
will deliver. In finance, this approach compares prices with flows of earnings or dividends
(Shiller 2000). High prices compared to earnings present candidate bubbles.
In the case of housing, the approach typically compares housing prices to rents, again assuming
that rents capture the flow of services from owning the house.

When interest rates are low,

small differences in expectations about future growth rates can generate wild swings in the
predicted price to rent ratio. As a result, some concluded that U.S. prices in 2005 were perfectly
compatible with current rents and rationality (Himmelberg, Mayer and Sinai, 2005). In the
Chinese case, renting is so rare that rental data is unavailable for units comparable to new
properties.

6
7

http://stats.bis.org/statx/srs/table/f3.1
https://research.stlouisfed.org/fred2/series/HDTGPDUSQ163N

15

An alternative to rent is to compare prices to income, which The Economist has referred to as “a
gauge of frothiness.” 8 Fang et al. (2015) use this approach in their balanced discussion of
whether China has “a housing bubble that is about to burst.” They note both that “housing prices
are indeed expensive to the income of many households,” and that “price appreciation has been
mostly accompanied by equally impressive income growth.”

They report “price-to-income

ratios of around eight in second-and third-tier cities and, in some years, even over ten in first-tier
cities.” These ratios are quite high by global standards, but the parallel trends of income and
price growth remind us that optimistic Chinese buyers look far more sensible than their
American counterparts who paid sky-high prices during the U.S. boom, despite only moderate
U.S. economic growth during those years.
But a constant price-to-income ratio is neither necessary nor sufficient to establish the existence
of a bubble.

If houses, or any product, can be built for a fixed cost of $100,000, then even if

house prices temporarily rise above $100,000 and keep pace with rapid income growth, they may
still ultimately fall down to the cost of supply. Alternatively, prices can rise faster than income
growth in places with restricted supply, perhaps because amenities are increasing, and there is no
reason for these high prices will later crash.
In China, educational and medical resources are heavily concentrated in major cities, and the
hukou system restricts access to many resources to local residents. Home purchases and
permanent residence in top tier cities is one step towards becoming local residents.
Consequently, high housing prices could in part reflect expectations about future demand for
urban amenities.
Overall, price to rent or price to income ratios offers remarkably little precision about whether
housing prices are too high or too low.

Slight changes in projected growth or interest rates

(Chinese mortgages are typically variable rate) cause the implied price to rent ratio (or price to
income ratio) to change radically.

Since we do not know the future value of urban amenities, it

is hard to have any confidence about what the demand should be for urban space.

8

http://www.economist.com/blogs/graphicdetail/2015/11/daily-chart-0

16

The Supply-Side Approach to Assessing Real Estate Bubbles
The demand-side calculations ignore the power of supply over housing prices.

Glaeser (2013)

argues that in the history of U.S. real estate bubbles, the most common mistake is for investors to
ignore the role that supply plays in determining prices of housing and land. Investors buying in
London’s Belgravia or Paris’ Ile St. Louis can probably rest secure that these areas will not be
flooded with new housing supply.

But we have already documented the enormous amount of

new construction and massive quantities of vacant homes in Chinese cities.

Elastic supply is a

better assumption than fixed supply for many Chinese cities today, although that could change
quickly with a sudden shift in public policy.
The physical cost of construction in China appears to be quite low, and fairly similar across
different cities. We use construction cost estimates from two standard sources. The first source is
the China Engineering Cost Network, directed by the Ministry of Housing and Urban-Rural
Development. The second source is the China Real Estate Yearbook. As of 2014, the China
Engineering Cost Network provides a cost of 1,362 RMB per square meter for multi-story
housing and 1,817 RMB per square meter for high rise housing.

This would represent a cost of

between 19 and 26 dollars per square foot for building, which is astonishingly low by U.S.
standards. The total physical cost at completion from the China Real Estate Yearbook is
somewhat higher, at 2,730 RMB per square meter, about 38 dollars per square foot. Their
estimates appear to include some softer cost and additional expenses. 9 Total cost has gone up
substantially since the early 2000s based on the Yearbook data. These rising costs may reflect
increasing labor costs or improving quality of construction, but they remain low relative to prices.
Moreover, technological progress in construction is likely to keep future construction costs low.
Modular skyscraper design seems to have enabled one developer to build a 57 story apartment
building in 19 days.10
Construction costs are typically given on a gross square footage basis (i.e. including halls,
stairwells, etc.), while sales prices refer to net square footage.

As gross square footage can

9 Developers typically report that 1,800 RMB per square meter is a reasonable industry standard for hard costs in recent years.
10

http://www.businessinsider.com/chinese-skyscraper-built-in-19-days-with-modular-design-2015-6

17

readily be 40 percent higher than net, construction costs range from 2,000 RMB per square meter
to 3,800 RMB per square meter of usable space. These costs should be compared with the
current prices of over 35,000 RMB per square meter in Shanghai and Beijing and 18,000 in
Guanzhou and 10,000 RMB per square meter in Wuhan. Soufun’s 100 city index shows an
average sale price of 12,000 RMB per square meter by mid 2016. Construction costs appear to
be less than 30 percent of sale prices in typical Chinese cities, and perhaps as little as 15 percent
in the top tier cities.
The large gap between construction costs and prices does not imply that developers are earning
huge profits. Land is expensive and taxes are high. Wu, Gyourko and Deng (2015) have built a
remarkable index of land prices in China based on repeat land sales. They find that real land
prices in 35 Chinese cities increased five-fold between 2005 and 2015.11 For 2014, Wu et al.
(2015) data show an average land price of 23,385 RMB per square meter of floor area in Beijing
(based on 31 parcel sales) and 20,620 RMB per square meter in Shanghai (based on 41 sales).
Lower tier cities have lower land prices. In a relatively well-off provincial capital like Wuhan,
land prices average 4,839 RMB per square meter (based on 40 sales). Most 2nd and 3rd tier cities
have land prices of around 1,000 RMB per square meter (Deng et al., 2012), and average sales
price of around 5,000 to 10,000 RMB per square meter.
There are two ways in which the land cost contribution to building costs could decline, and bring
prices closer in line with construction costs. First, Chinese cities could permit higher floor to area
ratios. Floor-area ratios (FARs) determine the ratio of built floor space to land in an entire parcel,
and thus reflect both building height and vacant land left around buildings. Despite the height of
many Chinese buildings, actual FARs are relatively low. Cai et al. (2016) show average FAR
limits for new residential construction of two in many cities (e.g., 2.12 in Beijing, 1.65 in
Shanghai). At an FAR of 2, assuming that urban Chinese consume 40 square meters of net living
space or 56 square meters of gross living space per capita in the long run, an urban population of
1.05 billion12 will require 29.4 billion square meters of urban residential land, which is still less
than China’s 40 billion square meters of urban residential land. 13 Cities eager for more
11

http://real.wharton.upenn.edu/~gyourko/chineselandpriceindex.html
Assuming population expands to 1.5 billion and urbanization rate reaches 70%.
13
https://web.stanford.edu/class/cee320/CEE320B/Seto.pdf
12

18

development and for less sprawl could readily ratchet FARs upward. At an FAR of 10 as
opposed to 2, accommodating 1.05 billion urban Chinese will require only seven billion square
meters of urban land, not 29.4 billion.
The alternative path to lower land costs is to expand urban space in new cities.
small town in 1980. Now it is a thriving megalopolis of 18 million.

Shenzhen was a

The urban space could

expand substantially, and land constraint could be relaxed by freeing land up for urban purposes.
It is well within the power of the Chinese government to allow either enough new cities or higher
FAR, either of which could create an ocean of new housing supply. In the next section, we will
explore the impact that new supply could have on housing prices in 20 years.

Prices in Twenty Years
The Chinese investors who buy and hold empty properties are investing for the long run. In the
section, we assess whether today’s prices in Chinese cities will look reasonable in twenty years.
We consider a range of possible scenarios and compare price estimates both with the price today,
and the price today plus 3 percent annual growth. If investors require a return of one percent per
year over and above maintenance and depreciation costs (which we assume are roughly two
percent), then prices need to rise by 80.6 percent in total over 20 years. Our estimation of future
price derives from estimates of demand for and supply of housing in the long run. We produce
our estimates separately for Tier 1, Tier 2 and Tier 3 cities. While Chinese cities have significant
heterogeneity, each tier groups cities that are relatively similar in economic development.
Our demand calculations begin by assuming that the willingness to pay for housing will
eventually settle on 10 times income, high by U.S. standards but not unusual in Europe.14 In
other words, we assume that all individuals with local incomes above one tenth of the price (P)

14 To justify this with a spatial equilibrium, assume that income for individual i in a city is denoted 𝑦 , and income in the reservation locale (rural
𝑖
(1−𝜃)
China) is 𝜃𝑦𝑖 + (1 − 𝜃)𝑦. If the rural price is fixed by construction costs at 𝑃, then the willingness to pay is 𝑃 +
(𝑦𝑖 − 𝑦), where 𝑔𝑖 is the

growth rate of this income gap. As long as 𝑃 −
approximately equals 10.

(1−𝜃)
𝑟−𝑔𝑖

𝑦 is small, then willingness to pay is

19

(1−𝜃)
𝑟−𝑔𝑖

𝑟−𝑔𝑖

times income. Our approach assumes that

(1−𝜃)
𝑟−𝑔𝑖

are willing to live in the location. The buyers are assumed to be the richest potential urbanites.
Consequently, if the income distribution is characterized by a cumulative distribution F(Y), then
total demand for housing is N(1-F(Y*)) where N is the size of the “potential” urban population in
this locale and 1-F(Y*) denotes the share with incomes above the cutoff value Y*, who will be
home owners. The equilibrium price P* will equal ten times Y* by assumption.
Hence, we predict prices by using the equilibrium condition:
Housing Supply=Potential Urban Population * (1-F(P*/10))
This equation requires us to estimate the future distribution of income, the growth in the potential
urban population and growth in the housing stock. Low housing supply and high population
growth will both lower the fraction of households served.

High income growth means that the

willingness to pay for the same marginal buyer will be higher.
For the distribution of future household income, we start with the current distribution of income
in each tier, based on data from the Urban Household Survey. We assume that the distribution is
log-normal, consistent with the data. We then estimate the income distribution in 2030 based on
assumptions of income growth rates. In the official statistics, real incomes for urban Chinese in
the past ten years have grown by about 10 percent per year.

Our baseline assumption is that

average future growth in the next two decades will be one-half that size, but Figures 6a, 6b and
6c show results for a wide range of income projections.
We project that the growth in future potential urban population will mirror past growth in actual
urban population, recognizing that past urban population reflects both changes in regional
population patterns and changes in the urbanization rate.

The first tier cities have high and

stable urbanization of 90%, but they have experienced much higher total population growth than
the national average. The population inflow comes from these cities’ advantages in creating high
paying jobs and the fact that educational, medical, and many other social resources, and these
advantages seem unlikely to change. For the second tier cities, population growth has been at the
national average, and the urbanization rate has been rising steadily. For the third tier cities, total

20

population growth has been lower than the national average, due to labor outflow, but they are
experiencing very rapid urbanization of the local population.
We assume that the first tier cities will continue to be highly urbanized, and that the growth in
potential population will be higher than the projected national population growth rate. In second
tier cities, we assume that potential population will increase at above the national rate because of
increasing urbanization.

The third tier cities are assumed to have regional population growth

below the national average but growing urbanization rate.
For supply of housing, we start with current occupied housing stock and then add inventories and
vacancies. New completion of floor space nationwide has risen to about 10 billion square feet per
year in the past five years, up from around 6 billion in the mid 2000s. We consider a wide range
of supply scenarios, from a lower bound of zero to an upper bound of about 8 billion square feet
per year nationally. We assume that the existing housing stock depreciates by 2 percent per year.
Will there be enough space to accommodate that additional supply? While China is a very
populous country, density in Chinese cities is typically much lower than major American
metropolitan areas. For example, the first tier cities have population density varying from 1,000
to 2,000 people per square kilometer in 2010, whereas New York City has density of 10,000
people per square kilometer and the top 100 American MSAs all have density above 4,000
people per square kilometer. Our most extreme high supply scenario will less than double
housing stock in the first tier cities, and the more probable range we consider will add less than
25% housing space. It is also unlikely that population growth in the first tier cities can
significantly exceed our estimate of 40% in the next twenty years, and this population growth
rate will still put top tier Chinese cities at lower density than many American cities.
Table 2a summarizes the specific parameter values we assume. Since our data and projections
of housing stock is based on the urban core in each city, which has roughly 60% of total urban
population, we also by .6 to capture the core’s share of total population.

This potential urban

population may not all be home owners in the city. Those who cannot afford housing may rent or

21

live outside of the urban core. Finally, we assume that per capita housing consumption in 2030
will be 430.56 square feet, or 40 square meters, up from 30 square meters in the 2010 census.
Table 2b discusses two specific cases for each tier of cities. Here we focus on 5% annual income
growth, and consider a conservative case where annual new supply is roughly cut in half
compared to the average from 2000 to 2010, and an aggressive case where the supply is higher.
These examples confirm that very high price growth seems unlikely, but as long as income
growth remains robust, the downside in the eventual long-run equilibrium also appears to be
modest.
Figures 6a, 6b, and 6c show long-run price estimates for each tier as a function of income growth
and new supply. They present a wide range of possible future scenarios. Here we translate price
estimate to average annualized house price growth from 2010 to 2030. We also draw a line that
denotes the parameter values needed to achieve an average 3% annual real returns. Parameter
values below the line will generate price growth that exceeds three percent returns. It is quite
possible that different tiers may end up in different housing market outcomes, depending on
economic growth and housing supply.
For both 1st tier and 2nd tier cities, 3% annual real return is quite difficult to achieve. It requires
annual real income of at least 6% to 7%, which is very optimistic for the average pace in the next
20 years, together with new supply close to zero. If supply persists at the average level of 2000 to
2010, returns will be minimal or negative unless income growth turns out to be spectacular.

For

the 3rd tier cities, our simulation provides some room for future price growth, as long as supply
does not overwhelm the market. The results are driven by the fact that these cities have the
largest scope for increased urbanization, and their current prices are generally low.
Overall, these simulations show a possible range of prices, depending on income growth,
potential urban population growth and housing supply growth. Of these three determinants of
future prices, the Chinese government has the most capacity to shape housing supply growth.
With sufficiently controlled housing supply, current prices can be maintained, but if housing
supply continues to aggressively deliver new space, prices will fall.

22

Conclusion
In many respects, China looks like a classic housing bubble.
construction is enormous.

Prices have soared.

New

Vacancies are large and pervasive. It is tempting to view these

events from afar and conclude that a price drop is imminent.
As we try to demonstrate, this scenario is far from certain. Chinese home buyers appear to be
investing for the long run, and are unlikely to sell voluntarily even if home prices decline. Nor
are they heavily leveraged, so repossessions and liquidations of homes are unlikely. Chinese
developers are more leveraged, but are cozy with state banks, so their loans are likely to be
restructured.

Even if banks repossess properties from developers, they are unlikely to dump

them on the market. Compared to Chinese stocks, more inertia is built into the housing market.
And then there is the critical role of the Chinese government in housing markets. The demand
for urbanization in China is so large that if the government acts to sharply restrict new supply, it
can probably maintain prices at close to current market levels. If the government buys up excess
inventory, perhaps to convert it to social housing as it has started to do in 2015, it can further
bolster softening prices. There does appear to be a feasible public path towards price stability.
Yet that path may create significant social costs. Construction employment would plummet.
Millions of Chinese may lose the apparent productivity advantages associated with living in
Chinese cities (Chauvin et al. 2016).

Local governments would lose the financial autonomy

from land sales and taxes that has been their institutional basis.
The alternative for the Chinese government is to accommodate high levels of construction and
housing supply. As we showed, this will lead to very low or negative expected returns to
investment in housing. The welfare of potential new buyers will rise, but current owners will
suffer losses.

23

Bursting real estate bubbles have traditionally done great harm when they are associated with
financial crises. Bubbles that burst without banking meltdowns, as in 1890s Los Angeles, are
temporary events that seem to cause little long run damage. Going forward, an important step is
to secure the financial system rather than focus solely on maintaining high housing costs in
Chinese cities.

24

References
Cai, Hongbin, J Vernon Henderson, and Qinghua Zhang, “China’s land market auctions:
Evidence of corruption?,” Rand Journal of Economics, 2013, 44 (3): 488–521.,
Cai, Hongbin, Zhi Wang, and Qinghua Zhang, “To Build Above the Limit? Implementation of
Land Use Regulations in Urban China,” Journal of Urban Economics, 2016.
Case, Karl E., Robert J. Shiller, and Anne Thompson, “What Have They Been Thinking? Home
Buyer Behavior in Hot and Cold Markets,” Working Paper, 2012.
Chamon, Marcos D., and Eswar S. Prasad. "Why Are Saving Rates of Urban Households in
China Rising?" American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 2010, 2 (1): 93-130.
Chauvin, Juan Pablo, Edward Glaeser, Yueran Ma, and Kristina Tobio, “What is Different About
Urbanization in Rich and Poor Countries? Cities in Brazil, China, India and the United States,”
Journal of Urban Economics, 2016.
Chivakul, Mali, W Raphael Lam, Xiaoguang Liu, Wojciech S Maliszewski, and Alfred Schipke,
“Understanding Residential Real Estate in China,” Working Paper, 2015.
Deng, Yongheng, Joseph Gyourko, and Jing Wu, “Land and House Price Measurement in China,”
Working Paper, 2012.
Fang, Hanming, Quanlin Gu, Wei Xiong, and Li-An Zhou, “Demystifying the Chinese housing
boom,” in NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2015, University of Chicago Press, 2015.
Glaeser, Edward L, “A Nation of Gamblers: Real Estate Speculation and American History,”
American Economic Review, 2013, 103 (3): 1–42.
Glaeser, Edward L. and Charles G. Nathanson, “Housing Bubbles,” Working Paper, 2014.
Glaeser, Edward L. and Charles G. Nathanson, “An Extrapolative Model of House Price
Dynamics,” Working Paper, 2016.
Glaeser, Edward L, Joshua D Gottlieb, and Joseph Gyourko, “Did Credit Market Policies Cause
the Housing Bubble?,” Working Paper, 2010.
Glaeser, Edward L., Joseph Gyourko, and Albert Saiz. "Housing Supply and Housing
Bubbles." Journal of Urban Economics, 2008, 64 (2): 198-217.
Himmelberg, Charles, Christopher Mayer, and Todd Sinai, “Assessing High House Prices:
Bubbles, Fundamentals and Misperceptions,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 2005, 19 (4):
67–92.
Hsieh, Chang-Tai, and Enrico Moretti, “Why Do Cities Matter? Local Growth and Aggregate
Growth,” Working Paper, 2015.

25

Huang, Zhen. “A Study of Household Finance in China,” Working Paper, 2013.
Li, Hongbin and Li-An Zhou, “Political Turnover and Economic Performance: The Incentive
Role of Personnel Control in China,” Journal of Public Economics, 2005, 89 (9-10): 1743–1762.
Mian, Atif and Amir Sufi, “The Consequences of Mortgage Credit Expansion: Evidence from
the US Mortgage Default Crisis,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2009, 124 (4): 1449–1496.
Painter, Gary, Yang, Lihong, and Zhou Yu, “Homeownership Determinants of Chinese
Americans: Assimilation, Ethnic Concentration, and Nativity,” Working Paper, 2003.
Saiz, Albert, “The Geographic Determinants of Housing Supply,” Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 2010, 125 (3): 1253–1296.
Shiller, Robert, Irrational Exuberance, 2000. Princeton University Press.
Wei, Shang-Jin, and Xiaobo Zhang, "The Competitive Saving Motive: Evidence from Rising Sex
Ratios and Savings Rates in China." Journal of Political Economy, 2011, 119 (3): 511-564.
Williams, John, “Bubbles Tomorrow and Bubbles Yesterday, but Never Bubbles Today?”
Speech at the National Association for Business Economics, 2013.
Wu, Jing, Joseph Gyourko, and Yongheng Deng, “Evaluating the risk of Chinese housing
markets: What we know and what we need to know,” Working Paper, 2015.
Wu, Xun, “An Introduction to Chinese Local Government Debt,” Working Paper, 2015.
Xie, Yu, and Yongai Jin, "Household Wealth in China." Chinese Sociological Review, 2015, 47
(3): 203-229.

26

Table 1: Estimates of Inventory and Vacancies
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

Tier of
city

Developer
inventory per
capita (ft)

Vacancy per
capita (ft per
capita)

Urban
Population
(Million)

5.5
17.1
14.5

10.4
19.9
16.0
12.9
15.4

57.7
166.9
185.1
206.5
616.2

1
2
3
4
Total

13.2

(5)
Predicted
developer
inventory
(Billion ft2)
0.32
2.85
2.69
3.00
8.86

(6)
Predicted
vacancy
(Billion ft2)
0.60
3.33
2.97
2.67
9.56

(7)
Developer
inventory +
Vacancy
(Billion ft2)
0.92
6.17
5.66
5.67
18.42

Note:
City tiers are from Fang et al. (2015). Inventory area per capita is calculated from local housing bureau
(Fangguanju) data for 2014 compiled by Soufun, and vacant area per capita is calculated based on 2009
Urban Household Survey. Urban population is from 2010 census. Column 5 is column 2 multiplied by
column 4, and column 6 is column 3 multiplied by column 4. Column 7 is the sum of columns (5) and (6).
We assume 4th tier cities have the same inventory per capita as 3rd tier cities.

27

Table 2: Estimates of Prices in 20 Years, by City Tier
Table 2a. Key Inputs and Assumptions
City tier:
Total housing in urban area 2010 (billion ft2)
Used
Developer inventory
Household vacancy
Total population growth 2000--2010
Urbanization rate 2010
Assumptions
Depreciation rate of housing
Housing per capita
Long-run price to income ratio
Total population growth 2010--2030
Urbanization rate 2030

1st

2nd

3rd

8.6
7.7
0.3
0.6
50%
90%

37.3
32.1
1.9
3.3
26%
70%

36.1
32.2
0.9
3.0
7%
50%

40%
90%

2%
403.56 ft2 (or 40 m2)
10
20%
10%
80%
70%

Table 2b. Selected Scenarios
1st
2nd
3rd
Conservative Aggressive Conservative Aggressive Conservative Aggressive

City tier
Scenarios
Additional assumptions
Annual housing supply 2010--2030
(billion ft2)
Annual income growth

0.17

Price in 2030 (2014 RMB per ft2)
Annual price growth

2,165
0.82%

Annual housing supply 2000--2010
Price in 2010 (2014 RMB per ft2)

0.48

0.72

2.00

0.90

2.83

410
-4.82%

1,017
3.37%

403
-1.30%

5%
1,531
-0.91%
0.42
1,840

1,039
-0.29%
1.98
1,102

Note: Housing in urban area in 2010 is from 2010 census, covering city proper area. Inventory is
estimated using Soufun data and vacancy is estimated using Urban Household Survey data.
Household income data are also drawn from Urban Household Survey. Annual housing supply in
2000—2010 is estimated as housing in urban area in 2010 census minus that in 2000 census times
0.82 (assuming housing stock in 2000 depreciates by 2% per year), then divided by 10. Based on
current data, 60% of urban population live in the city proper area. Price estimates are in 2014
RMB.

28

1.84
524

Figure 1: Price Growth by Tier: China and U.S.

Note: Housing price index data for China are from Fang et al. (2015). Housing price index data
for MSAs in the US are from the Federal Housing Finance Agency. We construct tiers in the US
by ranking US MSAs based on 1990 income per capita, and assign tiers so that each tier has the
same population share as that in China; the richest MSAs are assigned to 1st tier and so on so
forth. We calculate real price index using nominal price index adjusted for inflation. Price indices
in each tier are weighted averages of city level price indices.

29

Figure 2: Construction (square footage) China and US
Calendar year, US

12

1996

1997

1998

2000

2001

2002

2003

2004

2005

2006

US

2

4

Square ft in billions
6
8

10

CHN

1999

2003

2004

2005

2006

2007

2008

2009

2010

2011

2012

Calendar year, CHN

Note: Annual completed residential space for China is from China Statistical Yearbook. Annual
completed residential space for the US is calculated as units of single family homes completed
multiplied by average square footage of new single family homes, plus units of multi-family
homes completed multiplied by average square footage of new multi-family homes.

30

Figure 3a: Construction and Income across US Cities

Figure 3b: Construction and Income across Chinese Cities

Note: In panel A, housing stock per capita and income per capita for US MSAs are from the
decennial census. In panel B, housing stock per capita for Chinese prefecture level cities is from
2000 and 2010 census, and restricted to counties that are designated as urban in 2000. Log GDP
per capita in 2000 is from China City Statistical Yearbook 2000 for city proper.

31

Figure 4: Developer Inventory Estimates by Tier

Note: Developer inventory data is from local housing bureau (Fangguanju), and compiled by
Soufun. Because the data does not cover all the cities, our estimates of inventory in each tier is
based on inventory per capita by tier multiplied by urban population in each tier. We also assume
the 4th tier cities have the same inventory per capita as the 3rd tier cities. In total, the estimates are
based on 262 prefecture level cities: 4 cities in the first tier, 34 in the second tier and 84 in the
third and 140 in the fourth.

32

Figure 5: Household Vacancy Rates 2002-2012 Urban Housing Survey (36 Cities)
Second tier
Fourth tier

.02

.06

.1

.14

.18

First tier
Third tier

2002

2004

2006

2008

2010

2012

year

Note: Data from China Urban Household Survey. We keep the 36 cities with observations
throughout 2002-2012. City tiers are based on Fang et al. (2015).

33

Figure 6: Estimates of Average Annual Housing Price Growth (%) 2010—2030
Figure 6a: First Tier

Figure 6b: Second Tier

34

Figure 6c: Third Tier

Note: Plots of estimated average annual real housing price growth (%) from 2010 to 2030, as a
function of annual real income growth (x-axis) and annual new construction (y-axis). Darker
color denotes higher returns. The solid line is the frontier where annual real returns are 3%. The
dashed line shows the level of average annual supply from 2000 to 2010. Annual housing supply
in 2000—2010 is estimated as housing in urban area in 2010 census minus that in 2000 census
times 0.82 (assuming housing stock in 2000 depreciates by 2% per year), then divided by 10.

35

