                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




           COMPETITIVE EFFECTS OF SCOPE OF PRACTICE RESTRICTIONS:
                      PUBLIC HEALTH OR PUBLIC HARM?

                                       Sara Markowitz
                                     E. Kathleen Adams
                                 Mary Jane Lewitt, PhD,CNM
                                     Anne Dunlop, MD

                                      Working Paper 22780
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w22780


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    October 2016




Funding for this research was provided by AHRQ grant 1R01HS024530. We thank Megan Kelly
for her work on coding the laws, and Jonathan Hawley and Peter Joski for excellent research
assistance. We also thank Christine Durrance and seminar participants at Clemson University,
University of Alabama at Birmingham, the APPAM annual meeting and the ASHEcon biennial
meeting for extremely helpful comments. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and
do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2016 by Sara Markowitz, E. Kathleen Adams, Mary Jane Lewitt, PhD,CNM, and Anne
Dunlop, MD. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be
quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the
source.
Competitive Effects of Scope of Practice Restrictions: Public Health or Public Harm?
Sara Markowitz, E. Kathleen Adams, Mary Jane Lewitt, PhD,CNM, and Anne Dunlop, MD
NBER Working Paper No. 22780
October 2016
JEL No. I1,J44,K2

                                          ABSTRACT

The demand for health care and healthcare professionals is predicted to grow significantly over
the next decade. Securing an adequate health care workforce is of primary importance to ensure
the health and wellbeing of the population in an efficient manner. Occupational licensing laws
and related restrictions on scope of practice (SOP) are features of the market for healthcare
professionals and are also controversial. At issue is a balance between protecting the public health
and removing anticompetitive barriers to entry and practice. In this paper, we examine the
controversy surrounding SOP restrictions for certified nurse midwives (CNMs). We use the
variation in SOP laws governing CNM practice that has occurred over time in a quasi-
experimental design to evaluate the effect of the laws on the markets for CNMs and their
services, and on related maternal and infant outcomes. We focus on SOP laws that pertain to
physician oversight requirements and prescribing rules, and examine the effects of SOP laws in
geographic areas designated as medically underserved. Our findings indicate that SOP laws are
neither helpful nor harmful in regards to maternal behaviors and infant health outcomes, but
states that allow CNMs to practice with no SOP-based barriers to care have lower rates of
induced labor and Cesarean section births. We discuss the implications of these findings for the
policy debate surrounding SOP restrictions and for health care costs.

Sara Markowitz                                   Mary Jane Lewitt, PhD,CNM
Department of Economics                          Nell Hodgson Woodruff School of Nursing
Emory University                                 Emory University
1602 Fishburne Dr.                               1520 Clifton Rd
Atlanta, GA 30322                                Atlanta, GA 30322
and NBER                                         mlewitt@emory.edu
sara.markowitz@emory.edu
                                                 Anne Dunlop, MD
E. Kathleen Adams                                Nell Hodgson Woodruff School of Nursing
Emory School of Public Health                    Emory University
1518 Clifton Road, NE                            1520 Clifton Rd
Atlanta, GA 30322                                Atlanta, GA 30322
eadam01@emory.edu                                amlang@emory.edu
Introduction

          As a result of population growth, the aging of the population, and continued

implementation of the Affordable Care Act (ACA), the demand for health care and healthcare

professionals is predicted to grow tremendously over the next decade. The Bureau of Labor

Statistics (BLS) estimates that the collective healthcare occupation will be one of the fastest

growing, far outpacing the growth in other industries and adding 2.3 million new jobs by 2024

(BLS 2015). At the same time, others predict that demand for workers will outpace supply,

leading to a shortage of 35,000-52,000 adult primary care physicians by 2025 (Petterson et al.

2012). In the face of this changing landscape, securing an adequate health care workforce is of

primary importance to ensure the health and wellbeing of the population, as well as meeting

national goals of improving the efficiency of the healthcare system (Heisler 2013).

          The trajectory of the healthcare workforce is shaped by a variety of factors, with one of

the most important being issues related to occupational licensing. The Bureau of Labor Statistics

estimates that 72.2% of healthcare practitioners (6.33 million workers) are licensed and subject

to laws regulating those licenses (BLS 2016). Healthcare practitioners are licensed by the states

in which they practice, earning their license by completing the required years of education and

practical training, and passing national exams. In general, occupational licenses exist to ensure

that practitioners are knowledgeable and competent, and therefore protect the public from

potential harm (Bryson and Kleiner 2010). However, certain provisions of licenses can also

generate significant barriers to workforce entry, restrict competition, raise prices, and protect

guilds.

          Beyond the initial licensing requirements guiding entry into the profession, many health

care practitioners, generally non-physicians, face additional “scope of practice” license



                                                   1
restrictions after entry. These scope of practice (SOP) laws are set by the states and define the

range of tasks legally allowed for a given provider, within state boundaries. Physicians

generally have no restrictions on their SOP, are free to practice medicine as they see fit, and

perhaps earn economic rents. Other practitioners, including physician assistants, advanced

practice registered nurses (APRNs), dental hygienists, and optometrists, often face restrictions on

their SOP. It is these restrictions that have become a source of controversy in recent years as it is

argued that they may generate unnecessary barriers to practice, block patients’ access to care and

restrict the achievement of efficiencies in the overall health care system. Lifting restrictions is

seen as one solution to primary care shortages that can also result in improved access to care and

cost savings. Indeed, the current movement among states is to lift SOP restrictions and move

towards “fully enabled” SOP for many types of health practitioners.

       The controversy surrounding SOP regulation of healthcare practitioners is particularly

acute in the market for APRNs. Critics contend that quality of care may suffer under an APRN’s

direction, citing the shorter length of training and clinical experience required. Proponents argue

that APRNs improve efficiency of the system by providing care that is similar in quality to that

of physicians while reducing costs substantially (AAFP 2012, Schiff 2012). The heart of the

controversy lies in the determination of the costs and benefits. What remains unknown is

whether SOP restrictions complement licensing requirements in a way that protects the public

from potential harm, or if these restrictions simply generate artificial barriers and protect

physician rents. This line of inquiry is important for a subset of APRNs, Certified Nurse

Midwives (CNMs) whose education allows them to manage women’s health during pregnancy,

birth, and the postpartum period. The costs of births at delivery equaled about $39 billion in 2013

(based on authors’ calculations of the Medical Expenditure Panel Survey (MEPS)), with almost



                                                  2
half of that paid by taxpayers through the Medicaid program; the largest driver of the costs of

delivery is whether it is vaginal or by C-section.

       In this paper, we examine this controversy and evaluate the effects of varying levels of

SOP restrictions on health outcomes relevant to the CNM practice. CNMs are APRNs whose

practice is defined as the independent management of women’s health care. It focuses on

pregnancy, childbirth, postpartum care, newborn care, and the family planning and gynecological

needs of women. We use the natural experiment of states’ changes in laws affecting the SOP for

CNMs over the 1994-2013 time period to evaluate the effect of the laws on the markets for

CNMs and their services, and on related maternal and infant outcomes. We focus on SOP laws

that pertain to physician oversight requirements and prescribing rules, and examine the effects of

SOP laws in geographic areas designated as medically underserved. We estimate a reduced form

equation that links the laws directly to health outcomes and to the intermediary mechanisms of

CNM employment levels and consumers’ choice of provider.

       The results of this study inform the debate surrounding the movement to fully enabled

SOP for APRNs in general, but specifically, as it pertains to CNMs. We show that states that

allow for CNMs fully enabled practice, have on average, little or no differences in maternal

health behaviors or infant health outcomes as compared to states with more restrictive SOP.

There are however, noticeable differences in rates of labor inductions, elective labor inductions,

C-sections and elective C-sections, with fully enabled SOP states having lower probabilities of

these procedures. The results point to the conclusion that restrictions on CNM SOP primarily

serve as barriers to practice and removing these restrictions has the potential to improve the

efficiency of the health care system for delivery and infant care.




                                                     3
Background

       Scope of practice laws are the legal authority given to health care providers to provide

medical services. For nurses, these laws specifically “define nurses’ roles, articulate oversight

requirements, and govern practice and prescriptive authorities.” (Naylor and Kurtzman 2010, p.

896). The two most common and broad reaching of these laws pertaining to practice oversight

requirements and prescription authority. The SOP laws pertaining to practice authority specify

the degree of practice independence, which range from no specific requirements to collaborative

or consultative arrangements with physicians, to supervisory relationships. SOP laws regarding

prescription authority dictate whether or not an APRN can write prescriptions, and if so, for

which types of drugs, and whether physician involvement is required.

       The current regulatory environments for APRNs (including CNMs) vary tremendously by

state and range from restrictive supervisory relationships to complete independence. Restrictive

practice laws generate barriers to practice by requiring additional documentation (e.g., co-

signatures on charts and orders), delays in care for patients receiving treatments and medications

(such as those that occur when physicians must be contacted to order medications or treatments),

and disruptions of care continuity (when medical results or consultation reports are sent to the

physician of record and not the actual care provider).

       The relevant public policy question surrounding these laws is whether states should allow

APRNs to practice to the full extent of their training with no physician oversight. Full practice

authority is recommended for these practitioners by groups like the Institute of Medicine (IOM),

Robert Wood Johnson Foundation (RWJF), and National Governors Association (NGA) based

on conclusions from academic research comparing health care quality among the different

providers. The most common comparison in these studies is that of nurse practitioners (NPs),



                                                 4
who provide primary care services, to physicians. Newhouse et al. (2011) and the National

Governers Association (Schiff 2012) provide comprehensive reviews of this literature and

conclude that the quality of care provided by NPs is similar to that of physicians. The quality

measures include patient satisfaction, time spent with patients, prescription accuracy, and

changes in physiological measures. The Newhouse et al. study also compared CNM to physician

care and found CNM groups show lower rates of episiotomy, cesarean sections, epidural use,

perineal lacerations, and neonatal intensive care unit admission. They also show comparable

rates of APGAR score, labor augmentation, labor induction, low birth weight, vaginal operative

delivery, and vaginal birth after caesarian section (Newhouse et al. 2011).

       The consensus of this literature finding comparable or superior outcomes for the APRNs

is compelling but almost all of the outcome-based comparisons were conducted without regard to

the scope of practice environment in which the study is undertaken. Thus, the existing quality

comparisons do not inform the debate surrounding the movement by a state from restrictive to

fully enabled SOP. Consider for example, the list of U.S.-based studies shown in Table 1 below,

drawn from a review article by Johantgen et al. (2012) that is often cited as evidence supporting

the use of CNMs. We list the “high quality” studies identified by Johantgen et al. for which we

could identify the geographic area and the practice environment under which the data were

collected. We show that the practice environments differ by state but are dominated by restrictive

SOP laws. While the article draws the conclusion that “the findings provide evidence that care

by CNMs is safe and effective”, given the different practice environments under which the

studies are conducted, a more accurate conclusion is that CNM care is safe and effective under

several types of practice environments, including physician oversight. The literature leaves the




                                                 5
main question unanswered. It does not provide information as to whether changing the SOP

laws protect the public’s health and this is the gap in the literature we fill.

        There exists a modest academic literature on the effects of occupational licensing (for

example, Gittleman et al. 2015; Kleiner and Kruger 2013, Kleiner and Kruger 2010), but very

little research has specifically evaluated the effects of the scope of practice restrictions that cover

millions of health care workers. The existing literature primarily focuses on labor market effects

(changes in employment levels, hours, or earnings) and product market effects (changes in

prices, utilization, or expenditures) arising from changes in the SOP laws. Provider types studied

include nurse practitioners (Kleiner et al. 2016; Timmons 2016; Stange 2014; Spetz et al. 2013;

Perry 2009), physician assistants (Timmons 2016; Stange 2014; Perry 2009), dental hygienists

(Kleiner and Park 2010; Wing and Marier 2014); and chiropractors (Timmons et al. 2014).

Within this literature for nurse practitioners, independent SOP for prescription drugs are found to

have no effects on infant mortality rates (Kleiner et al. 2016) nor self-reported health status

(Stange 2014).

        Two studies examine the health effects of restrictive SOP specifically for CNMs. One

older study, Declercq et al. (1998), is a correlational study using two years of data from the

1990s. The authors find evidence that high legislative support for CNM practice is associated

with more CNMs and CNM attended births, lower rates of infant mortality, and lower rates of

low birth weight. A more recent study by Yang et al. (2016) uses a recent cross-section of states

to conduct a correlational study between the autonomy of CNM and birth outcomes. The authors

find that autonomous CNM practice is associated with lower probabilities of labor induction,

cesarean delivery, preterm birth and low birth weight. Although the authors control for

demographic characteristics of the mother, the law’s effects are identified only off of cross-state



                                                   6
variation. Their estimates are therefore highly likely to be biased because of the presence of

unmeasured characteristics of states and patient populations that are correlated with practice

environments.

       Two other relevant studies that examine outcomes related to midwifery include Miller

(2006) and Anderson et al. (2016). Miller examines insurance reimbursement mandates for

CNMs and finds these mandates increase the share of births attended by CNMs, but have no

effect on C-section rates, Apgar scores, birth weight or maternal mortality. The analysis does,

however, find reductions in neonatal and infant mortality. Anderson et al. (2016) take a

historical perspective and examines the effects of state midwifery licensing laws introduced

between 1900 and 1940. The find that licensing requirements are associated with reductions in

maternal mortality and nonwhite infant mortality.

       We advance the literature by presenting a comprehensive analysis of the range of SOP

practice laws for CNMs on health outcomes and identify the effects using the changes in states’

laws over a twenty year time period. We examine parts of the pathway of effects, including the

effects on CNM employment, patients’ use of CNMs, maternal prenatal behaviors,

characteristics of labor and delivery, and infant health outcomes. In doing so, we seek to inform

the debate surrounding the move to full practice authority for CNMs and to learn whether

outcomes in states that allow them to practice independently and to the full extent of their

training differ from states with more restrictive SOP laws. We also consider the effects of our

findings on potential short-term cost savings pertaining to labor and delivery to be found within

the health care system.




                                                 7
SOP Laws for CNMs

       The degree of physician involvement in the CNM practice as mandated by law varies

widely across states and over time. Moreover, there are multiple ways to classify the laws. They

can be broadly categorized into “restrictive”, “collaborative” and “independent” practices. In

“restrictive” practices, the CNM must be supervised or directed by a physician. In

“collaborative” practices, states require a collaborative agreement with a physician in order to

provide patient care. In “independent” practices there are no requirements for physician

oversight, and the CNM is completely independent in practice and prescription authorities. All

of these practice types may pertain to practice authority, prescription authority or both.

       Within the broad categories just described, there are statutory details that reveal a range

of practice allowance. For example, under collaborative SOP, some states require the CNM to

practice under a written collaborative practice agreement (CPA), while others do not. A CPA is

a document that outlines the working relationship between a physician and nurse. It may

describe details of the practice including appropriate levels of consultation and referral, and

reviews of diagnostic procedures, therapies, lab tests, and patient outcomes. These CPAs put in

place some barriers to practice, including at a minimum, finding a physician with which to enter

into a CPA and any monetary fees associated with setting up and maintaining the agreement.

Furthermore, some of these CPAs are mandated to include written protocols that specifically

dictate the practice protocol for case management of specific conditions or diagnoses. That is,

these protocols state the specific procedures, tests, treatments and prescriptions the CNM can

provide within the CPA. These protocols add further barriers to care over the CPA by limiting

what the CNM can do independently. For example, a CPA with protocols may dictate a

particular regimen of prescription medication for an infection, but if the patient has an allergy or



                                                 8
intolerance to that medication, the CNM would be required to take time to contact a physician to

modify the care for that particular patient.

        CNM practice may be further restricted by supervisory-type of arrangements including

delegation and direct supervision. However, even within these categories there is variation as to

whether the state requires written protocols and whether supervision requirements (such as

having the physician on-site or available by phone) are explicitly specified. For our analysis, we

are interested in describing and grouping the laws based on the barriers to providing care, and

therefore, generate and utilize the following classifications:

        No barriers: In this classification, CNMs practice to the full extent of their training with

no barriers to providing care. State laws include those with no oversight requirements at all and

states that specify collaborative relationships but do not require a formal collaborative practice

agreement nor written protocols.

        Low barriers: State laws include those that specify collaborative practice agreements but

do not require written protocols. Also included are states that are use the term “supervisory”

relationship but do not require written protocols nor have any specific supervision requirements.

CNMs in these states practice in collaborative arrangements with few barriers to care.

        Moderate barriers: These state laws specifically require a written protocol describing

allowable practices. The arrangement may be collaborative, delegative, or supervisory in nature,

but all tend towards the same barriers to care through the written protocol.

        High barriers: These states mandate that the CNM practice under the direct supervision

of a physician, with supervision requirements specified. In some cases, the CNM has no

authority to write prescriptions, but may be allowed to order prescriptions under the physician’s

name.



                                                  9
       It is important to note that over time, the trend in the laws has generally moved from the

more restrictive supervisory relationships towards fully enabled practice with few or no

restrictions. Also, as stated above, the legal relationships with physicians may pertain to the

CNM’s practice authority, prescription authority or both, and often differ within the same state.

For example, there are some cases where the state statute allows for a CNM to practice

independently in practice authority but under protocols if she wants to prescribe medications.

Since we want to best describe the barriers to providing care, we combine the practice and

prescription authorities, and classify the state by the more restrictive of the two.

       We have used the information in The Nurse Practitioner’s legislative update along with

information gathered directly from each state’s statutes pertaining specifically to CNMs to

generate variables representing the presence and extent of the laws in each state. As of 2013,

less than half of the states (18) plus DC allow CNMs to practice with no barriers to care, while

the rest of the states require some form of oversight or collaborative practice agreement. Figures

1 and 2 shows maps of the CNM SOP laws by state for 1994 and 2013 and demonstrate the

variation in our sample across states and over time. Less restrictive SOP laws were not always in

place, with states only recently eliminating barriers to care, and in a few cases states have

tightened restrictions. Using a long time period allows us to observe continued variation and

such variation is critical to our research methodology described below.



Mechanisms of Change

       Moving from a restrictive practice environment to a less restrictive one can affect health

care markets through both the supply of CNMs and the demand for their services. On the supply

side, the effects of the different SOP laws may work through altered incentives for entry into the



                                                  10
profession or workplace, or through migration, where workers move to areas with more

favorable practice environments. On the demand side, the laws may have a number of effects.

Less restrictive laws with no oversight requirements may encourage the opening of new health

care facilities staffed primarily by APRNs, or in our case, new birthing centers staffed by CNMs.

Expanded allowable services such as the ability to prescribe may alter consumers’ “tastes” for

seeing APRNs and again, lead to increased demand for their services. Ancillary effects may be

to bring people into the market that may have otherwise forgone or delayed care, or to generate a

substitution away from physician services. Even without expanding the supply of nurses or the

demand for new nurse-staffed facilities, eliminating oversight requirements that generate delays

in care may improve the marginal productivity of practicing nurses. In theory, all of these effects

should increase the equilibrium number of nurses practicing in less restrictive SOP

environments, while the effect on wages is ambiguous.

       While changes in the laws may induce changes in the rates of use of CNMs, or changes in

the practice of medicine by CNMs, it is unknown how this ultimately will affect the quality of

care. Proponents of fully enabled SOP argue that by design, the CNM model of care improves

maternal and infant health outcomes by emphasizing and supporting prenatal care and through

the use of less medical technology. The implication here is that any policy that expands the use

of CNMs will result in more healthy pregnancies and improved birth outcomes. The counter

argument is that the shorter length of training and clinical experience required for CNMs may

result in an overall lower quality of care, and that expanded use of CNMs will have a deleterious

effect on the health outcomes. To complicate matters, it is also possible there are spillover

effects in that the presence of new providers could help alleviate shortages, alter wait times and

time spent with patients, potentially leading to improved health outcomes from all providers.



                                                11
Another possibility is that the threat of competition from alternative providers could influence

the physician practice.

         We argue that both obstetricians and CNMs support the production of “good health” via

the inputs, although the input mix is different and for CNMs includes more time and less medical

technology. Whether the SOP laws affect the overall production of good health in a meaningful

way is an empirical question that we address here by evaluating the effects of changes in the

SOP laws for CNMs on: 1) altering maternal prenatal health behaviors (timely prenatal care,

tobacco use, alcohol use, appropriate weight gain); 2) altering labor and delivery outcomes (labor

induction, C-section birth); and 3) altering infant health outcomes (birth weight, gestational age

at birth, birth injury). Note that for the infant health outcomes of birth weight and gestational

age, the effects of the CNM SOP laws would work via changes in health inputs, only some of

which we can observe such as early prenatal care, lower tobacco and alcohol use, appropriate

gestational weight gain and method of delivery. Our main focus and conclusions arise from the

estimation of health/behavior outcomes and labor/delivery outcomes, but we supplement with

analyses of the employment level of nurses and choice of delivery attendant to shed some light

on the mechanisms. The data and estimation techniques for each set of outcomes are described

below.



Data and Methods

Health Outcomes Estimation: We use a multi-state, multi-time period difference-in-differences

methodology to evaluate the effects of the varying SOP laws on the outcomes of interest. This

approach is advantageous in that it allows for a comparison within a state before and after the

SOP law changes, while netting out similar trends in states that do not experience law changes.



                                                 12
Our research design avoids some of the flaws present in the previous cross-sectional studies; in

particular, we have valid pre-law and post-law time periods along with valid treatment and

control groups and are able to separate out the true effect of the policy changes from

confounding national and state-specific trends. Using data from birth certificates (described

below) our primary equation of interest evaluates the effects of the SOP laws on health outcomes

as follows:

(1a)   Hicjt = β1CNM-SOPj(t-g) + β2Xicjt + β3Zcjt + δj + γ(t-g) + εjt

In equation 1a, H represents the health outcomes for individual (i) in county (c) in state (j) at

time (t). CNM-SOP are indicator variables for the scope of practice laws pertaining to certified

nurse midwives in effect in the state at the time of conception (t-g) where g is gestation length as

documented in the vital records. We use the category of “No barriers” as the omitted reference

group in order to easily show how all other levels of restrictions compare to this category. The

vector X contains maternal characteristics available on the birth certificates including age,

marital status, maternal education, race/ethnicity and county population size; Z represents

county-level factors that may also influence the markets for or practice of nurses, including the

number of primary care physicians per capita (including obstetricians and family practitioners),

real income per capita, the unemployment rate, and the poverty rate; δj and γt represent state fixed

effects and conception year-by-quarter fixed effects, respectively. Geographic codes on the birth

certificates allow us to identify the county in which the mother resides, unless the county is very

small (<100,000 population). For the variables in the Z vector for which we do not know the

county, we use the average value for all counties in that state with population less than 100,000.

       The estimation of Equation 1a provides a direct comparison of health outcomes for all

births under the different SOP law regimes. Evaluating the effects among all babies born to all



                                                   13
attendants is important particularly if the laws alleviate shortages and allow for improved care by

physicians. Stange (2014) provides some support for this idea by showing an increase in primary

care utilization in areas where nurse practitioners can prescribe controlled substances.

       We estimate a second equation similar to 1a that limits births to those that are attended by

a CNM:

(1a)   Hicjt = β1CNM-SOPj(t-g) + β2Xicjt + β3Zcjt + δj + γ(t-g) + εjt   for CNMicjt =1.

Estimation of equation 1b provides a direct comparison of health outcomes among CNM

attended births under the different SOP law regimes. This equation provides the most direct

evidence on outcomes associated with the providers that are specifically targeted by the laws.

We caution that the results of estimating Equation 1b are only suggestive since there are many

known limitations to the attendant variable drawn from the birth certificates, including

underreporting of CNMs. Walker et al. (2004) estimates that underreporting is around 11

percent in a small sample of births in Michigan. The attendant recorded is defined as “the

individual physically present at the delivery who was responsible for the delivery.” (NCHS

2016); the NCHS guide gives the example that if a CNM delivers the baby under the supervision

of an obstetrician who is present in the room, the obstetrician should be reported as the attendant.

This leaves open the possibility that the attendant recorded is systematically related to the SOP

laws, especially in supervisory states. Another potential issue is that the attendant recorded also

does not necessarily indicate the prenatal care provider. Given these issues, the results from this

equation are not the primary focus of the paper.



Health Outcomes Data: Data on maternal and infant health outcomes for our analyses come

from the Center for Disease Control’s National Vital Statistics System Birth Certificates. We



                                                   14
examine outcomes pertaining to different aspects of pregnancy, labor, and delivery. The first

group of outcomes is maternal health behaviors which includes indicators for receiving first

trimester prenatal care, tobacco use during pregnancy, alcohol use during pregnancy, and an

indicator for adequate weight gain during pregnancy. The question regarding alcohol

consumption was eliminated from the birth certifications as of 2007 so results for this outcome

are limited to 1994-2006.

       The second group regards labor and delivery outcomes and includes indicator variables

for labor induction versus no induction and C-section versus vaginal birth. We also consider

effects of SOP laws on estimates of labor inductions or C-sections for which there are not

apparent medical indications. Termed “elective” procedures, we define these labor inductions

and C-section deliveries as those without the presence of certain clinical characteristics that

might necessitate medical intervention. In choosing these characteristics for this analysis, we are

limited by the data elements consistently available on the birth certificates. For labor induction,

these characteristics are 1) premature rupture of membranes and 2) chorioamnionitis

(inflammation of the fetal membranes due to bacterial infection) or evidence of chorioamnionitis

as indicated by the presence of intrapartum fever. For C-sections we use characteristics 1 and 2,

and add 3) presentation other than cephalic (any part of the fetus other than the head appearing

first) and 4) fetal distress or fetal intolerance of labor. As described in more detail below, we

also limit all samples to women with no history of certain pregnancy risk factors.

        Lastly we examine infant health outcomes including the following: Birth weight;

probability of birth weight less than 2500 grams; gestation weeks; probability of gestation less

than 39 weeks; and an indicator variable for birth injury. Birth injury as defined on the birth




                                                 15
certificate includes skeletal fractures, peripheral nerve injury, and damage to soft tissues or solid

organs. These injuries are potentially avoidable in the process of labor and delivery.

       We use linear probability models to analyze the dichotomous variables and use OLS to

analyze average birth weight and gestational age. Standard errors in all models are adjusted for

clustering at the state level. We tested models using probit for the dichotomous outcomes and

results and conclusions are unchanged. We also use alternative ways of analyzing birth weights

and gestation weeks using ordered probits and quantile regression. These models are discussed

further below.

Sampling and Statistical Issues:

       There are a number of sampling concerns that we address. First and foremost, there is

concern of sample selection issues where women who have prior knowledge about health

outcomes may be more likely to choose or avoid a CNM. To help alleviate this issue, we limit

the sample to singleton, first births. We further limit the sample to women with no history of any

of four pregnancy risk factors: diabetes (prepregnancy or gestational), eclampsia, chronic

hypertension, and pregnancy associated hypertension. These four conditions are chosen because

they are the only ones consistently available on the birth certificates during our sample period.

These limitations should help generate a more homogeneous sample of women. An additional

factor to note is that any prior health knowledge should be uncorrelated with the laws, leaving

the reduced form estimates unbiased.

       Next, we place some additional restrictions on the sample. We limit sample to women

who give birth and reside in the same state in order to ensure a proper match with the laws. For

models that use the full sample of births, we use a 25% random sample of birth certificates based

on states to manage computer file size. We also omit births attended by certified midwives



                                                 16
(midwives who are not APRNs). Over our sample period, only 0.34% of births are attended by

these midwives, while 7.26% are attended by CNMs. The overwhelming majority (92.4%) are

attended by physicians (MDs and DOs) with the remaining unknown (0.44%). We do, however,

use the universe of births attended by CNMs when estimating Equation 1a.

       In addition, the birth certificates underwent revisions in 2003, with the result that some of

the variables have changed over time either in form or availability. The revised certificates were

phased in over the years, but at different times by different states, and therefore, some variables

are missing for some states in a few years. The outcome variables we use that are affected by the

2003 revisions include the following: tobacco use, alcohol use, birth injury, and some of the

clinical characteristics used to generate elective inductions and C-sections (premature rupture of

membranes, chorioamnionitis, presence of fever, fetal distress, fetal intolerance of labor). The

results shown below use all available data, but the panel will be unbalanced for these outcomes.

However, this should not present a problem for the validity of our estimates since the states and

time periods with missing values are not systematically related to the outcomes or the laws and is

likely to be uncorrelated with the error term. We did test models where restrict the sample to

only the states that have non-missing values in all years and results are similar to those presented

below (available upon request).

       Policy endogeneity is another potential concern. This endogeneity can be either

statistical (correlation with the error term) or structural (when laws are altered as a result of the

outcomes under consideration). The county level variables and the state and year fixed effects

should help alleviate statistical endogeneity. Structural endogeneity is unlikely to be an issue. Is

hard to argue that the individual outcomes we examine would influence SOP policies, especially

since the laws pertaining to CNMs are also often passed in conjunction with laws pertaining to



                                                  17
all APRNs. Miller (2006) discusses this issue in her paper and finds that the timing of insurance

reimbursement mandates for CNMs supports the exogeneity of these laws.

        In all our models, the values on the SOP law coefficients are used to draw the study’s

main conclusions. These coefficients represent reduced form effects, where the laws influence

health outcomes through the variety of pathways previously mentioned. The empirical analyses

illuminate the magnitude and direction of any effects. Coefficients on health outcomes that are

small and statistically indistinguishable from zero reflect no difference in health outcomes based

on restrictiveness of the laws. Statistically significant positive or negative coefficients are

interpreted accordingly, with explanations for these effects being drawn from the study of

possible pathways as described next.



Pathways:

        Recall that the arguments for altered health outcomes stems in part from the expanded

use of CNMs as a result of the less restrictive laws which can work through altered labor supply,

altered demand for services and new facilities and perhaps via improved marginal productivity of

the CNM workforce. Unfortunately, the available data do not allow us to study all of the

possible pathways in depth, but we are able to examine effects on measures of the employment

levels of CNMs, on the demand for nurse services by observing the choice between physicians

and CNMs attendant, and on changes in the probability of births occurring at freestanding birth

centers.

        The estimating equation for the employment levels of nurses takes the following general

form:

(2)     Sjy = β1CNM-SOPjy-1 + β2Ljt + δj + δy + εjt,



                                                  18
where S is a measure of the number of CNMs per 100,000 women of child-bearing age in state

(j) in year (y), CNM-SOP represents the scope of practice laws for oversight and prescription

authority lagged one year so as to help avoid reverse causality from the workforce to the laws; L

is a vector of other factors relevant to the labor market for nurses and includes the state per capita

number of obstetricians and primary care physicians, state unemployment rates, and state real

income per capita; and δj and δy represent state and year fixed effects, respectively. The models

are estimated by weighted OLS with the state female child-bearing population (ages 14-44) as

the weight and standard errors clustered by state.

       Data on the number of nurses come from two different sources. The National Sample

Survey of Registered Nurses has estimates of the number of employed nurses for select years.

The employment questions pertain to the current survey year and employment status twelve

months prior which generates state estimates for 1995, 1996, 1999, 2000, 2003, 2004, 2007 and

2008. Given the limited number of years available from this source we also analyze data from

The Nurse Practitioner’s annual legislative update. This publication has counts of licensed

CNMs from 1999 to 2013, however these counts include employed, unemployed and nurses who

are out of the labor force.

       Turning to the question of who is chosen as the provider of care, the estimating equation

for the choice between a physician and CNM attendant takes the following general form:

(3)    Aicjt = β1CNM-SOPj(t-g) + β2Xicjt + β3Zcjt + δj + δ(t-g) + εjt

where A represents the probability that a birth was attended by a CNM versus a physician

(MD/DO) as reported on the birth certificates. All other variables are as defined in equation 1a

above. We analyze this probability first among our sample of singleton first births with no

reported maternal medical risks, and second, among a sample of second or more births, termed



                                                   19
parity >1. We generate this second sample using a 10% state-based random sample of all non-

first births and then further restrict this sample to singleton births born to women with no

reported maternal medical risks, no prior C-sections, and no prior pre-term births. This second

sample will allow us to analyze the provider decision among women who have knowledge of the

birthing process and to see if the SOP laws have effects on provider choice among these

‘experienced’ women. Equation 3 is estimated by a linear probability model and standard errors

are clustered by state. Probit models yield identical results.

       As we discuss above, we caution that the results of estimating Equation 3 are only

suggestive due to the issues with the attendant variable on the birth certificates. A further

limitation of this particular analysis is that the results do not help shed much light on the

mechanism behind the choice of CNMs vs. physicians. Results can reflect changes in the supply

of CNMs available for attending births and/or changing tastes for using a CNM, and we cannot

distinguish between the two. At best, the results of this exercise will simply tell whether or not

the laws have a statistical association with the attendant of record on the birth certificates.

       Another way to measure changes in demand for services and new facilities staffed by

CNMs is to examine changes over time in the number of births occurring in freestanding birth

centers (FBC). A birth center is a “home-like facility existing within a healthcare system with a

program of care designed in the wellness model of pregnancy and birth” (AABC 2016). Birth

centers employ physicians, CNMs, and certified midwives, but the facilities are designed around

the midwifery model of care. The number of FBCs has grown over time in recent years,

increasing from 195 centers nationwide in 2008 to 320 in 2016 (AABC personal

communication). The birth certificates contain information on the place where the birth

occurred, enabling us to analyze the probability of giving birth in a FBC versus a hospital. We



                                                  20
exclude home births and other locations since these may be planned or unplanned. We first

analyze this probability among our sample of singleton first births with no reported maternal

medical risks, and second, among the sample of singleton second or more births described above.

The estimating equation is similar to equation 3 above, however, we analyze the probability of a

FBC birth for births attended by all practitioners, including certified midwives, in order to

examine the demand for the facility type rather than the practitioner type. Because of the very

small proportion of births at FBCs, we use probit to estimate the models. Standard errors are

again adjusted for clustering at the state level.



Medically Underserved Areas

        Using the individual level birth outcomes data also enable us to evaluate the effects

among vulnerable populations, including mothers residing in medically underserved counties.

Indeed, the debate over fully enabled SOP is particularly salient for these women, as access to

care and the alleviation of shortages have been used as arguments in support of the less

restrictive laws. We use the geographic codes on the birth certificates to help identify medically

underserved areas. The Health Resources and Services Administration of the U.S. Department

of Health and Human Services describes a method for identifying medically underserved areas

(see details at http://www.hrsa.gov/shortage/mua/index.html). Using their methodology and

annual data from the Area Health Resource File, we generate the Index of Medical Underservice.

This index is based on weighted averages of four variables: the ratio of primary care physicians

to population, the poverty rate, the percent of people age 65+, and the infant mortality rate. The

index ranges from 0 to 100, with the degree of underservice falling as the index rises. HRSA

designates areas with an index value of 62 or less as a medically underserved area (MUA). The



                                                    21
value of the index fluctuates year to year, often hovering around the cut-off point. In order to

keep a consistent sample of counties, we use the cut-off point to identify mothers living in

counties that ever had a MUA designation over the years 1994-2013. When the mother lives in

an unidentified small county, the state average index value for all small counties in the state and

year is used to determine the MUA designation. In most cases these small population counties

are designated as MUA, but in two states, New Hampshire and Rhode Island, they are not.

       Limiting the sample to births by mothers living in counties that ever had a MUA

designation, we re-run equations 1a, 1b and 3 using the methods described above, although we

exclude the per capita number of physicians and the poverty rate from the Z vector since these

two variables are used in the MUA index. We also test some additional models where we re-

create the index using the ratio of obstetricians/gynecologists to the female population ages 15-

44 rather than the ratio of primary care physicians to total population. The results are similar and

are available upon request. We use the index based on primary care physicians rather than

obstetricians/gynecologists since primary care physicians may often serve as the provider in

cases of labor and delivery especially in medically underserved areas.



Summary Statistics

       Table 2 shows means of all variables for our main estimation sample (column 1) and by

attendant type (columns 2 and 3). The first set of rows in the table shows differences in the

characteristics of women who use physicians (MDs and DOs) versus CNMs. Women who use

CNMs are slightly younger (23.68 years versus 24.92 years), less likely to be married (49 percent

versus 56 percent), more likely to be Native American (2 percent versus 1 percent) and Hispanic

(24 percent versus 20 percent), and less educated. The county characteristics based on birth



                                                22
attendant are very similar, although women using CNMs are slightly less likely to live in

counties that ever received a medically underserved designation.

       Table 2 also shows means of the health outcomes by attendant at birth. While rates of

early prenatal care are more favorable under the physician attendant than CNM, other maternal

health behaviors are similar for each attendant type. Not surprisingly, physician attended births

are more likely than CNM births to be induced although induction is not uncommon for either

provider (22% and 18% of births, respectively). CNMs are not trained to perform C-sections,

nor are they legally allowed to perform this procedure. Therefore we should see a zero for C-

sections under the CNM birth attendant column. The proportion presented (0.01) is close to, but

not equal to zero, indicating some of the misreporting of attendant that occurs on the birth

certificates. Lastly, Table 2 shows that infant birth outcomes are more favorable under CNM

delivery. Even though these means include the restrictions limiting the sample to singleton first

births with no reported maternal medical risks, these differences in means are only suggestive as

these are unadjusted for maternal and area characteristics.

       Table 3 shows unadjusted means in the health outcomes based on the categories of SOP

laws. In general, birth outcomes are similar in all types of practice environments. There are

noticeable differences across the SOP law categories in the receipt of first trimester prenatal care

with the highest proportion occurring in high barrier states. By contrast, these high barrier states

also have the highest rates of smoking during pregnancy. Alcohol consumption is similar in all

states, as is the proportion of women with adequate weight gain. Rates of labor induction are the

lowest in the high barrier states at 18 percent, compared with the no barrier states at 22 percent.

Rates of C-sections among the no barrier and high barrier states are both lower than the other

states with rates of 24 percent. The average birth weight is highest in the no barrier and low



                                                 23
barrier states, while the other birth outcomes are very similar across all states. Lastly, the

percent of births is not distributed evenly, with the highest proportion occurring in moderate

barrier states. Not surprisingly, the most CNM births occur in no barrier states, but what is

surprising is that the proportion here (10 percent) is only slightly higher than that of the high

barrier states with 9 percent. The middle two categories both have 6 percent of births attended

by CNMs.



Results for Prenatal Health Behaviors, Delivery, and Birth Outcomes

        Tables 4a, 4b and 4c contain results from the maternal health behaviors, labor and

delivery outcomes, and infant health outcomes, respectively, among all providers. The results in

Table 4a show no difference in maternal health behaviors based on the category of law. By

contrast, the results in Table 4b show that women giving birth in high barrier states are 3.0

percentage points more likely to be induced, and 1.6 percentage points more likely to have a C-

section compared to women in states with no barriers. Women in the moderate barrier states are

also more likely to be induced or have a C-section compared to women in states with no barriers,

although the coefficient on induction is statistically significant at just above the 10 percent level.

The effects for the low level of barriers are not statistically different from the barrier-free states.

The results for the apparent elective inductions and C-sections tell a similar story, with low-risk

women in moderate and high barrier states more likely to have C-sections relative to the no

barrier states.

        To put the magnitude of the C-section effects into context, moving from high barrier to

no barrier represents a reduction in the C-section rate from 25.3% to 23.7% (a 6.3% reduction).

Considering there are currently around 1.3 million first births per year, this 6.3% reduction



                                                   24
equals approximately 20,800 C-sections avoided annually. Using data from the MEPS we

calculate a $4,099 difference in the amounts paid for C-section versus vaginal delivery. This

implies a savings of over $85 million a year. According to a report by Truven Health Analytics,

the estimated difference between C-section and vaginal delivery is $9,372 for mothers and

infants with employer provided commercial insurance, indicating that these payers could save

even more per delivery under less restrictive SOP laws for CNMs (Truven Health Analytics

2013).

         In considering the infant health outcomes, Table 4c reveals little in the way of systemic

differences based on the SOP law classification. Average birth weights are slightly lower in the

states with barriers compared to the states with no barriers, but by very small amounts (6.3 grams

for low barriers, 11.3 grams for moderate barriers and 9.1 grams for high barriers). At an

average birth weight of 3,286 grams, these effects seem too small to be meaningful and indeed

only the moderate SOP coefficient is statistically significant. Columns 2 show results for the

probability of birth weight <2500 grams, but there are no discernable effects of the laws on this

outcome. Column 3 shows that the average gestation length is slightly reduced by about 0.06

weeks (less than half of a day) in moderate and high barrier states, but again, this effect is very

small considering an average gestation of 39 weeks. Column 4 also shows that the probability of

an early birth (< 39 weeks’ gestation) is higher in the high barrier states by 1.2 percentage points.

Column 5 considers the probability of observing an injury at birth but here the laws have no

statistically significant effects. Overall, the results in Table 4c indicates that the laws are neither

helpful nor harmful when it comes to infant health.

         Looking at changes in average birth weight and weeks of gestation may mask some of the

effects that might occur at other parts of the distribution. To check for this, we first run an



                                                  25
ordered probit on categories of gestation weeks. We group the weeks into classifications

designated by the American College of Obstetrics and Gynecology (2013): < 34 complete weeks

(early preterm), 34 through 36 completed weeks (late preterm) , 37 through 38 completed weeks

(early term), 39 through 40 completed weeks (term) and 41 or more weeks (late term and post

term). Ordered probit results indicate that the laws reflecting moderate and high barriers reduced

the probability of having a term birth (39-40 weeks and 41+ weeks) and increase the probability

of births in the all categories that are less than 39 weeks. Again, the size of the effects are very

small relative to the means. For example, the statistically significant probability changes

associated with the high barrier states are as follows: -0.010 (41+ weeks), -0.002 (39-40 weeks),

0.006 (37-38 weeks), 0.004 (34-36 weeks), 0.002 (<34 weeks). These effects should be

interpreted relative to the baseline probability of each category: 0.206 (41+ weeks), 0.484 (39-

40 weeks), 0.216 (37-38 weeks), 0.067 (34-36 weeks), 0.027 (<34 weeks).

       Although small in magnitude, the result that SOP laws can influence gestation weeks may

be surprising given that altering gestational age is generally very difficult to do, and especially

given that we see no changes in maternal health behaviors, including smoking. However, since

the laws’ effects occur around the 39 week mark, we believe that these gestation results are most

likely reflecting the results shown above for labor inductions and C-sections. Where the barrier-

free SOP lower rates of these procedures, we may plausibly see longer gestation periods on

average as more women avoid the elective procedures.

       Ordered probits for categories of birth weight show no statistically effects of the laws on

the probability of being in one of three birth weight categories: normal weight, low birth weight

(<2500 grams -1500 grams), or very low birth weight (<1500 grams.) However, these cut-off

points may be too broad to detect meaningful results, so we turn to a unconditional quantile



                                                 26
regression to check for effects across the distribution of birth weights (Firpo et al. 2009; Borah

and Basu 2013; Borgen 2016). Figure 3 shows the effects of the SOP laws on the 5th through 95th

quantiles of birth weights. Coefficients for all three laws are plotted, and statistical significance

of each point estimate is indicated by the shading of the marker. For the bulk of the quantiles

(the 15th through 65th quantiles), the effects of the laws are statistically indistinguishable from

zero. The effects of the laws on average birth weights seen in Table 4c seem to be driven by

effects at the top of the distribution. The birth weights associated with the higher quantiles range

from 3555 grams to 4111 grams (7.8 lbs to 9.1 lbs) and the reductions associated with the laws

range from 8 to 21 grams (0.02 lbs to 0.05 lbs). In other words, the SOP restrictions are only

influencing the birth weights of infants with higher birth weights and by only a small amount.

For many infants, variations in weight of these magnitudes are not a health concern, however,

fetal macrosomia is a concern and if SOP barriers reduce birth weights among the heaviest of

babies this may be seen as health improving.



CNM Attended Births

       Table 5 limits the sample to deliveries attended by CNMs only, and reflects the women

whose prenatal care and delivery were most likely managed by a CNM. Hence, it provides the

most direct information on the effects of SOP laws for CNMs with the caveats mentioned above

about the issues surrounding the reported attendant on the birth certificates. Here, we find a

higher probability of drinking during pregnancy in low barrier SOP states, although we also see

an unexpected result where smoking rates are lower in the high barrier SOP states (at the 10

percent significance level). In addition, we see more adverse birth outcomes in the groups of

states with barriers including higher rates of labor induction (in moderate and high barrier states),



                                                  27
lower average birth weight (in low and moderate barrier states states), and slightly lower

gestation weeks in all states with barriers. However, the magnitude of the reductions are again

very small for gestation weeks and birth weight.

       Analyses using ordered probit to analyze the five categories of gestational age at birth

and the three categories of birth weight for births attended by CNM generate results similar to

that for the larger sample of physician/CNM attendants. The laws have statistically significant,

but very small effects on gestational age at birth, with the barriers associated with a reduction in

the probabilities of 39-40 weeks and 41 or more weeks. The laws have no statistically

significant effects of the probabilities of low or very low birth weight. The unconditional

quantile regression results show no statistical difference between high barrier SOP states and no

barrier states in terms of birth weights, however, there are negative effects of moderate and low

levels of barriers on birth weights beginning at the 45th and 50th percentiles, respectively. The

magnitudes range from 6 grams to 20 grams.



Medically Underserved Areas

       Tables 6a, 6b, 6c, and 7 are similar to Tables 4a, 4b, 4c, and 5 but the samples are limited

to women residing in counties that are identified as medically underserved any time during the

sample period. Tables 6a-6c shows results for physician and CNM attendants combined and

Table 7 limits the sample to only CNM attended births. Overall, the results are consistent with

that of the previous tables. There are no large statistical differences in maternal health behaviors

based on the laws. However, here we also see no observed differences in the probability of a C-

section. Rates of labor induction are higher in medically underserved counties located in

moderate and high barrier states (4.9 and 2.5 percentage points for all attendants in Table 6b; 5.9



                                                 28
and 4.0 percentage points for CNM attendants in Table 7) compared to no barrier states. We also

observe lower gestational age in low barrier states (Table 6c and Table 7) and in moderate barrier

states (Table 7) compared to no barrier states. Ordered probits confirm these results with the

negative effects of the barriers occurring at 39-40 weeks and 41+ weeks. Average birth weight is

also slightly lower in low barrier states attended by CNMs in medically underserved counties,

but there are no effects on the probabilities of low and very low birth weights.



Results for Mechanisms

       Results for employment levels are shown in Table 8. Here, we show results from 1)

annual estimates of number of licensed CNMs by state for 1999-2013 per 100,000 women ages

14 to 44; and 2) annual estimates of number of employed CNMs by state per 100,000 women

ages 14 to 44 for 1995, 1996, 1999, 2000, 2003, 2004, 2007, and 2008. Models include

alternatively one year lags and three year lags in the laws in order to allow the laws time to affect

labor markets. We use a three year lag because three years is the average time it takes to

complete an advanced nursing degree. However, weighted OLS regressions of these

employment measures yield small and statistically insignificant coefficients on all the law

categories.

       Table 9 examines the effects of the laws on the probability of having a birth attended by a

CNM versus a physician. Results are shown for all counties (columns 1 and 3) and medically

underserved counties (columns 2 and 4), among first births (columns 1 and 2) and parity >1 (i.e.

second or more births, shown in columns 3 and 4). Among all counties, the probability of

delivery by a CNM is lower in moderate and high barrier states by a range of 1.4 to 2 percentage

points. This is a fairly large effect given that only 7.5 percent of our sample of births are



                                                 29
reported as attended by CNMs. The results for medically underserved areas show no difference

in the probability of a CNM attendant based on the degrees of barriers to practice although the

signs of the coefficients are negative for all types of barriers. These results provides some

evidence that eliminating barriers to practice acts on the demand for CNMs by women, rather

than through some of the possible labor market channels. We again caution that attendant type is

recorded with a lot of known issues, so these results should be taken as suggestive only.

       Lastly, Table 10 shows probit results for the choice of delivering in a freestanding birth

center versus a hospital for all counties (column 1 and 3) and medically underserved counties

(column 2 and 4), for first births (columns 1 and 2) and second or more births (columns 3 and 4).

The SOP coefficients are negative in most models shown, and are statistically significant for

moderate barriers in all models and high barriers in columns 2, 3, and 4. The probability of

delivering in a FBC is very rare with 0.26 percent of the sample of first births born in FBCs

among all counties, and 0.27 percent born in medically underserved counties. The proportion is

higher for second or more births with the respective proportions at 0.45 percent and 0.57.

Relative to these mean values, the marginal effects are also very small, translating to reductions

of less than one percent in all counties, and less than 2 percent in medically underserved

counties. Nevertheless, differences in the cost of vaginal births at these lower-cost facilities

versus hospitals would add to the calculation of cost savings at time of delivery.



Conclusions

       Overall, the results of our empirical analyses show very few effects of the SOP laws on

maternal health behaviors and infant health outcomes based on the degree of barriers to practice

imposed by states’ SOP laws. We do show, however, that states that allow CNMs to practice



                                                 30
with no barriers have lower observed probabilities of labor inductions, C-sections, apparent

elective inductions, and apparent elective C-sections relative to states with high barriers. We

also show some reductions in the probability of induction in the barrier-free states in medically

underserved counties. We see very small changes in birth weights and gestational age at birth,

but no corresponding change in maternal health behaviors.

       Taken together, these results are somewhat puzzling. It is unclear why we see

comparatively large changes in C-sections and inductions, but very small or no changes in all

other outcomes studied. Our analyses of the mechanisms can provide some insight. We show no

effects of the laws on employment levels, however, we do find that the barrier-free status is

associated with a small but statistically significant increase use of CNMs as birth attendants,

along with a small increase in the use of freestanding birth centers. If we take the results for the

mechanisms at face value, this suggests that the CNM labor market is unaffected by the laws,

whereas consumer demand for CNM services is influenced. However, we caution that we do not

have the available data to learn whether the laws have influenced rate of entry into the profession

and we see this as an important direction for future research. Also, the results for employment

levels reflect an annual mix of entry, exit, and migration, and while our results point to the

conclusion that the effects of the laws on these net changes is zero, we cannot separate out the

different movements here.

       Our results lead to a competition story. The popularity of CNM services is growing, with

the proportion of CNM attended singleton births (of any parity) increasing from 5.3 percent in

1994 to 8.4 percent in 2013. Whereas the growth of CNM use is likely not large enough to bring

about noticeable changes in the averages of many of the outcomes we study, our results are

consistent with a story where the obstetric practices are changing in response to the threat of



                                                 31
competition from CNM services that are formally untethered to the physician practice. (It should

be noted that it is standard practice for CNMs under any SOP environment to work

collaboratively with physicians.) This may explain why the primary results seen are a reductions

in labor induction, C-sections and apparently elective labor induction and C-sections. All of

these procedures are most directly and immediately affected by the different practitioner

approaches to labor and delivery.

       Even though we are not fully informed about the exact mechanisms through which the

SOP laws are working, our results do directly address the debate surrounding the states’ policies

regarding SOP for CNMs. Returning to the key arguments we discussed earlier—that critics say

the quality of care may suffer while the proponents argue that the efficiency of the system can be

improved—means the controversy lies in the determination of the costs and benefits. Our results

point to the conclusion that removing barriers on the CNM practice will not harm mothers and

infants, and that the restrictive laws primarily serve as artificial barriers to care. We have shown

no evidence of deleterious health effects, and in fact show very small improvements in

gestational age at birth, likely driven by the reductions in C-sections and inductions prior to 39

weeks’ gestation. If the mechanism behind our results is the threat of competition, then there is

an efficiency argument to be made for removing SOP-based barriers to practice for certified

nurse midwives.




                                                 32
                                           References

American Academy of Family Physicians (AAFP). Primary care for the 21st century: ensuring
a quality physician-led team for every patient. American Academy of Family Physicians.
September 18, 2012.

American Association of Birth Centers (AABC). “What is a Birth Center?” Available at
http://www.birthcenters.org/?page=bce_what_is_a_bc. Accessed September 2016.

American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (ACOG). Definition of term pregnancy.
Committee Opinion No. 579. Obstet Gynecol 2013;122:1139–40.

Anderson, D. Mark, Ryan Brown, Kerwin Kofi Charles, Daniel I. Rees, “The Effect of
Occupational Licensing on Consumer Welfare: Early Midwifery Laws and Maternal Mortality”
NBER Working Paper No. 22456, July 2016.

Borah BJ and Basu A. “Highlighting differences between conditional and unconditional quantile
regression approaches through an application to assess medication adherence. Health
Economics. 2013 Sep;22(9):1052-70.

Borgen, Nicolai T. "Fixed effects in unconditional quantile regression." Stata Journal 16.2
(2016): 403-415.

Bureau of Labor Statistics. Occupational Outlook Handbook: Healthcare Occupations.
Available at: http://www.bls.gov/ooh/healthcare/home.htm. Publish Date: Thursday, December
17, 2015.

Bureau of Labor Statistics. Data on certifications and licenses. Available at:
http://www.bls.gov/cps/certifications-and-licenses-table-5.htm. Accessed Sept. 1 2016.

Bryson, Alex, and Morris M. Kleiner. "The regulation of occupations." British Journal of
Industrial Relations 48.4 (2010): 670-675.

Chambliss, L. R., Daly, C., Medearis, A. L., Ames, M., Kayne, M., & Paul, R. (1992). The role
of selection bias in comparing cesarean birth rates between physician and midwifery
management. Obstetrics and Gynecology, 80, 161–165.

Cragin, L., & Kennedy, H. P. (2006). Linking obstetric and midwifery practice with optimal
outcomes. Journal of Obstetric, Gynecologic, and Neonatal Nursing, 35, 779–785.

Davis, L. G., Riedmann, G. L., Sapiro, M., Minogue, J. P., & Kazer, R. R. (1994).Cesarean
section rates in low-risk private patients managed by certified nurse-midwives and obstetricians.
Journal of Nurse-Midwifery, 39, 91–97.

DeLano, C. F., Hirsh, L. D., & Schauberger, C. W. (1997). Nurse-midwifery at Gundersen
Clinic: A twenty year review. Wisconsin Medical Journal, 96, 37–40.

                                               33
Declercq, Eugene R., et al. "State regulation, payment policies, and nurse-midwife
services." Health Affairs 17.2 (1998): 190-200.

Heins, H. C., Jr., Nance, N. W., McCarthy, B. J., & Efird, C. M. (1990). A randomized trial of
nurse-midwifery prenatal care to reduce low birth weight. Obstetrics and Gynecology, 75, 341–
345.

Heisler, Elayne J. “Physician Supply and the Affordable Care Act,” Congressional Research
Service Report for Congress, January 15, 2013, http://op.bna.com/hl.nsf/id/myon-
93zpre/$File/crsdoctor.pdf (accessed January 23, 2014).

Firpo, Sergio, Nicole M. Fortin, and Thomas Lemieux. "Unconditional quantile regressions."
Econometrica 77.3 (2009): 953-973.

Gittleman, Maury, Mark A. Klee, and Morris M. Kleiner. “Analyzing the labor market outcomes
of occupational licensing.” No. w20961. National Bureau of Economic Research, 2015.

Jackson, D. J., Lang, J. M., Ecker, J., Swartz, W. H., & Heeren, T. (2003a). “Impact of
collaborative management and early admission in labor on method of delivery.” Journal of
Obstetric, Gynecologic, and Neonatal Nursing, 32, 147–157.

Jackson, D. J., Lang, J. M., Swartz, W. H., Ganiats, T. G., Fullerton, J., Ecker, J., et al. (2003b).
Outcomes, safety, and resource utilization in a collaborative care birth center program compared
with traditional physician-based perinatal care. American Journal of Public Health, 93, 999–
1006.

Johantgen M, Fountain L, Zangaro G, Newhouse R, Stanik-Hutt J, White K. “Comparison of
labor and delivery care provided by certified nurse-midwives and physicians: a systematic
review.” Women’s Health Issues. 2012; 22(1):e73-e81.

Kleiner, Morris M., Allison Marier, Kyoung Won Park, and Coady Wing. “Relaxing
Occupational Licensing Requirements: Analyzing Wages and Prices for a Medical Service”
Journal of Law and Economics, Vol. 59, No. 2, May 2016

Kleiner, Morris M and Alan B. Krueger. “The Prevalence and Effects of Occupational
Licensing,” British Journal of Industrial Relations, Vol.48, No. 4 December 2010, pp. 676–
687.

Kleiner, Morris M and Alan B. Krueger. “Analyzing the Extent and Influence of Occupational
Licensing on the Labor Market” with A. B. Krueger, Journal of Labor Economics, vol. 31, no.
S1, April 2013 pp. S-173-202.

Kleiner, MM, Marier, A., Parke, WY, Wing, C. "Relaxing Occupational Licensing
Requirements: Analyzing Wages and Prices for a Medical Service". NBER working paper
19906, February 2014.



                                                 34
Kleiner, Morris M., and Kyoung Won Park. “Battles among licensed occupations: Analyzing
government regulations on labor market outcomes for dentists and hygienists.” Working paper
No. w16560. National Bureau of Economic Research, 2010.

Lenaway, D., Koepsell, T. D., Vaughan, T., van Belle, G., Shy, K., & Cruz-Uribe, F. (1998).
“Evaluation of a public-private certified nurse-midwife maternity program for indigent women.”
American Journal of Public Health, 88, 675–679.

MacDorman, M. F., & Singh, G. K. (1998). “Midwifery care, social and medical risk factors, and
birth outcomes in the USA.” Journal of Epidemiology and Community Health, 52, 310–317.

Miller, Amalia R. "The impact of midwifery-promoting public policies on medical interventions
and health outcomes." Advances in Economic Analysis & Policy 6.1 (2006).

National Center for Health Statistics. Guide to Completing the Facility Worksheets for the
Certificate of Live Birth and Report of Fetal Death (2003 revision). Updated May 2016.
Available at http://www.cdc.gov/nchs/data/dvs/guidetocompletefacilitywks.pdf

Naylor MD, Kurtzman ET. The role of nurse practitioners in reinventing primary care. Health
Affairs. 2010; 29(5):893-899.

Newhouse RP et al. Advanced practice nurse outcomes 1990-2008: a systematic review. Nursing
Economics. 2011; 29(5):1-22.

Petterson SM, Liaw WR, Phillips Jr RL, Rabin DL, Meyers DS, Bazemore AW. “Projective US
primary care physician workforce needs: 2010-2025.” Ann Fam Med. 2012; 10(6):503-509.

Robinson, J. N., Norwitz, E. R., Cohen, A. P., & Lieberman, E. (2000). “Predictors of
episiotomy use at first spontaneous vaginal delivery.” Obstetrics and Gynecology, 96, 214–218.

Rosenblatt, R. A., Dobie, S. A., Hart, L. G., Schneeweiss, R., Gould, D., Raine, T. R., et al.
(1997). “Interspecialty differences in the obstetric care of low-risk women.” American Journal of
Public Health, 87, 344–351.

Schiff, M. “The role of nurse practitioners in meeting increasing demand for primary care.”
National Governors Association. Washington, DC. December 2012.

Spetz, J. Parente, ST, Town, RJ and Bazarko D. "Scope-Of-Practice Laws For Nurse
Practitioners Limit Cost Savings That Can Be Achieved In Retail Clinics." Health Affairs, 2013,
32:11, 1977-1984.

Stange K. “How does provider supply and regulation influence health care markets? Evidence
from nurse practitioners and physician assistants.” Journal of Health Economics. 2014; 33:1–
27.




                                               35
Sze, E. H., Ciarleglio, M., & Hobbs, G. (2008). “Risk factors associated with anal sphincter tear
difference among midwife, private obstetrician, and resident deliveries.” International
Urogynecology Journal and Pelvic Floor Dysfunction, 19, 1141–1144.

Truven Health Analytics. The Cost of Having a Baby in the United States”, Prepared by Truven
Health Analytics for Childbirth Connection, Catalyst for Payment Reform, Center for Healthcare
Quality and Payment Reform, January, 2013.

Timmons, Edward. "Healthcare License Turf Wars: The Effects of Expanded Nurse Practitioner
and Physician Assistant Scope of Practice on Medicaid Patient Access," Mercatus Working
Paper Series, January 26, 2016.

Walker DS, Schmunk SB Summers L. “Do birth certificate data accurately reflect the number of
CNM-attended births? An exploratory study.” J Midwifery Women’s Health. 2004; 49:443–448.

Wing, Coady, and Allison Marier. "Effects of occupational regulations on the cost of dental
services: evidence from dental insurance claims." Journal of health economics 34 (2014): 131-
143.

Yang, Y. Tony, Laura B. Attanasio, and Katy B. Kozhimannil. "State scope of practice laws,
nurse-midwifery workforce, and childbirth procedures and outcomes." Women's Health
Issues 26.3 (2016): 262-267.




                                               36
Figure 1: CNM SOP 1994




Figure 2: CNM SOP 2013




            37
                                                         Figure 3: Effects of SOP Laws on Birth Weight
                                            Using Unconditional Quantile Regression at the 5th through 95th Quantiles
                                  25


                                  20


                                  15
Change in Birth Weight in grams




                                  10


                                   5


                                   0


                                   -5


                                  -10


                                  -15


                                  -20


                                  -25
                                        0         10       20         30           40          50       60      70            80         90        100
                                                                                    Birth weight quantile
                                                                Low SOP barriers        Moderate SOP barriers        High SOP barriers

                                  Notes: N=6,903,133. Solid marker indicates point estimate is statistcially significant at the 5% level. Open
                                  marker indicates estimate is not statistically different from zero. Estimates generated using xtrifreg command
                                  in Stata, with state clustered standard errors .




                                                                                          38
                                                Table 1

            Study                     State and data collection         Scope of Practice Law
                                               period                        classification*
Chambliss et. al (1992)           Arizona (prior to 1992)            Collaborative
Cragin & Kennedy (2006)           California (years unknown)         Restrictive
Davis et al. (1994)               Illinois (1987-1990)               Restrictive
Delano et al. (1997)              Wisconsin (1975-1995)              Restrictive
Heins et al. (1990)               South Carolina                     Restrictive
Jackson et al. (2003a and         California (1994-1996)             Restrictive
2003b)
Lenaway et al. (1998)             Colorado (1989-1990)               Collaborative
MacDorman & Singh (1998)          United States (1991)               All types combined
Robinson et al. (2000)            Massachusetts (1994-1995)          Restrictive
Rosenblatt et al. (1997)          Washington (1988-1989)             Independent
Sze et al. (2008)                 West Virginia (2000-2004)          Collaborative
*SOP classification refers to practice authority. The restrictive classification means CNMs must be
supervised or directed by a physician. Collaborative SOP requires an agreement with a physician in
order to provide patient care. Independent states have no requirements for physician oversight.




                                                  39
                     Table 2: Means by Birth Attendant, First Births, 1994-2013
                                                  Birth Attended Birth Attended                      Birth Attended
                                                  by Physician or    by Physician                       by CNM
                                                       CNM
Individual Characteristics
    Maternal age                                       24.83             24.92                            23.68
    Married                                             0.56              0.56                            0.49
    Female baby                                         0.49              0.49                            0.50
    White                                               0.78              0.78                            0.78
    Black                                               0.15              0.15                            0.15
    Native American                                     0.01              0.01                            0.02
    Asian                                               0.06              0.06                            0.05
    Hispanic                                            0.20              0.20                            0.24
    Hispanic unknown                                    0.01              0.01                            0.01
    Less than high school                               0.19              0.19                            0.24
    High school                                         0.27              0.27                            0.28
    Some college                                        0.22              0.22                            0.20
    College                                             0.26              0.27                            0.21
    Education unknown                                   0.06              0.06                            0.06
County Characteristics
    County pop >1,000,000                               0.27              0.28                             0.24
    County pop 500,000 – 1,000,000                      0.20              0.20                             0.20
    County pop 250,000 – 500,000                        0.15              0.15                             0.16
    County pop 100,000 – 250,000                        0.16              0.16                             0.19
    County pop <100,000                                 0.22              0.22                             0.21
    Unemployment                                        6.19              6.17                             6.37
    Real income per capita (in $1000s)                 15.87             15.84                            16.23
    Percent poverty                                    13.87             13.86                            13.95
    Primary care physicians per cap.                    1.96              1.96                             1.94
    Ever medically underserved county                   0.18              0.18                             0.16
Maternal Health Behaviors
    1st trimester prenatal care                         0.81              0.81                             0.77
    Smoked during pregnancy                             0.10              0.10                             0.10
    Drank alcohol during pregnancy (1994-2006)          0.01              0.01                             0.01
    Adequate weight gain                                0.37              0.37                             0.37
Labor and Delivery Outcomes
    Induced                                             0.22              0.22                             0.18
    Apparent elective induction                         0.20              0.21                             0.16
    C-section                                           0.25              0.27                             0.01
    Apparent elective C-section                         0.16              0.17                              --
Birth Outcomes
    Birth weight in grams                              3286              3283                             3317
    Birth weight<2500 grams                             0.06              0.07                            0.04
    Gestational weeks                                  39.01             38.99                            39.32
    Gestation<39 weeks                                  0.31              0.31                            0.27
    Birth injury                                       0.002             0.002                            0.002
      Notes: N=6,907,461 for both attendants and N=6,383,331 for physician attendant; 25% state-based random
      sample of all singleton first births born to women with no pregnancy risk factors. N= 2,097,298 for CNM
      attendant; universe of all singleton first births born to women with no pregnancy risk factors.
                                                         40
 Table 3: Means of Maternal and Infant Outcomes, by Scope of Practice Legislative
                                Environment, 1994-2013
                                                 No     Low     Moderate   High
                                              Barriers Barriers Barriers Barriers
Maternal Health Behaviors
    1st trimester prenatal care                 0.79     0.81     0.80      0.84
    Smoked during pregnancy                     0.09     0.10     0.10      0.11
    Drank alcohol during pregnancy              0.01     0.01     0.01      0.01
    Adequate weight gain                        0.38     0.37     0.36      0.38
Labor and Delivery Outcomes
    Induced                                     0.22     0.25     0.23      0.18
    Apparent elective induction                 0.20     0.24     0.22      0.16
    C-section                                   0.24     0.26     0.27      0.24
    Apparent elective C-section                 0.15     0.15     0.17      0.16
Birth Outcomes
    Birth weight                               3305     3290     3271      3297
    Birth weight<2500 grams                     0.06     0.06     0.07      0.06
    Gestation weeks                            39.12    39.02    38.94     39.07
    Gestation<39 weeks                          0.29     0.31     0.32      0.31
    Birth injury                               0.003    0.003    0.002     0.002
Percent of first births                                     0.18        0.11         0.46          0.25
Percent of first births attended by CNM                     0.10        0.06         0.06          0.09
Notes: The sample used is a 25% state-based random sample of all singleton first births born to women with no
pregnancy risk factors.




                                                    41
               Table 4a: Effects of SOP Laws on Maternal Health Behaviors,
                 Delivery Attended by Physician or Certified Nurse Midwife
                                 (1)             (2)             (3)           (4)
                           Early Prenatal    Smoked        Drank during    Adequate
                                Care          during        pregnancy     Weight Gain
                                           pregnancy
Low SOP barriers               0.006          -0.006           0.001         0.004
                               (0.40)         (-0.81)          (0.94)        (0.44)
Moderate SOP barriers          0.004          -0.001           0.001         0.009
                               (0.24)         (-0.24)          (0.97)        (1.20)
High SOP barriers              -0.022         -0.006           0.001         0.008
                              (-1.16)         (-1.02)          (0.80)        (0.95)
Maternal age                   0.006           0.002           0.001         0.001
                              (31.81)          (5.39)         (11.19)        (7.32)
Married                        0.080          -0.096           -0.009        0.022
                              (26.95)         (-9.93)        (-12.79)       (12.46)
Female baby                    0.003          -0.001         -0.0001         0.007
                               (8.56)         (-2.81)         (-0.65)       (15.35)
Black                          -0.055         -0.133           -0.005        -0.016
                             (-19.77)        (-12.84)        (-10.17)      (-10.18)
Native Am.                     -0.062         -0.027           0.011         -0.017
                              (-8.63)         (-1.32)          (4.14)       (-3.94)
Asian                          -0.074         -0.062           -0.007        0.035
                             (-17.78)        (-10.07)         (-7.56)       (12.64)
Hispanic                       -0.049         -0.142           -0.006        0.016
                              (-4.91)        (-16.28)         (-9.73)        (6.63)
Less than high school          -0.080          0.044           0.002         -0.008
                             (-21.12)          (7.10)          (9.00)       (-3.59)
Some college                   0.027          -0.058           -0.000        0.009
                              (13.92)        (-10.32)         (-2.02)        (4.40)
College                        0.050          -0.118           -0.003        0.060
                              (13.18)        (-13.08)         (-7.61)       (26.07)
Unemployment                   -0.002        -0.0004         -0.0001         0.001
                              (-1.83)         (-0.55)         (-1.24)        (0.59)
Real income per capita         -0.001         -0.001         -0.0001         0.001
                              (-3.41)         (-3.61)         (-2.18)        (3.81)
Percent poverty                -0.001         -0.001         -0.0001        -0.0003
                              (-1.93)         (-2.00)         (-2.57)       (-1.04)
Primary care physicians        0.008           0.001           0.001         0.001
per cap.                       (3.05)          (0.84)          (4.82)        (0.94)
Observations                 6430475        5618840          3562645       5949706
R2                             0.097           0.120           0.006         0.012
Notes: t-statistics in parentheses. SOP law categories are interpreted relative to states with no barriers. Models
include indicator variables for unknown education and unknown Hispanic ethnicity, county population categories,
state fixed effects, and year-by-quarter fixed effects. The sample used is a 25% state-based random sample of all
singleton first births born to women with no pregnancy risk factors.




                                                       42
                      Table 4b: Effects of SOP Laws on Labor and Delivery,
                    Delivery Attended by Physician or Certified Nurse Midwife
                                          (1)         (2)          (3)        (4)
                                       Induced    Apparent      C-section  Apparent
                                                   Elective                Elective
                                                  Induction                C-section

           Low SOP barriers                    0.009            0.019           0.003            0.0004
                                               (0.33)           (0.79)          (0.74)           (0.11)
           Moderate SOP barriers               0.029            0.033           0.011             0.015
                                               (1.68)           (1.97)          (2.25)           (4.32)
           High SOP barriers                   0.030            0.034           0.016             0.021
                                               (2.21)           (2.77)          (2.84)           (3.67)
           Observations                       6901578          6270033         6887640          5892746
           R2                                  0.029            0.030           0.040             0.029
          Notes: T-statistics in parentheses. SOP law categories are interpreted relative to states with no
          barriers. Models include all variables shown in Table 4a plus indicator variables for unknown
          education and unknown Hispanic ethnicity, county population categories, state fixed effects, and
          year-by-quarter fixed effects. The sample used is a 25% state-based random sample of all
          singleton first births born to women with no pregnancy risk factors.




                     Table 4c: Effects of SOP Laws on Infant Outcomes,
                 Delivery Attended by Physician or Certified Nurse Midwife
                              (1)             (2)        (3)           (4)                                    (5)
                             Birth           Birth    Gestation    Gestation                              Birth Injury
                            Weight         Weight      Weeks       <39 weeks
                                            <2500
                                            grams
Low SOP barriers            -6.344         0.0003      -0.017        0.002                                 0.000002
                            (-1.53)         (0.30)     (-0.72)       (0.60)                                 (0.002)
Moderate SOP barriers      -11.254        -0.00002     -0.055        0.008                                  0.0001
                            (-2.13)        (-0.02)     (-2.31)       (1.59)                                  (0.13)
High SOP barriers           -9.124         -0.0001     -0.060        0.012                                  -0.0003
                            (-1.57)        (-0.05)     (-2.15)       (2.19)                                 (-0.24)
Observations               6903133        6903133     6907461       6907461                                5909771
R2                           0.048          0.012       0.019        0.012                                   0.003
 Notes: T-statistics in parentheses. SOP law categories are interpreted relative to states with no barriers. Models
 include all variables shown in Table 4a plus indicator variables for unknown education and unknown Hispanic
 ethnicity, county population categories, state fixed effects, and year-by-quarter fixed effects. The sample used is a
 25% state-based random sample of all singleton first births born to women with no pregnancy risk factors.




                                                          43
              Table 5: Effects of SOP Laws on Maternal and Infant Outcomes,
                       Delivery Attended by Certified Nurse Midwife
                             Early       Smoked        Drank      Adequate                                   Induced
                           Prenatal       during       during       Weight
                              Care      pregnancy    pregnancy       Gain
Low SOP barriers             0.013        -0.008        0.002       -0.006                                    0.006
                             (0.70)       (-1.40)      (2.13)       (-0.39)                                   (0.21)
Moderate SOP barriers        0.001        -0.002        0.001       -0.011                                    0.028
                             (0.03)       (-0.43)      (0.45)       (-0.89)                                   (2.04)
High SOP barriers           -0.017        -0.012       0.0004       -0.003                                    0.021
                            (-0.84)       (-1.93)      (0.23)       (-0.29)                                   (1.77)
Observations               1955485       1669847      1017598      1794661                                   2095554
R2                           0.083         0.121        0.008        0.010                                    0.025

                                    Birth           Low/Very           Gestation         Gestation         Birth Injury
                                    Weight          Low Birth           Weeks            <39 weeks
                                                      Weight
Low SOP barriers                    -8.371           0.00003             -0.072            0.008             -0.0002
                                    (-2.56)           (0.01)             (-3.07)           (2.51)             (-0.13)
Moderate SOP barriers              -11.879            0.002              -0.067            0.005             0.00003
                                    (-3.98)           (1.26)             (-2.84)           (1.29)              (0.03)
High SOP barriers                   -5.638            0.001              -0.061            0.008              -0.001
                                    (-1.41)           (0.60)             (-2.41)           (1.81)             (-0.87)
Observations                       2096267           2096267            2097298           2097298            1838320
R2                                   0.058            0.009               0.019            0.013               0.004
  Notes: t-statistics in parentheses. SOP law categories are interpreted relative to states with no barriers. Models
  include all variables shown in Table 4a plus indicator variables for unknown education and unknown Hispanic
  ethnicity, county population categories, state fixed effects, and year-by-quarter fixed effects. The sample used is the
  universe of all singleton first births born to women with no pregnancy risk factors reporting a CNM attendant.




                                                           44
               Table 6a: Effects of SOP Laws on Maternal Health Behaviors,
                 Delivery attended by Physician or Certified Nurse Midwife,
                               Medically Underserved Counties
                                  (1)            (2)              (3)           (4)
                           Early Prenatal    Smoked        Drank during     Adequate
                                 Care         during         pregnancy    Weight Gain
                                            pregnancy
Low SOP barriers                0.007          0.005            0.002         -0.013
                                (0.40)         (0.56)           (0.74)       (-0.80)
Moderate SOP barriers           0.025         -0.004            0.002         -0.003
                                (1.90)        (-0.38)           (0.94)       (-0.24)
High SOP barriers               0.020         -0.015            0.001         0.001
                                (1.33)        (-1.49)           (0.57)        (0.07)
Maternal age                    0.005          0.004            0.001         0.001
                               (22.56)         (7.95)          (14.77)        (3.16)
Married                         0.090         -0.112            -0.010        0.017
                               (36.00)       (-10.93)         (-12.33)        (8.89)
Female baby                     0.003         -0.001          -0.0001         0.006
                                (4.71)        (-2.01)          (-0.72)        (7.11)
Black                           -0.062        -0.195            -0.004        -0.011
                              (-14.77)       (-21.45)          (-8.78)       (-3.69)
Native Am.                      -0.069        -0.057            0.012         -0.027
                               (-7.04)        (-2.42)           (3.79)       (-7.00)
Asian                           -0.097        -0.094            -0.004        0.033
                              (-16.59)       (-21.72)          (-4.64)        (6.48)
Hispanic                        -0.102        -0.189            -0.005        0.017
                               (-9.51)       (-21.46)         (-12.31)        (4.88)
Less than high school           -0.076         0.073            0.003         -0.011
                              (-19.09)         (8.96)          (10.65)       (-6.45)
Some college                    0.022         -0.083            -0.001        0.017
                                (6.89)       (-11.81)          (-1.98)        (9.36)
College                         0.038         -0.162            -0.003        0.066
                                (7.12)       (-17.75)          (-7.04)       (24.22)
Unemployment                    -0.002        0.0002          -0.0003         0.003
                               (-1.71)         (0.30)          (-3.97)        (1.18)
Real income per capita          -0.001         0.001           0.0001         0.001
                               (-0.87)         (2.21)           (0.99)        (2.02)
Observations                  1169255        1108153          956815        1155700
R2                              0.096          0.123            0.007         0.010
Notes: T-statistics in parentheses. SOP law categories are interpreted relative to states with no barriers. Models
include indicator variables for unknown education and unknown Hispanic ethnicity, county population categories,
unemployment, real income per capita, state fixed effects, and year-by-quarter fixed effects. The sample used is a
25% state-based random sample of all singleton first births born to women with no pregnancy risk factors.




                                                       45
                       Table 6b: Effects of SOP Laws on Labor and Delivery,
                     Delivery attended by Physician or Certified Nurse Midwife,
                                  Medically Underserved Counties
                                           (1)         (2)          (3)         (4)
                                        Induced     Apparent     C-section  Apparent
                                                     Elective                Elective
                                                    Induction               C-section

            Low SOP barriers                    0.023            0.025           -0.004           -0.003
                                                (0.87)           (1.09)          (-0.45)          (-0.61)
            Moderate SOP barriers               0.049            0.049           -0.002           -0.003
                                                (2.93)           (2.93)          (-0.16)          (-0.50)
            High SOP barriers                   0.025            0.025           -0.002            0.002
                                                (1.80)           (1.73)          (-0.19)           (0.42)
            Observations                       1219504          1152449         1215186          1057113
            R2                                  0.032            0.032            0.034            0.028
  Notes: t-statistics in parentheses. SOP law categories are interpreted relative to states with no barriers. Models
  include all variables shown in Table 6a plus indicator variables for unknown education and unknown Hispanic
  ethnicity, county population categories, state fixed effects, and year-by-quarter fixed effects. The sample used is a
  25% state-based random sample of all singleton first births born to women with no pregnancy risk factors.




                     Table 6c: Effects of SOP Laws on Infant Outcomes,
                 Delivery Attended by Physician or Certified Nurse Midwife,
                               Medically Underserved Counties
                              (1)             (2)         (3)          (4)                                     (5)
                             Birth        Low/Very    Gestation     Gestation                              Birth Injury
                            Weight       Low Birth     Weeks       <39 weeks
                                           Weight
Low SOP barriers           -14.729          0.001      -0.096        0.009                                   -0.0003
                            (-1.21)         (0.20)     (-1.91)       (0.96)                                   (-0.31)
Moderate SOP barriers      -10.918         -0.001      -0.056        0.005                                     0.001
                            (-0.79)        (-0.48)     (-0.94)       (0.38)                                    (0.61)
High SOP barriers           -6.950         -0.001      -0.025        0.001                                    0.0004
                            (-0.58)        (-0.51)     (-0.45)       (0.12)                                    (0.37)
Observations               1219672        1219672     1220387       1220387                                  1061325
R2                           0.051          0.012       0.021        0.014                                     0.005
  Notes: t-statistics in parentheses. SOP law categories are interpreted relative to states with no barriers. Models
  include all variables shown in Table 6a plus indicator variables for unknown education and unknown Hispanic
  ethnicity, county population categories, state fixed effects, and year-by-quarter fixed effects. The sample used is a
  25% state-based random sample of all singleton first births born to women with no pregnancy risk factors.




                                                           46
                  Table 7: Effects of SOP Laws on Maternal and Infant Outcomes,
                           Delivery Attended by Certified Nurse Midwife,
                                  Medically Underserved Counties

                                    Early            Smoked             Drank           Adequate            Induced
                                   Prenatal           during            during           Weight
                                     Care           pregnancy         pregnancy           Gain
Low SOP barriers                    0.011             -0.010             0.003           -0.065              0.021
                                    (0.63)            (-1.57)            (1.32)          (-1.64)             (0.66)
Moderate SOP barriers               0.005             0.0002            0.0003           -0.043              0.059
                                    (0.25)             (0.03)            (0.13)          (-1.82)             (3.31)
High SOP barriers                   0.017             -0.015            -0.001           -0.023              0.040
                                    (0.60)            (-1.54)           (-0.29)          (-1.24)             (1.86)
Observations                       324236            297502            255869            320313             339329
R2                                  0.094              0.125             0.010            0.017              0.035

                                   Birth           Low/Very           Gestation         Gestation        Birth Injury
                                   Weight          Low Birth           Weeks            <39 weeks
                                                    Weight
Low SOP barriers                   -19.186          -0.001             -0.189              0.030             0.001
                                   (-2.35)          (-0.25)            (-4.16)             (4.36)            (0.39)
Moderate SOP barriers               -3.899          0.0004             -0.101              0.014            -0.002
                                   (-0.46)           (0.15)            (-2.34)             (1.58)           (-1.24)
High SOP barriers                  11.751           -0.004             -0.054              0.004            -0.002
                                    (1.35)          (-1.28)            (-1.47)             (0.50)           (-1.12)
Observations                       339368           339368             339538             339538            309462
R2                                  0.060            0.011              0.023              0.015             0.015
  Notes: T-statistics in parentheses. SOP law categories are interpreted relative to states with no barriers. Models
  include all variables shown in Table 6a plus indicator variables for unknown education and unknown Hispanic
  ethnicity, county population categories, state fixed effects, and year-by-quarter fixed effects. The sample used is
  the universe of all singleton first births born to women with no pregnancy risk factors reporting a CNM attendant.




                                                          47
                        Table 8: Effects of SOP Laws on CNM Employment

                                     Licensed CNMs                                Employed CNMs
         Lag on law:          One year lag    Three year lag                One year lag  Three year lag
Low SOP barriers                -0.628            0.531                       10.325          5.911
                                (-0.54)           (0.81)                      (1.06)          (0.93)
Moderate SOP barriers           -0.994           -0.725                        3.731          0.937
                                (-0.78)          (-1.04)                      (0.34)          (0.11)
High SOP barriers                0.068            0.548                        9.289          5.034
                                 (0.04)           (0.57)                      (0.74)          (0.50)
Observations                      765              765                          316            316
R2                               0.939            0.934                        0.615          0.604
Notes: Weighted OLS models, t-statistics in parentheses. Models include state real income per capita, state
unemployment rates, the state supply of primary care physicians per capita, and state and year fixed effects.
Columns 1 and 2 also include an indicator for imputed values, where applicable. Licensed CNMs are for years
1999-2013 and include employed, unemployed and nurses out of the labor force. Employed CNMs are for years
1995, 1996, 1999, 2000, 2003, 2004, 2007, and 2008. Both counts are per 100,000 women ages 14-44.




                                                       48
        Table 9: Effects of SOP Laws on Probability of Delivery by Certified Nurse Midwife vs. Physician
                                    (1)               (2)                 (3)                 (4)
                           Delivery by CNM   Delivery by CNM         Delivery by     Delivery by CNM,
                                                 Medically              CNM,             Parity >1
                                                Underserved           Parity >1          Medically
                                                  Counties                             Underserved
                                                                                          Counties
  Low SOP barriers                0.001             -0.011              -0.007             -0.015
                                  (0.15)           (-0.67)              (-0.72)            (-0.83)
  Moderate SOP                   -0.014             -0.023              -0.020             -0.031
  barriers                       (-1.74)           (-1.40)              (-2.10)            (-1.61)
  High SOP barriers              -0.016             -0.011              -0.020             -0.019
                                 (-1.66)           (-0.55)              (-1.77)            (-0.82)
  Maternal age                   -0.003             -0.002              -0.002             -0.001
                                (-11.39)           (-7.37)              (-8.55)            (-6.68)
  Married                        -0.001             -0.002               0.004              0.001
                                 (-0.22)           (-1.76)              (1.02)              (0.64)
  Female baby                     0.004             0.003                0.002              0.001
                                  (8.89)            (5.77)              (4.49)              (1.02)
  Black                           0.001             -0.002              -0.004             -0.005
                                  (0.13)           (-0.43)              (-0.84)            (-0.62)
  Native Am.                      0.081             0.132                0.086              0.142
                                  (3.21)            (4.51)              (2.97)              (4.22)
  Asian                          -0.011             0.009               -0.010              0.015
                                 (-4.87)            (1.79)              (-2.12)             (1.63)
  Hispanic                        0.007             0.007                0.006              0.006
                                  (1.33)            (1.04)              (1.03)              (0.70)
  Less than high school           0.007             0.004                0.011              0.008
                                  (1.83)            (2.99)              (1.83)              (4.34)
  Some college                   -0.002             -0.002             -0.0001             -0.001
                                 (-1.53)           (-1.53)              (-0.04)            (-0.88)
  College                        -0.001            -0.0002              -0.003             -0.001
                                 (-0.35)           (-0.11)              (-0.95)            (-0.43)
  Number of children                                                     0.003              0.004
                                                                        (2.88)              (3.98)
  Unemployment                  -0.0002             0.004                0.002              0.004
                                 (-0.09)            (0.77)              (0.74)              (0.85)
  Real income per                 0.001             0.001               0.0004              0.002
  capita                          (2.05)            (0.72)              (0.79)              (1.34)
  Percent poverty                 0.001                                 -0.001
                                  (0.83)                                (-0.59)
  Primary care                   -0.007                                 -0.009
  physicians per cap.            (-1.51)                                (-1.42)
  Observations                 6907461            1220387             2580697             509579
  R2                              0.030             0.053                0.031              0.064
Notes: T-statistics in parentheses. SOP law categories are interpreted relative to states with no barriers. Models include indicator variables for unknown
education and unknown Hispanic ethnicity, county population categories, state fixed effects, and year-by-quarter fixed effects. The sample used in
columns 1 and 2 is a 25% state-based random sample of all singleton first births born to women with no pregnancy risk factors. The sample used in
columns 3 and 4 is a 10% state-based random sample of all second or more children, born to women with no pregnancy risk factors, no previous C-
section and no previous pre-term birth.
                                                                         49
    Table 10: Effects of SOP Laws on Probability of Delivery in Freestanding Birth Clinic
                                  (1)              (2)                 (3)               (4)
                            Delivery in   Delivery in FBC, Delivery in FBC Delivery in FBC,
                                 FBC,          First birth         Parity>1           Parity>1
                             First birth      Medically                             Medically
                                             Underserved                           Underserved
                                               Counties                              Counties
Low SOP barriers                0.007            -0.217             -0.147             -0.163
                                (0.08)           (-1.50)            (-1.60)            (-1.55)
                              [0.0001]         [-0.0032]           [-0.0026]         [-0.0047]
Moderate SOP barriers           -0.197           -0.381             -0.261             -0.425
                                (-2.28)          (-4.53)            (-3.01)            (-5.68)
                              [-0.0018]        [-0.0047]           [-0.0041]         [-0.0097]
High SOP barriers               -0.143           -0.360             -0.247             -0.434
                                (-1.46)          (-2.42)            (-2.56)            (-3.40)
                              [-0.0014]        [-0.0045]           [-0.0039]         [-0.0098]
Maternal age                    -0.001           0.010               0.003             0.010
                                (-0.61)          (5.37)              (1.27)            (6.25)
                             [-0.00001]         [0.0001]          [0.00003]           [0.0002]
Married                         0.224            0.311               0.373             0.409
                                (3.58)           (3.78)              (4.03)            (3.80)
                              [0.0017]          [0.0025]           [0.0038]           [0.0051]
Female baby                     0.022            0.009               0.003             -0.015
                                (4.08)           (0.75)              (0.50)            (-1.19)
                              [0.0002]          [0.0001]          [0.00003]          [-0.0002]
Black                           -0.318           -0.450             -0.405             -0.650
                                (-7.34)          (-7.18)            (-8.65)            (-7.69)
                              [-0.0019]        [-0.0024]           [-0.0036]         [-0.0056]
Native American                 -0.334           -0.475             -0.418             -0.587
                                (-2.68)          (-2.51)            (-3.39)            (-2.57)
                              [-0.0018]        [-0.0024]           [-0.0033]         [-0.0052]
Asian                           -0.365           -0.221             -0.454             -0.418
                               (-10.53)          (-3.34)            (-8.82)            (-3.52)
                              [-0.0020]        [-0.0015]           [-0.0036]         [-0.0043]
Hispanic                        -0.159           -0.065             -0.333             -0.277
                                (-4.26)          (-0.65)            (-4.25)            (-1.74)
                              [-0.0011]        [-0.0005]           [-0.0036]         [-0.0039]
Less than high school           0.211            0.351               0.395             0.494
                                (2.12)           (2.85)              (2.34)            (2.60)
                              [0.0021]          [0.0038]           [0.0067]           [0.0099]
Some college                    0.112            0.029               0.099             0.064
                                (4.38)           (0.78)              (3.71)            (1.76)
                              [0.0010]          [0.0003]           [0.0013]           [0.0010]
College                         0.199            0.035               0.168             0.053
                                (5.78)           (0.66)              (5.29)            (1.15)
                              [0.0018]          [0.0003]           [0.0024]           [0.0009]
Number of children                                                   0.067             0.089
                                                                     (4.16)            (2.85)
                                                                   [0.0008]           [0.0014]
                                               50
 Unemployment                            0.008                    0.061                     0.020                  0.065
                                         (0.34)                   (3.02)                    (0.88)                 (5.37)
                                        [0.0001]                 [0.0005]                 [0.0003]                [0.0010]
 Real income per capita                  0.003                    0.016                     0.002                  0.019
                                         (0.87)                   (2.76)                    (0.40)                 (2.48)
                                        [0.0000]                 [0.0001]                [0.00002]                [0.0003]
 Percent poverty                         0.016                                              0.009
                                         (3.24)                                             (1.49)
                                        [0.0001]                                          [0.0001]
 Primary care physicians                 0.020                                             -0.013
 per cap.                                (0.64)                                            (-0.44)
                                        [0.0002]                                          [-0.0002]
 Observations                           6482027                  1015455                  2454539                  450338
Notes: Probit estimates. T-statistics in parentheses, marginal effects in brackets. SOP law categories are interpreted relative to states
with no barriers. Models include indicator variables for unknown education and unknown Hispanic ethnicity, county population
categories, state fixed effects, and year-by-quarter fixed effects. The sample used in columns 1 and 2 is a 25% state-based random
sample of all singleton first births born to women with no pregnancy risk factors. The sample used in columns 3 and 4 is a 10% state-
based random sample of all second or more children, born to women with no pregnancy risk factors, no previous C-section and no
previous pre-term birth.




                                                                 51
