                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                           COMMODITIES FOR THE LONG RUN

                                         Ari Levine
                                        Yao Hua Ooi
                                     Matthew Richardson

                                     Working Paper 22793
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w22793


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                  November 2016




Ari Levine (AQR), Yao Hua Ooi (AQR), and Matthew Richardson (NYU and NBER). AQR, the
firm at which two of the authors are employed, offers financial products that invest in
commodities. The construction of these products may, at times, draw on insights related to this
research. We would like to thank Jusvin Dhillon, Suraj Malladi and Ning Sun for excellent
research assistance, and Claude Erb, Campbell Harvey, Antti Ilmanen, Lasse Pedersen, Caroline
Sasseville, and Ning Sun for many helpful comments and suggestions. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2016 by Ari Levine, Yao Hua Ooi, and Matthew Richardson. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Commodities for the Long Run
Ari Levine, Yao Hua Ooi, and Matthew Richardson
NBER Working Paper No. 22793
November 2016
JEL No. G10,G11,G13,N2,N21,N22

                                         ABSTRACT

This paper analyzes a novel data set of commodity futures prices over a long sample period
starting in 1877, which allows us to shed new light on several important and controversial
questions. We document that commodity futures returns (1) have been positive on average; (2)
vary significantly across business cycles, inflation episodes, and periods of backwardation versus
contango, (3) are driven mostly by variation of spot returns and therefore closely linked to the
underlying commodity spot market; (4) perform well during inflation cycles and provide more
return in backwardated states; and (5) display low correlation with stocks and bonds. These long-
run stylized facts imply that commodity futures can add value to a diversified portfolio from an
asset allocation perspective.

Ari Levine                                      Matthew Richardson
AQR Capital Management                          Stern School of Business
2 Greenwich Plaza                               New York University
Greenwich, CT 06830                             44 West 4th Street, Suite 9-190
ari.levine@aqr.com                              New York, NY 10012
                                                and NBER
Yao Hua Ooi                                     mrichar0@stern.nyu.edu
AQR Capital Management
2 Greenwich Plaza
Greenwich, CT 06830
yao.ooi@aqr.com
             I. Introduction

             From an investor’s point of view, how do commodity futures fit into the asset
    allocation decision? To answer this question, we need to understand the statistical
    properties of commodity futures returns and, in particular, these properties in aggregate
    economic states.
             A recent series of influential papers have studied the properties of returns on
    commodity indices. Gorton and Rouwenhorst (2006, denote GR) and Bhardwaj, Gorton and
    Rouwenhorst (2015, denote BGR) form an equally-weighted index of commodities over the
    past 50 years and document three key features of the data: (i) equity-like returns, (ii) a
    positive sensitivity to inflation, and (iii) a negative correlation with other major asset
    classes. In contrast, Erb and Harvey (2006, 2015, denote EH) provide a more cautionary
    note, arguing that the above statistical properties of commodity returns may be more
    transient. Moreover, EH find that the most important component of commodity futures
    returns is its carry (or income) piece, rather than the underlying spot return. We provide
    new perspective on this topic by analyzing a novel data set of futures prices on
    commodities, dating back as early as 1877.
             Specifically, over the period 1877-2015, we construct returns on indices of
    commodity futures, decomposing these returns into the convenience yield (using the spread
    between adjacent futures contracts, adjusted for interest rates) and the implied excess return
    on the indices’ underlying spot index.1 Because this 139 year period includes (i) many more
    episodes of recessions (e.g., 29 versus 7 for BGR (2015)), (ii) large inflationary and
    deflationary cycles, and (iii) varying times of backwardation and contango, we have greater
    power to identify the behavior of the returns on the commodity index. Since futures require
    no up-front capital, one can view the returns on the commodity indices as excess returns.
    We therefore compare their statistical properties over the period with excess returns on
    stocks and bonds in the U.S.



1
 The indices include both an equal-weighted and equal risk-weighted portfolio of the available commodity futures.
During the earlier part of the sample, there are fewer commodities available for inclusion in the index. For example,
prior to 1945, seven commodities enter the sample. Furthermore, EH question the application of equal-weighted
indices compared to other weighting schemes. These issues are discussed in Section II.
             We provide long-run evidence that both components of commodity futures returns
    are positive: the excess-of-cash spot returns and the convenience yield. Following the
    practitioner literature, we denote the returns associated with the convenience yield as the
    interest rate adjusted carry yield. These positive returns exist both in early and later
    subperiods of the last 139 years. For example, breaking the sample into the period 1877-
    1945 and 1946-2015, average excess spot returns on an equal risk-weighted index are 2.4%
    and 1.6%, respectively, while the average adjusted carry yield on the same index is 2.8%
    and 4.4%.
              The paper makes several additional contributions to the literature, all exploiting the
    construction of returns on a long sample of commodity futures. First, we describe the
    statistical behavior of commodity index returns conditional on the aforementioned
    aggregate states of backwardation/contango, inflation, and the economy. We find that
    commodity indices, such as the equal risk-weighted one, earn 7.9% versus 1.5% in periods
    of backwardation versus contango; 14.1% versus -4.5% in high inflation versus low
    inflation cycles; and 8.9% versus -7.3% in expansions versus recessions.
             Second, from an asset allocation perspective, commodity futures add value to a
    portfolio of stocks and long-term government bonds because of their low correlation to
    these assets.2 Unlike these other assets, they offer a hedge against inflation and
    idiosyncratic performance during backwardated periods. That said, commodities have
    negative exposure to market downturns and periods of low inflation. In simple asset
    allocation exercises of the three asset classes, we compare equal-weighted and ex post
    optimal portfolios over the entire 1877-2015 sample, 1877-1945 and 1946-2015
    subsamples, and across the different aggregate states. For example, we find that, over the
    entire sample, the optimal mean-variance portfolio allocates 17% to commodities, 29% to
    stocks and 54% to government bonds. Moreover, a 54%/36%/10% portfolio of stocks,
    bonds and commodities consistently outperforms a 60%/40% allocation of just stocks and
    bonds.
             Third, in terms of the aforementioned debate on the nature of commodity futures,
    this paper is generally supportive of the GR and BGR point of view. That is, commodity

  EH make the valid point (and provide some evidence) that the size of the commodity futures market is small
2

relative to the size of equity and bond markets, and thus suggest caution when interpreting asset allocation exercises
economy wide. In section IV, we provide some perspective regarding this argument.
       futures are exposed to aggregate states with a large source of their return variation
       explained by commodity spot returns. The evidence does not, however, support equity-like
       returns for commodities. Consistent with EH’s conclusion, it is interesting to note that, over
       the 139 year period, adjusted carry yields (roll yields plus short rates) are a larger
       contributor to average futures returns than are excess-of-cash spot returns, much of it
       coming from short rates.
                This paper is organized as follows. In section 2, we provide the underlying theory
       for the sources of risk premia for commodity futures returns. In this context, we also
       describe the data on the various commodity futures from 1877-2015, including a number of
       interesting stylized facts. In Section 3, we construct commodity indices, based on equal-
       weights and equal risk-weights. Their statistical properties are explored and compared in
       different aggregate states of nature, including a comparison between the returns on our
       commodity futures indices, the U.S. aggregate stock index, and U.S. government bonds.
       Section 4 interprets these findings in terms of asset allocation. Section 5 concludes.


               II.      Data Description and Analysis
                 A. Theory
                The starting point for models of commodity futures prices is the cost-of-carry
       model:3
                                                             ( rt ,T ut ,T ct ,T ) T t 
                                              Ft ,T  St e                                                    (1)

       where St is the time t spot price of the commodity, Ft,T is the futures price with maturity T,
       rt,T is the continuously-compounded riskless rate of interest from t to T, ut,T is the
       annualized storage costs as a percent of the spot price from t to T, and ct ,T is the

       convenience yield over the same time period. Intuitively, the futures price reflects both the
       foregone interest and cost of storage of holding the commodity. These costs are potentially
       offset by the convenience yield c. The convenience yield arises due to potential shortages of
       the underlying commodity, and has been interpreted in the context of one of two theories:
       (i) Theory of Storage (Kaldor (1939), Working (1949) and Gorton, Hayashi and



3
    The equation assumes nonstochastic, deterministic interest rates, storage costs and convenience yields.
Rouwenhorst (2013)), and (ii) Theory of Normal Backwardation (Keynes (1930), Hicks
(1939), and Gorton, Hayashi and Rouwenhorst (2013)).
                               F            
          Define rt F,tT1  ln t 1,T  , the continuously compounded return on a futures contract
                                      Ft ,T 


with maturity T; and  t*,T  ut 1,T  ct 1,T T  t  1  ut ,T  ct ,T T  t   ct ,T  ut ,T , the

convenience yield net of storage costs (assuming any change in convenience yields or
storage costs are small relative to their level from t to t+1). Further define the continuously-

compounded, excess return on the spot return of the commodity, ert ,t 1 , as the difference
                                                                                                   S




between the continuously compounded spot return on the commodity, rt ,St 1  ln  St 1  ,
                                                                                        St 

and the continuously-compounded interest rate,                                 rt*,T  rt 1,T T  t  1  rt ,T T  t   rt ,T

(assuming any changes in interest rates are small relative to the level of interest rates). That

is, ert ,t 1  rt S,t 1  rt*:T . By taking logs and rearranging, equation (1) can then be rewritten in
      S



terms of commodity futures returns:

                                               rt F,tT1  ert ,t 1  t*,T                                            (2)
                                                             S



          Note that, in some form or another in the prior literature,  t*,T has been a focus for

study. For example, practitioner researchers often report the carry of the commodity,
defined by  t*,T  rt*:T , which ex post is equivalent to the roll yield of the commodity when

futures contracts are rolled into the next contract as it reaches expiration (see, for example,
Erb and Harvey (2006)). By adding back rt*:T to the commodity’s carry, we get back  t*,T .

To coincide with practitioner terminology, we therefore call  t*,T the interest rate adjusted

carry of the commodity. We use this decomposition of returns because we find it more
intuitive to focus net convenience yield and the spot returns in excess of cash instead of
decomposing futures returns into spot returns and roll returns. However, we also report the
latter decomposition for a few key results, and include summary statistics on the short rate
of interest to show its size and impact on the decomposition.
          Equation (2) provides a description of futures returns for each individual commodity
in terms of their excess spot return and interest-rate adjusted carry. We also wish to
consider portfolios of commodities. However, a weighted sum of the individual
commodities does not aggregate in log terms, i.e., the sum of geometric returns of the
individual assets does not itself equal a geometric return of the asset portfolio. It is therefore
convenient to approximate equation (2) in terms of arithmetic returns which do aggregate
well into portfolios. Specifically, using a first-order Taylor series approximation,4
                                                                                RtF,tT1  eRtS,t 1  t*,T  RtS,t 1 t*,T   (3)

where RtF,tT1 , RtS,t 1 and eRtS,t 1 are all written in arithmetic returns.

                 It is well-documented that spot returns on commodities tend to be negatively
correlated with the convenience yield. Hence, the returns on futures returns may be
overestimated using simply the sum of excess spot returns and the convenience yield. This
point aside, the goal of this paper is to better understand the properties of commodity
futures returns as described by equations (2) and (3) using a very long time-series of data.
Consider equation (2). The breakdown of futures returns into two components - (i)
commodity spot excess returns, and (ii) an interest rate adjusted carry – is a useful way to
start the analysis.
                 This simple futures math has clear implications: First, because the futures return is

long the commodity and short the cash market, i.e., ert ,t 1  rt S,t 1  rt*:T , it is immediately
                                                                                                                            S



clear that futures represents an excess return. Because interest rates reflect expected
inflation rates, and it is reasonable to assume that changes in commodity prices also reflect
inflation expectations, equation (2) implies that expected inflation is netted out of futures
returns. Therefore, futures’ direct exposure to inflation is only through unexpected inflation
shocks. To the extent these inflation shocks are likely correlated with commodity spot
returns, it is transparent why commodity futures provide a hedge against inflation.




  The approximation can be derived as follows with the third step resulting from a first-order Taylor
4

approximation:
                 1  RtS,t 1
1  RtF,tT1                       1       *
                                                t ,T
                 1  Rt*:T
                 1  RtS,t 1             t*,T              RtS,t 1 t*,T
                        *
                                                 *
                                                         
                 1 R    t :T           1 R      t :T          1  Rt*:T
             1  (R      S
                         t , t 1       *
                                          t ,T     R     S
                                                         t , t 1 t*,T )  ( Rt*:T )
             1 R       S
                         t , t 1   R   *
                                         t :T         *
                                                         t ,T     RtS,t 1 t*,T
            Second, equation (2) highlights the potential risk premia associated with each source
    of futures returns. Specifically, the excess spot return suggests a premium corresponding to
    the systematic risk (if any) of the spot commodity, while the interest rate adjusted carry
    points to compensation for bearing inventory risk and/or providing liquidity to hedgers.
    This decomposition is consistent with the existing theoretical literature on futures risk
    premia. For example, futures risk premia are related to systematic risk by Dusak (1973) and
    Jagannathan (1985), among others, and to hedging pressure by Keynes (1930), Hicks
    (1939), Basu and Miffre (2013), Gorton, Hayashi and Rouwenhorst (2013), and,
    Syzmanowska, De Roon, Nijman and Goorbergh (2014), among others. Stoll (1979),
    Bessembinder (1992) and Hirshleifer, and de Roon, Nijman and Veld (2000) have
    theoretically incorporated and empirically tested models including both these sources for
    risk premia.5
            In terms of the interest rate adjusted carry component, the literature has related
    hedging pressure and inventories to the convenience yield. The convenience yield depends
    negatively on storage costs and tends to be positive during periods of low inventories
    (Kaldor (1939) and Working (1949)), resulting in a high demand for hedging (Keynes
    (1930), Hicks (1939), and Cootner (1960)). The belief in this latter risk premium is
    controversial due to the possibility that it may be idiosyncratic in nature; nevertheless, there
    is empirical evidence of its existence and it can be motivated via segmented markets. Of
    course, since it is impractical for futures market investors to invest in one of these return
    sources without getting exposure to the other, this return decomposition is merely
    suggestive, not probative.


             B. Data
            In 1865, the Chicago Board of Trade (CBOT) developed the first standardized
    futures contracts on grain trading. Daily high and low prices for multiple contract
    expirations on several commodity futures are available starting January 2nd, 1877. The
    source for the data until 1951 is the Annual Report of the Trade and Commerce of the
    Chicago Board of Trade. After 1951 and before 2012, the futures prices across various


 Acharya, Lochstoer and Ramadorai (2013) and Hamilton and Wu (2014) discuss hedging demand using a limits to
5

arbitrage argument.
    contracts are taken from the data vendor, Commodity Systems Inc. After 2012, the futures
    prices are from Bloomberg. For base metals and platinum, rolled return series from S&P,
    Goldman Sachs, and Bloomberg are used.
             Table 1 provides a description of when the data become available for each
    commodity, the number of contracts, and some facts with respect to the quality of the price
    data. The initial data period starting in 1877 includes corn, wheat, oats, lard, short ribs and
    pork, with cotton, soybeans, soymeal, and soyoil added at various points during the 1920s-
    50s. Other commodities come into the data set in various years up to the 1990s.6 Most of
    the commodities data continues to December 2015. A popular measure of liquidity, namely
    the percentage of days of zero moves, is consistent across the commodities, irrespective of
    their starting date. In fact, while breaking the sample up into the 1877-1945 versus 1946-
    2015 time periods shows more missing data in the early period, the percentage of zero day
    moves is actually greater in the latter period. This is consistent with Hieronymus (1977,
    p.23) who shows that the nineteenth century was a period of high trading activity in
    commodity futures, not surpassed until the mid 1970s at least with respect to commodities
    such as grains, which have traded throughout the period.
             We construct the annualized, arithmetic returns on each commodity futures using
    the following procedure.7 At each month end, we calculate the return on each contract from
    the previous month end. For each month, we hold the nearest of the contracts whose
    delivery month is at least two months away8. The returns on the contracts held are spliced
    together on the roll dates. There are months in which the desired contract may not have a
    return. In those instances, we move to the next contract and follow the same procedure until
    there is a return or until we reach the fifth contract. If there is still no return, we then hold
    the contract in front of the desired contract. Using the same rolled contract series, we


  Opening and closing prices were not recorded in the early part of the sample, so the analysis uses high and low
6

values, and, in particular, the average of these high and low values for the daily return series before closing price is
available.
7
  We also investigate geometric returns. We do this to coincide with the existing literature such as Ibbotson and
Chen (2003), Gorton and Rowenhorst (2006) and Erb and Harvey (2006).
  For example, we hold an April contract through the end of February. An exception is Brent oil, whose delivery
8

month needs to be at least three months away, i.e. we hold the April contract through the end of January. This
methodology is chosen to coincide with the procedure employed by the popular Goldman Sachs Commodity Index.
That said, we also ran the results using commodity returns generated from the nearest to deliver contract taken from
the previous month end. As the contract approaches maturity, we roll into the next nearby contract. The results are
qualitatively similar.
    construct a rolled price series and calculate the spot returns. Roll yield is then calculated
    from rolled return series and spot returns. Note that there are days with limit moves on
    various grains contracts, and we assume all contiguous limit moves are incorporated into
    the first move price.9
              Table 2 documents the arithmetic mean and volatility for each futures return on the
    commodities over the full and two subsample periods (1877-1945 and 1946-2015). Table 2
    also reports a breakdown of the commodity futures return into two components: (i) its
    excess spot return, and (ii) its interest rate adjusted carry. Because we have access to only
    high and low prices during the early part of the sample, for that period we use the range
                                                                                                              2

                                                                                                  ln   , where H and L
                                                                                  N
    volatility estimator of Parkinson (1980), i.e., ˆ t2,range              1
                                                                              N   
                                                                                  i 1
                                                                                            1
                                                                                         4 ln 2
                                                                                                     H t i
                                                                                                     Lt i



    represent the daily high and low prices, and N the number of days during the period.
    Having access to just high and low prices is not necessarily a drawback for volatility
    estimation. It is well-known that, under certain assumptions, the range volatility estimator is
    more efficient than using a corresponding sum of daily squared returns (e.g., Beckers
    (1983) and Alizadeh, Brandt and Diebold (2002)). Unfortunately, without intraday data, no
    such measure exists for a range correlation estimator (see Brandt and Diebold (2003))
    which is discussed in the next section on index construction.
              Several observations are in order. First, across 41 commodity series spread across
    the two subsamples, only 7 series have negative mean returns, 4 negative excess spot
    returns and 8 negative interest rate adjusted carry (roll yield plus short rate).10 Second, in
    the full sample, of the 35 commodities represented, 21 of these commodities have higher
    average interest rate adjusted carry than excess spot returns. In terms of the debate between
9
   For limit day periods, we incorporate all the limit day returns into the first limit day following Roll (1984) and
Boudoukh, Richardson, Shen and Whitelaw (2007). Limit days are determined by whether on that day (i) the
maximum price shift across contracts of the same commodity is a round amount (before closing prices are available,
the largest positive shift from high price and the largest negative shift from low price are used) (ii) two or more
contracts move by this amount, (iii) if maximum price shift is from the front contract and does not meet above
conditions, maximum shift of the other contracts meets above conditions (since sometimes the front contract is not
subject to limits if it is considered “spot”), and (iv) this shift is equal to or higher than the official price limit set by
the exchange (when available).
10
   As pointed out by GR (2006) and EH (2006), there are substantive differences between arithmetic and geometric
means of commodity returns due to the high volatility of individual commodity returns. If we instead consider
geometric means, then of the 41 commodity series across the two subsamples, 16 series have negative mean
returns, almost all (i.e., 35) have negative excess spot returns and 8 negative adjusted convenience yields (roll
yield plus short rate). Of course, the reason excess spot returns are mostly negative relative to convenience yields
are the much higher volatility of the series.
GR/BGR and EH, this result is a mixed bag. On the one hand, at least for arithmetic returns,
excess spot returns are a significant portion of realized returns for a subset of commodity
futures. On the other hand, consistent with EH, “income,” at least as measured here by
convenience yields, is a key component of pricing.
       Third, because the expected return component arising from spot returns is small, EH
argue that spot returns are not an important component of commodity futures return and
therefore commodity futures is not “a play on commodity prices”. However, in describing
the relation between commodity futures and spot returns, what matters is their covariation.
Table 2 describes the monthly return volatility of commodity futures returns and their
underlying components. Comparing the volatility of the excess spot return to the volatility
of the interest rate adjusted carry (i.e., “income”) component, it is clear that the driver of
most of the variability is spot prices. In fact, for all commodities, either full sample or for
subsamples, spot returns explain much more of the futures return variability than do interest
rate adjusted carry yields. This result contrasts with EH who argue that spot returns are not
a driver of futures returns at various horizon intervals. That said, EH’s primary focus is on
long-term holding periods, in particular, 10 years. They readily admit their analysis is
subject to limited nonoverlapping observations. One of the benefits of a long sample period
is that long-horizon statistics can be more efficiently estimated. Not shown in Table 2, our
result that spot return variability is the majority driver of futures returns holds at all
horizons measured up to 10 years over the full sample period. Using the index returns, this
issue is explored in detail in the next section. Finally, there is considerable variation in the
cross-section of mean returns. This suggests that commodity variation cannot be solely
explained by a common component, such as short rate volatility. This result is strengthened
by the especially long sample for some commodities.
       Finally, Table 2 reports the average arithmetic and geometric mean across the
commodities for the full and subsample periods. There are large differences between
arithmetic and geometric mean returns for individual commodities due to their high level of
return volatility. For example, in the full sample, the average arithmetic mean return is
5.0%, 2.9% and 2.8% for futures, excess spot returns, and interest rate adjusted carry
yields, respectively. In contrast, the average geometric mean return is 1.1%, -1.4% and
2.5% for futures, excess spot returns, and interest rate adjusted carry yields, respectively.
     Most of the difference between arithmetic and geometric mean returns can be explained by
     the fact that spot moves drive most of the futures returns variation. A significant factor,
     however, is also the negative correlation between spot prices and interest rate adjusted carry
     yields as illustrated by equations (2) and (3). That said, as shown in Section 3 below, these
     effects are mitigated when aggregated to the portfolio level, where the volatility is lower.
     (This effect, which only applies to geometric returns, has sometimes been called the
     “rebalancing premium”.) A final comment is the similarity in results across subsamples. For
     example, for arithmetic mean returns, the average return across commodities is 5.0% for the
     full sample, 5.4% for the 1877-1945 subsample, and 4.7% for the 1946-2015 subsample.


              C. Data on Macro Shocks and Aggregate Asset Classes
            There is considerable interest in documenting the statistical properties of commodity
     indices, especially as they relate to other aggregate factors. Part of the motivation is due to
     the “financialization” of commodities and the increasing awareness of commodities as an
     asset class. As mentioned in Section II.A above, the long time series available for study in
     this paper makes it possible to address the long-term properties of commodities futures to
     coincide with an extensive literature in finance that has done similar long-horizon research
     on other asset classes. (See, for example, Siegel (1992), Boudoukh and Richardson (1993),
     Goetzmann (1993), Goetzmann, Li and Rouwenhorst (1995), Goetzmann and Jorion (1999),
     Hurst, Ooi and Pedersen (2012), and, more recently, Geczy and Samanov (2015).)11
            For our analysis, we compare the commodity indices to two other asset classes -
     long-term U.S. government bonds and the aggregate U.S. stock market. The data is provided
     by Global Financial Data, and represents total returns on these asset classes. Because futures
     represent excess returns, these two asset classes are expressed in excess terms using a “safe”
     short-term rate.12 The properties of these asset classes, relative to commodities, are discussed
     in the next section.


   Geczy and Samanov (2015) look at the 200-year plus history of statistical momentum properties of many
11

aggregate assets, including commodities. The authors employ spot prices of 75 commodities using Global Financial
Data. They do not, however, analyze investable futures prices on commodities, whose returns can differ
substantially from spot returns.
12
   The U.S. government only started issuing short-term bills after 1929. The series prior to 1918 is taken from
Federal Reserve Economic Data (FRED) at the St. Louis Federal Reserve Bank. The data represents New York call
money rates until 1889, and the New York Times money rates until 1918. After 1918, we use Global Financial Data;
            One of the goals of this paper is to better understand the means, volatilities and
   correlations of the various asset classes in different states of nature. We focus on three
   particular state variables:
               The first variable is an ex ante measure of the backwardation or contango of the
                commodity futures. Backwardation is defined as 𝐹𝑡,𝑇2 < 𝐹𝑡,𝑇1, where T2>T1,
                where F is defined by equation (1). Contango is the opposite. As described
                above, there is a long literature that focuses on conditions under which a
                downward sloping commodity futures curve may exist. By definition, the
                estimated convenience yield is a function of this backwardation and theoretically
                reflects low inventories, high volatility of the commodity return, and increased
                                                              1
                hedging demand. We define the state as 𝑁 ∑𝑁       𝑖=1( 𝐹𝑖𝑡,𝑇1 − 𝐹𝑖𝑡,𝑇2 )/((𝑇2 − T1) ∗
                𝐹𝑖𝑡,𝑇1 ) in other words, the average level of backwardation across the various
                commodity series.
               The second variable is the expansion and recession periods estimated by the
                NBER Business Cycle Dating Committee. One of the advantages of the long time
                series is that there have been 29 recessions (i.e., peak to trough) in the U.S. since
                1877, compared to 7 since 1965 (the starting point for GR (2006) analysis) and
                just 3 since 1985 (another common start period). We measure recessions (peak-
                to-trough) and expansions (trough-to-peak) by the binary variable -1/1.
               The third variable is whether the inflation rate lies above or below its full sample
                mean, which is an annualized 2.3%. Post 1913, the monthly inflation rate is
                calculated from the U.S. consumer price index (CPI) published by the U.S.
                Bureau of Labor Statistics. Prior to 1913, the data comes from Shiller (2000) who
                uses the Warren and Pearson (1935) price index. Inflation is a particularly
                important state because of the well-known divergent comovements between
                inflation and various asset classes over short- and long-horizons (e.g., Boudoukh
                and Richardson (1993)).

             Table 3 provides summary statistics for the three states, in particular, (i) the number
    of months in the state, (ii) the level of that state, (iii) the average length of a continuous
    episode of the state, and (iv) the continuation probability from a given period’s state to the
    next. For example, the backwardation state occurs 47% of the time with an average value of
    90 basis points. When a backwardation state occurs, its average length until turning into a
    contango state is 4.4 months. In contrast, recessions occur 28% of the time with an average
    length of 15.9 months. Note that we define expansions/recessions as 1/-1 and do not
    measure their severity. Finally, inflation is fairly symmetric with 48% of the time inflation
    lying above its long-run mean with an expected demeaned value of 0.7% per month (i.e.,

the data represents secondary market rates on the shortest term US bonds available until 1931 and T-bills thereafter.
A rolling one-year average of the short-term rate is used.
0.9% per month if not demeaned). Surprisingly, the average time inflation stays above its
long-run mean is just 2.9 months, since we are using raw unsmoothed CPI, which is noisy.
       One of the primary advantages of commodities over other asset classes is their
hedging benefits against inflation at short horizons. Moreover, commodities are potentially
sensitive to aggregate economic shocks as well as periods of low inventories and hedging
demands. This paper allows us to investigate these issues due to the particularly long
horizon which cover many business cycles, inflationary, and backwardated periods.


      III.     Commodity Index Returns and Aggregate Shocks
       Since returns on various commodity futures are not highly correlated over the
sample period, there are benefits to diversification. Following the literature (e.g., Bodie and
Rosansky (1980), GR (2006), EH (2006), and Rallis, Miffre and Fuertes (2013), among
others), we construct two indices on commodity futures using monthly rebalancing
procedures:
            An equally-weighted portfolio of the available commodity futures. At the
             beginning of each rebalancing period, the portfolios holds 1 N of the N
             commodities.
            An equal risk-weighted portfolio of the available commodity futures. At the
             beginning of the monthly rebalancing period, each commodity’s holding is
             weighted by 1 , where  i in the earlier period is the range volatility estimator
                            i

             of commodity i’s futures returns using daily data (defined in Section II.B), and
             in the later period is the realized daily returns volatility. In both cases the past
             year’s volatility is used. Assuming equal correlation across the commodities,
             this approach weights each commodity by their contribution to portfolio
             variance.

       EH suggest caution in interpreting equal-weighted commodity return indices. Their
argument is based on the fact that equal-weighted commodity indices are not investable at
large size because too much weight is placed on fringe commodities. Indeed, the success of
the S&P Goldman Sachs Commodity Index (S&P GSCI) is likely due to the index
comprising and weighting commodities by their worldwide production and liquidity in the
futures markets. While this point is well taken, it does not follow that equal-weighted
commodity return indices are necessarily inflating return premia relative to ones based on
production-based weighting schemes. In equity markets, equal-weighted indices place extra
     weight on small stocks, which likely demand excess return premia. There is no similarly
     documented result for commodities. Indeed, a perusal of Table 2 shows that 9 of 16
     commodities with less than 1% dollar weight in the S&P GSCI has lower mean returns over
     the sample than the equal-weighted index return.13
             This point aside, for the majority of the paper, the use of equal-weighted indices is
     meant to capture the average return across commodities at any given point in time so that
     we can relate commodity returns to the aggregate states of nature described in section II.C.
     In particular, our focus is less on whether an index is investable and more about describing
     the risk/return properties of the average commodity. Nevertheless, we return to the
     investability issue when we discuss asset allocation in section IV below.
             Figure 1A-B graphs the cumulative returns on each commodity index, including a
     breakdown of the return coming from the computed spot return and the realized roll yield
     (e.g., carry). The figures show the cumulative returns broken down by (i) excess spot
     returns and (ii) interest-rate adjusted carry (roll yield plus the short rate), as well as broken
     down by (i) spot returns and (ii) roll yield (with no short rate adjustment). The graph covers
     the sample period 1877-2015. Several observations are in order. First, the graphs for the
     returns on the equal-weighted and equal risk-weighted indices are qualitatively similar.
     Second, there are many periods of large swings in the commodity return index. Even
     though index returns are on average positive, long periods of flat or negative returns are not
     uncommon.
             Third, the breakdown of the returns on the commodity index depends very much on
     the allocation of the short rate.14 It is quite common to report the carry of the commodity,
     defined by  t*,T  rt*:T in equation (2). This is ex post equivalent to the roll yield of the

     commodity when futures contracts are rolled into the next contract as it reaches expiration.
     This metric, on average, has earned a little less than zero over the past 139 years. If the
     returns are decomposed into spot returns and carry, most of the returns come from spot.


   Of course, some historical commodities like lard, oats, pork and short ribs, and less liquid ones like platinum and
13

tin are less than 1% by construction as they are not represented in the GSCI.
   One concern might be that historical series on the short rate, especially pre U.S. T-bills in 1929, may not represent
14

the risk-free rate either in mean or volatility terms. Thus, any breakdown of spot returns and roll yields into the
mathematically equivalent excess spot return and interest rate-adjusted carry (roll yield plus short rate) may
exaggerate the role of short rates. This point is addressed in Table 4A and shown not to be the source of futures
return variation.
Subtracting cash rates from spot returns and adding it to carry leads to the decomposition
described in equations (2) and (3). Excess-of-cash spot returns have been positive, albeit
with decade long periods of negative drifts. Of course, futures returns have performed
reasonably well because interest-rate adjusted carry, defined as the convenience yield,  t*,T ,

has grown with the short rate of interest.


           A. Spot Versus Carry
       In order to provide precision for Figure 1, Table 4A reports the mean futures return,
breakdown between the excess spot return and interest rate adjusted carry yield, volatility of
the returns on the various commodity indices and similar statistics for the short rate of
interest. To coincide with GR (2006)/BGR (2015) and EH (2006, 2015) results are also
reported for geometric means. Because no high or low value is available for the index
return on any given day, the return volatility of the index series is calculated using monthly
returns.
       Throughout this section and the next, we will report results for the equal-weighted
index only, as results are nearly identical for the equal risk weighted index. Results for both
are included in the tables. In the full sample, the arithmetic mean returns are 4.8% for the
equal-weighted index, with a volatility of 17.6%. In terms of the breakdown into excess
spot returns versus the interest-rate adjusted carry, the excess spot return contributes 2.1%
versus a higher 3.9% from adjusted carry. Note that the final row of Table 4A also reports
the mean and volatility of the measured short-term interest rate over the full sample and
subperiods. For example, over the entire period, the mean of the short rate is 3.6% with
0.7% volatility. The statistics on the short rate highlight the above discussion of Figure 1
with respect to interest-rate adjusted carry and roll yields. Importantly, the volatility of the
short rate is seemingly unimportant for explaining variation of commodity futures returns.


       As documented earlier for the volatility of individual commodities, spot return
volatility is 18.2% versus adjusted carry volatility of 5.5%. The higher volatility of the spot
return supports the contention that commodity futures are fundamentally about commodity
prices, not just income or carry. To make sure that this is not just a short horizon
phenomenon, we also looked at horizons up to 10 years, which is possible given the long
data sample. The spot return volatility component of the index of futures returns also
dominates at these longer horizons, though interest rate adjusted carry does play a bigger
role as the horizon increases. These results are reported in Table 4B. For example,
compared to the volatility of futures returns of 17.6%, 22.0%, 22.3% and 22.9% at 1-
month, 1-year, 5-years and 10-years, respectively, the volatility of excess spot returns is
18.2%, 21.2%, 18.4% and 17.0% versus 5.5%, 8.7%, 13.2% and 15.3% respectively for
interest rate adjusted carry. As implied by the low volatility of the short-term interest rate,
these numbers barely change if we instead decompose futures returns into spot returns and
roll yields.
        Most interesting, however, is the relative performance of the index across the two
subsample periods, 1876-1945 and 1946-2015. The performance is lower in the former
subsample, that is, 3.8% versus 5.8%. The average excess spot returns are similar between
the two periods, and the performance differences are driven primarily by differences in the
adjusted carry yields, namely 3.2% versus 4.5%. The volatility of the index return is much
higher in the first period, 20.8%, versus 13.9%. It should be noted, however, that the
composition of the index changes through time, that is, the early period is mostly made up
of agricultural commodities and a few meats. The results of Table 2 suggest similar
volatility for the agricultural commodities in the two samples. A likely explanation for the
difference in index volatility across the two subsamples is the greater diversification during
the latter sample as more and more commodities join the index. To confirm this, Table 4A
documents the full sample and subsample results for a portfolio made up solely of grain
commodities. The commodities grain index has much more similar mean and volatility
return properties across the periods. For example, the mean and volatility of the return on
the equal-weighted index of grains is respectively 4.8% and 24.3% in the 1877-1945 period
compared to 4.1% and 20.1% in the 1946-2015 period.
        The above summary statistics for the index and its spot and carry components have
been represented in terms of arithmetic means. It is also common to report the geometric
mean of the series. Note that because the log portfolio return is not a weighted sum of the
log individual commodity returns, equation (2) no longer strictly holds. Like the arithmetic
mean, the performance of the index is lower in the earlier subsample, that is, 1.7% versus
4.9%. These differences are partially due to the higher volatility of the index in the early
sample as a result of the portfolio not being diversified. Indeed, the performance is more
similar when comparing the commodity grains indices, 1.9% in 1877-1945 versus 2.2% in
1946-2015.
       For comparison purposes, Table 4C provides the arithmetic mean excess return and
volatility of government bonds and aggregate stocks over the full sample and two
subsample periods. Consistent with many other studies, Table 4C displays the equity
premium puzzle. Across the samples, equity returns earn on average 6.7%, 6.1% and 7.4%
with corresponding volatility 17.0%, 19.3% and 14.4%. Similarly, long-term government
bonds earn excess returns, with means of 1.1%, 0.5% and 1.7% and volatility 5.5%, 3.1%
and 7.1% across 1877-2015, 1877-1945 and 1946-2015, respectively. Of course, similar to
commodities, when written in terms of geometric means, the excess return on U.S. stocks
drops to 5.4%, 4.3% and 6.5% respectively for the 1877-2015, 1877-1945 and 1946-2015
periods.


           B. Macro Performance of the Commodity Indices
       Section III.A presents behavior of the commodity index in different periods across
the entire sample. The various sample periods of course encounter different levels of
business cycle effects, inflationary episodes and commodity backwardation periods. It
seems worthwhile therefore to document the performance of the index conditional on these
macroeconomic events.
       Table 5 reports the mean and volatility of the returns on the commodity index for
six states: (i) backwardation, (ii) contango, (iii) peak-to-trough (recession), (iv) trough-to-
peak (expansion), (v) inflation (above its mean), and (vi) inflation (below its mean). For
each of these states, we also report the  of the index against the aggregate U.S. stock
market and U.S. government bonds. In brief, the table confirms that, over the 1877-2015
sample period, backwardation (as represented by the shape of the futures curve), inflation
and overall state of the economy are all sources of variation in expected returns.
       Consider first backwardated versus contango states. As in the previous section,
because the two indices are quite similar, we just discuss the equal-weighted index findings.
In periods with backwardation, the commodity index returns are higher (7.7% versus 2.1%)
with marginally lower betas (0.19 and -0.29 versus 0.28 and -0.20 against stocks and bonds,
respectively). While there is slightly higher volatility (18.0% versus 17.3%), the driving
force behind these results are much higher interest rate adjusted carry yields (12.2% versus
-3.6%). This may not be a surprise to the practitioner community. When the commodity
contracts are in backwardation, the ex post carry yield does turn out to be higher. The table
illustrates an additional phenomena, namely that the excess spot returns are lower in
backwardation than in contango (i.e., -2.9% versus 6.5% for spot returns in backwardation
versus contango). This is the well-documented relation between the mean reversion of spot
prices and shape of the commodity futures curve (e.g., Bessembinder (1992)). The novel
finding is that the result holds going back to the 1870s.
       With respect to inflation, the differential in mean returns between high and low
inflation states is dramatic, 14.8% versus -4.7%. This is especially the case given that the
volatility of the index returns is essentially the same in these two states. Over the 139 year
period, there are many examples of low and high inflation periods. The table confirms the
standard intuition that commodity returns do well (poorly) in high inflation (low inflation)
periods. Interestingly, the driver of these returns is spot commodity price returns (10.4%
versus -5.8%) with interest rate adjusted carry yields only marginally different (5.5% versus
2.3%). There is a long literature, mostly in fixed income, which argues for the existence of
a risk premium associated with inflation risk. The strong performance of commodities in
high inflation periods provides one potential clue for why commodities might offer lower
returns than stocks and bonds. Investors value the inflation hedge and therefore do not
require as much compensation as other asset classes. Commodity index betas also seem to
be lower in high inflation states, which provides further diversification value to
commodities.
       The final macro aggregate is the state of the economy as measured by the NBER
dating committee. Here the long sample period is especially valuable because it allows for
many more recessions than more recent data allows. The results too are fairly telling and
are again contrary to the idea that commodity futures are not driven by the underlying
commodity spot price. In an expansion versus a recession, mean returns on the index are
9.4% versus -7.4% with somewhat higher volatility in the recession period. While the
interest rate adjusted carry yields are similar irrespective of the economic state (4.3% versus
2.9%), the mean excess spot returns differ sharply, namely 6.3% versus -9.0%. In terms of
     systematic risk, the equity betas are similar (0.23 in both states) while the bond betas are
     somewhat different (-0.27 and -0.15). The fact that the equity betas are positive and there is
     a distinct difference in return performance in expansions and recessions strongly suggests
     that the sensitivity to economic state is a source of risk premium.
             The results from Table 5 support the impact of aggregate effects on the returns of
     commodity indices. There are two things, however, that obscure these findings. First, there
     may be correlation between the states of nature that lead to an omitted variables problem in
     interpreting the results of Table 5. For example, the average inflation rate in recessions
     versus expansions is -1.27% versus 3.63%, respectively. Second, even if the states of nature
     are uncorrelated, such as backwardation and the business cycle, it may be the case that there
     is some spurious correlation. For example, while the infamous dust bowl of the 1930s (and
     ensuing backwardation of grain futures) and the Great Depression were contemporaneous,
     few historians would argue that the drought was a major factor of the Great Depression. To
     address these issues, we perform a series of multivariate regressions of the return on the
     commodity index on inflation, backwardation/contango and the economic state.15
             These results are reported in Table 6 for monthly returns. Consider again the equal-
     weighted commodity index return. The coefficients on demeaned values of the business
     cycle, carry and inflation are all positive and statistically significant with respective t-
     statistics of 3.08, 1.95 and 10.70 (the equal risk weighted index has similar t-stats, with a
     higher value of 3.11 on carry). The R-squared is a reasonable 8.0%. The coefficient on
     demeaned inflation is 1.27 which suggests an almost one-for-one relation with commodity
     index returns. The coefficient on the business cycle and level of backwardation (i.e., carry)
     are 0.0503 (i.e. 5.03%) and 0.21 respectively, consistent with the breakdown of mean
     returns by individual states in Table 5. Note that the positive intercept in Table 6 is partly
     due to the fact that expansions last much longer than recessions.
              Table 6 also extends the current literature on asset returns at long versus short
     horizons to commodity indices. If futures returns are not autocorrelated, then the benefit of
     long horizons must derive from the properties of the regressors. Intuitively, in measuring
     the state of the business or inflationary cycle, monthly data may not be sufficient to capture

  With respect to the economic state, we demean the 1/-1 measure for expansions and recessions. This way, all the
15

state variables are effectively mean zero. This will not impact the coefficients on the economic state but does change
the intercept.
     the state. Therefore, we also investigate 1-year and 5-year horizons.16 Gorton and
     Rouwenhorst (2005) and Erb and Harvey (2006) also perform such an analysis, but are
     greatly constrained by the number of non-overlapping 5-year periods. Here, because of the
     139-year sample, we are able to better tie down the relation between commodity index
     returns and macro aggregates.
             Consistent with the above intuition, at the one-year horizon, the coefficient on
     business cycles stays at a similar value, 0.0470 (i.e. 4.7%), while the coefficient on inflation
     increases to 1.76, with a jump in the R-squared to 31%. The drop in the coefficient on carry
     to 0.12 reflects the fact that the current state of backwardation/contango has less relation to
     commodity returns in the far future.17 The large increase in R-squared is interesting. The
     one-year horizon likely captures the business cycle and inflationary cycle better than the
     one-month horizon. This point further highlights the benefit of using a long sample. The
     results using a 5-year horizon confirms this intuition. Only inflation remains a significant
     state variable for explaining commodity returns, albeit with a healthy R-squared of 37%.
     The reason business cycles no longer explain commodity index returns is likely because
     recessions are generally shorter than five years.


             C. Return Predictability of the Commodity Indices


             Section III.B above ran a contemporaneous regression of the commodity return
     index on the NBER business cycle, inflation and ex-ante carry. There is also a considerable
     literature documenting commodity return predictability. In particular, the focus has been on
     predictive variables for individual commodities based on the investment styles of
     momentum, value and carry.18 One of the disadvantages of using investment styles is that
     there is not a sufficient time series to capture these styles. Two exceptions are Hurst, Ooi
16
   Regressions at 1-year and 5-year horizons (in both Table 6 and Table 8) are on overlapping returns at monthly
frequency. A Newey–West estimator is used to calculate t-statistics.
17
   These results are based on carry averaged over the previous month. If we instead use carry averaged over the
previous 12 months, for the equal risk-weighted commodity index, the coefficients on the business cycle, carry and
inflation are 0.0499, 0.07, and 1.72 respectively, with t-statistics of 2.85, 0.38 and 6.55. The R-squared is 31%.
Similar findings for carry hold true at the 5-year horizon.
18
   For commodities, see, for example, GR (2006), EH (2006), Miffre and Rallis (2007), Fuertes, Miffre and Rallis
(2010), Moskowitz, Ooi and Pedersen (2012), Asness, Moskowitz and Pedersen (2013), Koijen, Moskowitz,
Pedersen and Vrugt (2013), and Miffre and Fernandez-Perez (2015), among others.
and Pedersen (2012), and Geczy and Samanov (2015) who document momentum across
many asset classes, including commodities. Nevertheless, measures of carry and value
remain elusive. In this section, we combine signals on carry, momentum and value together
in order to investigate the predictability of the commodity return index using investment
styles over the 1877-2015 sample period.
       We run a regression of monthly, annual and 5-year returns on the equal weighted
commodity index on measures of carry, momentum and value. To coincide with the
existing literature, we measure momentum of the index as its previous 12-month return;
value as the negative 48-month return 12-months ago (i.e., long-term reversal); and carry as
the backwardated/contango value of the commodity index described previously. The unique
aspect of this regression is that it dates back to 1882. Of some note, the long time series
allows us almost 30 independent observations on the long-term reversal, our measure of
value. The results are reported in Table 7, panel A. Consider first the monthly returns. The
predicted R2 is 2% with all three coefficients on momentum (0.25), value (0.08) and carry
(0.28) being of the right sign with t-statistics respectively of 3.31, 1.78 and 2.44. The
annual returns produce similar results albeit with smaller (and less significant) coefficients.
The R2, however, is approximately double, at 4%. There is little predictability at the long 5-
year horizon.
       To test if these results are robust across aggregate states, we consider the predictive
regression model of panel A in our six states of nature. Table 7, panel B, provides estimates
from a regression of the realized monthly commodity index returns in the six states against
the model of expected returns (using carry, momentum and value). The R2s are similar to
those of panel A. Though there is clearly variation in the coefficients, all the coefficients on
carry, momentum and value are positive, irrespective of the state of nature. Approximately
half of the estimates are statistically significant at conventional levels, despite the smaller
sample size by construction.




      IV.       Using Commodities for Asset Allocation
             Table 5 reports s between the commodity index and the stock and bond markets in
     different states of nature. These findings suggest that the returns on stocks, commodities
     and bonds have responded differently to economic shocks over the last 139 years. Given
     these results, it seems worthwhile performing an asset allocation exercise to better
     understand how a portfolio of commodities, stocks and bonds might perform in different
     aggregate economic states.
             EH argue that asset allocation exercises like this may be open to misinterpretation.
     They provide evidence that the size of the commodity futures market is small relative to the
     size of equity and bond markets. In this sense, from an economy-wide asset allocation
     perspective, even if the evidence pointed to a large position in commodity futures, the
     aggregate investor could not hold such a position. The argument suggests that the resulting
     asset allocation should be interpreted from an individual investor perspective, and not
     across the economy as a whole.19
             For the analysis to follow, we consider an individual investor who is considering
     allocating across an equal-weighted index of commodity futures, the aggregate U.S. stock
     market and the U.S. government bond market. We make no pretense about the size of such
     an allocation or whether such allocations were equally feasible today versus 140 years ago.
     The long sample period is used so we can exploit the wide variation in aggregate economic
     states. We further assume that the realized mean, volatility and correlation across these
     asset classes were known ex ante and constant over time. Figure 2A-C graphs the mean-
     variance investment opportunity set for these assets in the full sample and two subsample
     periods. We are limiting our analysis to U.S. stocks and U.S. bonds, so the results do not
     reflect a global portfolio. Even though this period represents a good ex post outcome for
     U.S. stocks (e.g., Goetzmann and Jorion (1999)), the optimal portfolio still includes
     considerable holdings in commodities and government bonds.



19
   As an aside, the size of equity markets and government bond markets does not negate the importance of
commodities. Presumably, the value of government bonds depends somewhat on the ability of the government to
pay down its debt which in turn depends on the resources owned by the government and its tax base. These natural
resources especially are tied to commodities. Similarly, a number of equity sectors, such as energy, agribusiness,
mining, etc…, represent present values of future commodity payouts. In other words, an investment in long
commodity futures can be likened to an equity claim on a company tied to commodity-based assets. Commodity
futures are just one, albeit small way, to get exposure to the underlying spot commodity market.
        Consider the full sample period, 1877-2015, described by Figure 2A. Several
observations are in order. First, investments solely in government bonds, stocks or
commodities all lie far from portfolios combining these three assets. While commodity
futures lie far from the optimal portfolio, this does not imply commodity futures should not
be held in some amount. Second, to this point, the optimal portfolio allocates 17% to
commodities, 29% to stocks and 54% to government bonds. While both commodity futures
and stocks do poorly in recessions, government bonds do well, providing a hedge. Third,
commodity futures are the only assets that perform well during inflationary periods.
Moreover, their strong performance during backwardation provides some idiosyncratic
return relative to stocks and bonds. Finally, an equal-weighted portfolio across the three
asset classes performs fairly close to the optimal portfolio when combined with holdings in
short-term bonds. Moreover, a 54%/36%/10% portfolio of stocks, bonds and commodity
futures outperforms a 60%/40% allocation of just stocks and bonds.
        The two subsamples provide contrasting results. The latter sample implies optimal
holdings of 29% to commodity futures, 31% to stocks and 39% to long-term government
bonds and therefore is close to an equal-weighted index. In contrast, the early period
provides little weight to commodity futures (i.e., 7%), 21% to stocks, and 72% to long-term
government bonds. The early sample includes a greater fraction of recessions and massive
deflation during large parts of the late 19th century, both of which are not particularly good
states for commodities. Because long-term government bonds do well in these periods, their
allocation is higher. However, in both subsample periods, a 54%/36%/10% portfolio of
stocks, bonds and commodity futures outperforms a 60%/40% allocation of just stocks and
bonds
        In order to see why commodity futures are important to hold in a portfolio, Table
8A reports the mean, variance, and Sharpe ratio of (a) each individual asset class, (b) an
equal-weighted-portfolio of the assets, (c) a 60/40 portfolio consisting of 60% stocks and
40% bonds, (d) a 54/36/10 portfolio consisting of stocks, bonds and commodity futures
respectively, and (e) the optimal mean-variance portfolio. These are measured in the full
sample, and conditional on the six states: (i) backwardation, (ii) contango, (iii) peak-to-
trough (recession), (iv) trough-to-peak (expansion), (v) inflation (above its mean), and (vi)
inflation (below its mean). By construction, the optimal mean-variance portfolio has the
highest Sharpe ratio unconditionally over the entire period.
        First, consider the mean return of the various assets and asset portfolios across the
different states of nature. All the assets and portfolios, except long-term government bonds,
have negative returns during recessions. This is precisely why long-term governments are
so valuable to hold in a portfolio. Commodities tend to do poorly in low inflation periods
and recessions in contrast to stocks that perform well most everywhere except recessions.
Of course, commodity futures do particularly well in inflationary and backwardated
environments, providing a motivation for why commodity futures help the risk/return
profile of a portfolio.
        Second, volatility is similar across many of the states, with arguably higher levels
during recessions. The cross-sectional differences, however, are large. Return volatility for
bonds is much less than stock and commodity futures return volatility. This leads to much
lower volatility for the portfolio with a high weight in bonds, albeit at much lower mean
returns than the other portfolios.
        Finally, the pattern in Sharpe ratios of the four portfolios across the different
aggregate states is quite telling. In the full sample, the optimal portfolio, equally weighted
portfolio, 60/40 portfolio and 54/36/10 portfolio have Sharpe ratios of 0.48, 0.45, 0.42 and
0.45, respectively, showcasing the robustness of the equal weighting. In backwardated
states, the equal weighted portfolio performs best with a Sharpe of 0.49 while in contango
states the 60/40 stock-bond portfolio does marginally better than the optimal portfolio (with
a Sharpe of 0.52 versus 0.51). In high inflation states, a portfolio 100% in commodity
futures has the highest Sharpe ratio, i.e., 0.84, though an equal-weighted portfolio has a
similar Sharpe ratio, i.e., 0.83. In low inflation states, the opposite is true, with commodity
futures earning -0.27. In expansions, the equal-weight and optimal portfolios have a Sharpe
ratio of 0.92 yet -0.42 and -0.33, respectively in recessions. The only portfolio to earn a
positive Sharpe ratio is one with 100% weight in government bonds with a Sharpe ratio
0.23 in recessions and 0.20 in expansions.
        Another way to evaluate these four portfolios is to consider the consistency of their
performance through time. Table 8B documents seven independent 20-year periods from
1877 through 2015. In terms of realized Sharpe ratios, the optimal portfolio outperforms in
two of the periods, equal-weight in three periods, and 60/40 in two periods. The 54/36/10
portfolio outperforms 60/40 in 4 of the 7 cases, and is only dominated by the optimal
portfolio in 3 of the 7 cases.


        V.     Conclusion

        This paper studies the return properties of commodity futures over a uniquely long
sample period from 1877-2015. The long sample allows us to better identify aggregate
states of nature related to business cycles, inflation episodes, and backwardation/contango
periods. We are able to address the recent debate on whether commodities improve asset
allocation. We provide evidence that:

       Commodity futures index returns have been positive and significant since 1877.
        While the performance has come both from the excess spot portion of returns as
        well as the interest rate adjusted carry portion of returns (i.e., roll yield plus short
        rate or the convenience yield), the carry component has earned the lion’s share.
       Commodity futures returns vary significantly across aggregate states. Most of the
        variation across these states and through time comes from variation of spot returns
        and therefore commodity futures are “a play on commodity prices”. Moreover, this
        sensitivity to business cycles and inflation episodes offer support to the existence of
        risk premiums in commodities markets.
       Commodity index returns are somewhat predictable at 1-month horizons, and less so
        at 1-year and 5-year horizons using investment styles of carry, value and
        momentum. Interestingly, these forecasted returns tend to be robust predictors
        across aggregate states of nature like business cycles and inflation episodes,
        suggesting investment styles are related to fundamentals.
       Unlike stocks and bonds, commodity futures offer a hedge against inflation and
        provide idiosyncratic return in backwardated states, thus providing justification for
        including them in a diversified portfolio of assets as illustrated in a simple asset
        allocation exercise.
References

   Alizadeh, Sassan, Brandt, Michael W., and Diebold, Frank X. (2002), Range-Based
   Estimation of Stochastic Volatility Models, Journal of Finance, 57, 1047–1091.

   Asness, Clifford S., Moskowitz, Tobias J. and Lasse Heje Pedersen, 2013, Value and
   Momentum Everywhere, Journal of Finance 68: 3, 929-985.

   Beckers, Stan, 1983, Variance of Security Price Returns Based on High, Low, and Closing
   Prices, Journal of Business 56, 97-112.

   Bhardwaj, Geetesh, Gorton, Gary and Geert Rouwenhorst, 2015, Facts and Fantasies about
   Commodity Futures Ten Years Later, Yale ICF Working Paper No. 15-18.

   Bodie, Zvi and Victor Rosansky. 1980. "Diversification Returns And Asset Contributions",
   Financial Analysts Journal, (May/June): 26-32.

   Boudoukh, Jacob and Matthew Richardson, 1993, Stock Returns and Inflation: A Long-
   Horizon Perspective, American Economic Review 83: 5, 1346-1355.

   Boudoukh, Jacob, Richardson, Matthew, Shen, YuQing and Robert F. Whitelaw, 2007, Do
   Asset Prices Reflect Fundamentals? Freshly Squeezed Evidence from the OJ Market,
   Journal of Financial Economics 83: 2, 397-412.

   Brandt, Michael W., and Diebold, Frank X., 2006, A No-Arbitrage Approach to Range-
   Based Estimation of Return Covariances and Correlations, Journal of Business, 79, 61–73.

   Cootner, Paul H. "Returns to speculators: Telser versus Keynes." The Journal of Political
   Economy (1960): 396-404.

   Erb, Claude and Campbell R. Harvey, 2006, “The Tactical and Strategic Value of
   Commodity Futures,” Financial Analysts Journal, March/April.

   Erb, Claude B., and Campbell R. Harvey, 2016, "Conquering Misperceptions about
   Commodity Futures Investing." Financial Analysts Journal, 72: 4: 26-35.

   Fama, Eugene F., and Kenneth R. French. 1987. "Commodity Futures Prices: Some
   Evidence on Forecast Power, Premiums and the Theory of Storage”, Journal of Business,
   60, 55-73.

   Fuertes, Ana_Maria, Miffre, Joelle and George Rallis, 2010, Tactical allocation in
   commodity futures markets: Combining momentum and term structure signals. Journal of
   Banking & Finance, 34: 10, 2530-2548.

   Geczy, Christopher and Mikhail Samonov, 2015, 215 Years of Global Multi-Asset
   Momentum: 1800-2014, working paper.
Goetzmann, William N., 1993, Patterns in Three Centuries of Stock Market Prices, Journal
of Business 66, 249-270.

Goetzmann, William N. and Philippe Jorion, 1999, Global Stock Markets in the Twentieth
Century, The Journal of Finance, 54: 3, 953-980.

Goetzmann, William N., Li, Lingfeng and Geert Rouwenhorst, 1995, Long-Term Global
Market Correlations, Journal of Business 78: 1, 1-38.

Gorton, Gary, and Geert Rouwenhorst. 2005. “Facts and Fantasies about Commodity
Futures.” Financial Analysts Journal, 62: 2, 47-68.

Gorton, Gary B., Hayashi, Fumio, and Rouwenhorst, K. Geert, 2013, The Fundamentals of
Commodity Futures Returns, Review of Finance, 17, 35-105.

Greer, Robert J. 2000. "The Nature of Commodity Index Returns." Journal of Alternative
Investments, (Summer): 45-52.

Hicks, John, 1939. Value and Capital. Oxford: Clarendon Press.

Hurst, Brian, Ooi, Yao Hua, and Pedersen, Lasse H., 2012, A Century of Evidence on
Trend-Following, Investing, AQR Capital Management.

Ibbotson, Roger G., and Peng Chen. 2003. “Long-Run Stock Returns: Participating in the
Real Economy”, Financial Analysts Journal, vol. 59, no. 1: 88-98.

Jensen, Gerald R., Robert R. Johnson, and Jeffrey M. Mercer. 2002. "Tactical Asset
Allocation and Commodity Futures", Journal of Portfolio Management, (Summer): 100-
111.

Kaldor, Nicholas. "Speculation and economic stability." The Review of Economic Studies
7.1 (1939): 1-27.

Keynes, John M. 1930. A Treatise on Money, Volume 2. London: Macmillan.

Koijen, Ralph, Tobias Moskowitz, Lasse H. Pedersen, and Evert Vrugt (2013), “Carry,”
working paper.

Miffre, Joelle, and Georgios Rallis, 2007, Momentum Strategies in Commodity Futures Markets.
Journal of Banking and Finance 31(6), 1863-1886.

Moskowitz, Tobias J., Ooi, Yao Hua, and Pedersen, Lasse Heje, 2012, Time Series
Momentum, Journal of Financial Economics 104, 228-250.

Parkinson, Michael, 1980, The Extreme Value Method for Estimating the Variance of the
Rate of Return,”Journal of Business, 53, 61–65.
Rallis, Georgios, Joelle Miffre and Ana-Maria Fuertes, 2013, Strategic and Tactical Roles
of Enhanced Commodity Indices, The Journal of Futures Markets 33: 10, 965-992.

Roll, Richard, 1984, Orange Juice and Weather, American Economic Review, 74, 861-880.

Shen, Qian, Szakmary, Andrew C. and Subhash C. Sharma, 2007, An Examination of
Momentum Strategies in Commodity Markets, Journal of Futures Markets 27: 3, 227-256.

Shiller, Robert J. Irrational exuberance. Princeton university press, 2015.

Siegel, Jeremy, J., 1992, The Equity Premium: Stock and Bond Returns Since 1802,
Financial Analysts Journal 48, 28-38.

USDA, 1997, Usual Planting and Harvesting Dates for U.S. Field Crops, NASS,
Agricultural Handbook Number 628.

Warren, George F. and Frank A. Pearson, 1935, Gold and Prices, New York: John Wiley
and Sons.

Working, Holbrook. "The theory of price of storage." The American Economic Review
(1949): 1254-1262.
                                                   Table 1
                                   Description of Commodity Futures Data

      Table 1 provides a description of commodity futures data availability and summary facts regarding
      the quality of the price data, including the number of days without data and proportion of days with
      zero moves (which only includes days on which contract prices of all maturities do not move). The
      earliest start date is January 1877 for certain commodities, including corn, wheat, oats, lard, and
      pork.
                                                                 Longest Period
                                                    Number of     without Data    % of Days w/o    % Days of
                      Start Date        End Date    Contracts        (Days)            Data       Zero Moves


ALUMINUM             1992-07-31        2015-12-31     N/A              -                -           0.0%
BRENTOIL             1988-06-23        2015-12-31     415              -                -           2.4%
CATTLE               1964-11-30        2015-12-31     331              -                -           3.4%
COCOA                1965-12-30        2015-12-31     261              -                -           4.2%
COFFEE               1972-08-16        2015-12-31     235              -                -           4.2%
COMEXCOPPER          1988-07-29        2015-12-31     345              -                -           3.8%
COPPER               1993-09-30        2015-12-31     N/A              -                -           0.0%
CORN                 1877-01-02        2015-12-31     855             456             4.2%          2.1%
COTTON               1925-01-02        2015-12-31     450            2739            16.9%          3.0%
CRUDE                1983-03-30        2015-12-31     469              -                -           3.8%
FEEDERCATTLE         1971-11-30        2015-12-31     354              -                -           3.4%
GASOIL               1981-04-06        2015-12-31     487              -                -           2.6%
GOLD                 1975-01-02        2015-12-31     493              -                -           3.9%
HEATOIL              1978-11-15        2015-12-31     489              -                -           3.9%
HOGS                 1966-02-28        2015-12-31     379              -                -           3.5%
KANSASWHEAT          1966-05-16        2015-12-31     262              -                -           3.5%
LARD                 1877-01-02        1951-12-31     569             619            10.9%          1.5%
LEAD                 1995-02-28        2015-12-31     N/A              -                -           0.0%
LONDONCOCOA          1968-01-02        2015-12-31     255              -                -           3.2%
NATGAS               1990-04-03        2015-12-31     463              -                -           3.8%
NICKEL               1994-10-31        2015-12-31     N/A              -                -           0.0%
NYMEXPLATINUM        1964-01-14        2015-12-31     368              -                -           4.1%
OATS                 1877-01-02        2015-12-31     803             13              4.1%          1.6%
PLATINUM             1992-02-28        2015-12-31     N/A              -                -           0.0%
PORK                 1877-01-02        1922-03-27     337             116             4.3%          1.4%
SHORTRIBS            1885-01-02        1929-08-14     292             50             11.6%          2.2%
SILVER               1963-06-12        2015-12-31     627              -                -           4.3%
SOYBEANS             1937-01-04        2015-12-31     504            1599             7.7%          3.3%
SOYMEAL              1951-08-29        2015-12-31     532              -              0.0%          3.8%
SOYOIL               1950-07-17        2015-12-31     535              -                -           3.4%
SUGAR                1965-12-30        2015-12-31     266              -                -           4.2%
TIN                  1995-02-28        2015-12-31     N/A              -                -           0.0%
UNLEADED             1984-12-03        2015-12-31     420              -                -           3.8%
WHEAT                1877-01-02        2015-12-31     788            1055             4.4%          1.9%
ZINC                 1992-10-30        2015-12-31     N/A              -                -           0.0%
                                                                                     Table 2
                                                                  Individual Commodity Futures Returns: Summary

   Table 2 documents the arithmetic mean and volatility for each futures return on the commodities over the full and two subsample periods (1877-1945 and
   1946-2015). Table 2 breaks down the commodity futures return into two components: (i) its excess spot return, and (ii) its interest rate adjusted carry (i.e., its
   roll yield plus the short interest rate). Because only high and low prices are available during the early part of the sample, before we have closing prices we
                                                                                                                          2

                                                                                                ln   , where H and L represent the daily high and low prices, and N the
                                                                                               N
   use the range volatility estimator of Parkinson (1980), i.e., ˆ t2,range              1             1       H t i
                                                                                           N          4 ln 2     Lt i
                                                                                               i 1
   number of days during the period. Cross-section averages for both arithmetic and geometric mean returns are also provided.

                                                Full sample                                                 1877-1945                                                1946-2015
                              Excess     Interest                       Interest Rate        Excess Interest                     Interest Rate        Excess Interest                     Interest Rate
                              Spot         Rate             Excess Spot Adjusted              Spot    Rate            Excess Spot Adjusted             Spot    Rate            Excess Spot Adjusted
                       Return Return    Adjusted Return       Return        Carry     Return Return Adjusted Return     Return       Carry     Return Return Adjusted Return     Return       Carry
                       Mean Mean       Carry Mean Volatility Volatility   Volatility  Mean Mean Carry Mean Volatility Volatility   Volatility  Mean Mean Carry Mean Volatility Volatility   Volatility

ALUMINUM               -3.3%   -0.2%      -3.0%    20.1%     19.1%       1.4%                                                                 -3.3%   -0.2%    -3.0%     20.1%     19.1%       1.4%
BRENTOIL                9.8%    4.8%      5.1%     31.6%     30.5%       5.3%                                                                 9.8%     4.8%    5.1%      31.6%     30.5%       5.3%
CATTLE                  5.0%    0.3%      5.4%     15.4%     18.2%       8.4%                                                                 5.0%     0.3%    5.4%      15.4%     18.2%       8.4%
COCOA                   5.6%    3.8%      2.3%     28.6%     31.2%       7.7%                                                                 5.6%     3.8%    2.3%      28.6%     31.2%       7.7%
COFFEE                  5.3%    3.9%      2.1%     33.3%     37.7%       9.8%                                                                 5.3%     3.9%    2.1%      33.3%     37.7%       9.8%
COMEXCOPPER             9.4%    3.4%      6.1%     26.5%     26.2%       3.8%                                                                 9.4%     3.4%    6.1%      26.5%     26.2%       3.8%
COPPER                  8.7%    4.7%      4.0%     25.8%     25.3%       2.5%                                                                 8.7%     4.7%    4.0%      25.8%     25.3%       2.5%
CORN                    2.3%    1.5%      2.1%     19.8%     27.1%      12.2%     5.4%    3.0%            4.4%        19.3%   30.1%   15.3%   -0.6%    0.1%    -0.1%     20.3%     23.9%       8.3%
COTTON                  3.1%    0.7%      3.8%     20.2%     26.1%      13.9%     -0.1%   -0.9%           1.1%        17.6%   27.8%    5.5%   3.9%     1.1%    4.4%      20.7%     25.7%      15.3%
CRUDE                   7.7%    2.3%      5.7%     33.5%     33.0%       6.8%                                                                 7.7%     2.3%    5.7%      33.5%     33.0%       6.8%
FEEDERCATTLE            3.7%    0.1%      3.8%     15.2%     17.3%       5.2%                                                                 3.7%     0.1%    3.8%      15.2%     17.3%       5.2%
GASOIL                  6.8%    1.0%      6.2%     29.2%     30.9%       6.3%                                                                 6.8%     1.0%    6.2%      29.2%     30.9%       6.3%
GOLD                    1.0%    1.5%      -0.5%    19.3%     19.4%       0.8%                                                                 1.0%     1.5%    -0.5%     19.3%     19.4%       0.8%
HEATOIL                 8.0%    3.1%      5.6%     30.1%     32.6%       8.5%                                                                 8.0%     3.1%    5.6%      30.1%     32.6%       8.5%
HOGS                    3.5%    1.0%      5.8%     23.7%     30.9%      18.2%                                                                 3.5%     1.0%    5.8%      23.7%     30.9%      18.2%
KANSASWHEAT             1.4%    0.3%      1.3%     22.8%     25.4%       6.9%                                                                 1.4%     0.3%    1.3%      22.8%     25.4%       6.9%
LARD                   -1.6%   -0.5%      -0.2%    16.0%     25.7%       9.5%     -1.6%   -0.3%          -0.3%        15.5%   24.5%   9.7%    -2.0%   -3.1%    1.8%      20.8%     38.3%       7.9%
LEAD                    6.8%    6.2%      0.5%     30.5%     28.3%       2.2%                                                                 6.8%     6.2%    0.5%      30.5%     28.3%       2.2%
LONDONCOCOA             7.0%    4.3%      3.3%     25.7%     31.6%       8.8%                                                                 7.0%     4.3%    3.3%      25.7%     31.6%       8.8%
NATGAS                 -8.3%   12.4%     -16.2%    45.1%     53.5%      20.3%                                                                 -8.3%   12.4%   -16.2%     45.1%     53.5%      20.3%
NICKEL                  7.2%    4.8%      2.3%     35.3%     34.8%       2.2%                                                                 7.2%     4.8%    2.3%      35.3%     34.8%       2.2%
NYMEXPLATINUM           6.3%    3.1%      3.2%     25.5%     26.9%       3.3%                                                                 6.3%     3.1%    3.2%      25.5%     26.9%       3.3%
OATS                    2.6%    2.1%      2.1%     22.7%     30.6%      13.8%      4.1%   2.9%            3.6%        20.2%   32.9%   16.6%   1.1%     1.2%    0.6%      24.9%     28.3%      10.2%
PLATINUM                8.1%    3.7%      4.3%     23.2%     22.6%       1.9%                                                                 8.1%     3.7%    4.3%      23.2%     22.6%       1.9%
PORK                    3.5%    4.2%      1.0%     16.7%     32.0%      14.2%      3.5%   4.2%            1.0%        16.7%   32.0%   14.2%
SHORTRIBS               9.4%    1.9%      9.4%     14.2%     27.5%      14.7%      9.4%   1.9%            9.4%        14.2%   27.5%   14.7%
SILVER                  3.2%    4.5%      -1.3%    28.3%     31.1%       1.4%                                                                  3.2%   4.5%     -1.3%     28.3%     31.1%       1.4%
SOYBEANS                7.8%    1.7%      7.2%     20.8%     26.9%      10.7%     20.0%   9.9%           13.1%        15.8%   32.5%   16.5%    6.7%   1.0%      6.7%     21.1%     26.4%      10.1%
SOYMEAL                 9.6%    2.0%      8.3%     24.4%     28.8%       9.0%                                                                  9.6%   2.0%      8.3%     24.4%     28.8%       9.0%
SOYOIL                  6.6%    1.1%      5.7%     24.2%     28.4%       6.4%                                                                  6.6%   1.1%      5.7%     24.2%     28.4%       6.4%
SUGAR                   4.9%    7.6%      -1.5%    38.2%     43.2%      11.5%                                                                  4.9%   7.6%     -1.5%     38.2%     43.2%      11.5%
TIN                     7.0%    4.5%      2.5%     25.8%     24.3%       1.3%                                                                  7.0%   4.5%      2.5%     25.8%     24.3%       1.3%
UNLEADED               15.5%    4.9%     11.9%     32.3%     36.4%      11.1%                                                                 15.5%   4.9%     11.9%     32.3%     36.4%      11.1%
WHEAT                   1.5%    0.5%      1.8%     21.3%     25.5%      10.8%      2.8%   0.9%            3.1%        20.2%   26.7%   12.2%    0.2%   0.2%      0.6%     22.3%     24.3%       9.4%
ZINC                   -1.3%    1.5%      -2.7%    27.2%     25.4%       2.0%                                                                 -1.3%   1.5%     -2.7%     27.2%     25.4%       2.0%
CS Avg of Arith Mean    5.0%    2.9%      2.8%                                     5.4%   2.7%            4.4%                                 4.7%   2.7%      2.6%
CS Avg of Geom Mean     1.1%   -1.4%      2.5%                                     2.2%   -1.5%           3.7%                                 0.7%   -1.6%     2.3%
                                                                        Table 3
                                                             Description of States of Nature

Table 3 describes six states of nature over the period 1877-2015: (i) average backwardation across commodity futures, (ii) average contango across
commodity futures, (iii) high inflation (inflation above its mean), (iv) low inflation (inflation below its mean), (v) expansion (trough-to-peak based
on NBER dating), and (vi) recession (i.e., peak-to-trough based on NBER dating). The weighted average backwardation and contango are
provided for both an equal dollar weighted and equal risk weighted index as the weights differ across these two portfolios. The inflation values are
in excess of the mean inflation over the period. The table provides summary statistics for the states, in particular, (i) the number of months in the
state, (ii) the average level of that state, (iii) the average length of a continuous episode of the state, and (iv) the probability of being in a state
conditional on having been in that state 1, 6, and 12 months ago.


                                                   Equal Dollar Weighted     Equal Risk Weighted
                                                                                                    High Inflation Low Inflation Expansion Recession
                                                  Backwardation Contango   Backwardation Contango

               Number of Months                       791          876         778          882         808           859         1207       460
            Average Level of the State                0.9%        -0.7%        0.8%        -0.6%       0.7%          -0.6%
  Average Length of Continuous Episode (Months)       4.4           4.9        4.1           4.6        2.9           3.1         40.3       15.9
        Conditional Probability (1 Month)             77%          80%         75%          78%         66%           68%         98%        94%
        Conditional Probability (6 Months)            57%          61%         55%          60%         59%           61%         86%        62%
       Conditional Probability (12 Months)            66%          69%         66%          70%         63%           65%         75%        32%
                                                          Table 4 - Commodity Index and Aggregate Asset Returns

                                                                Table 4A - Commodity Index Returns: Summary
Table 4A reports the mean, breakdown between the excess spot return and adjusted carry yield (i.e., roll yield plus short interest rate), and volatility of the
returns on equal dollar- and risk-weighted commodity futures indices, for both arithmetic and geometric means. Standard errors for the means are reported
in parenthesis. The table also reports the same metrics for a commodity grain futures index.


                                          Full Sample                                                   1877-1945                                                  1946-2015
                                   Interest                                                     Interest                                                   Interest
                      Excess         Rate                         Interest Rate        Excess     Rate                       Interest Rate        Excess     Rate                       Interest Rate
                       Spot        Adjusted            Excess Spot Adjusted             Spot    Adjusted          Excess Spot Adjusted             Spot    Adjusted          Excess Spot Adjusted
               Return Return        Carry       Return   Return       Carry     Return Return    Carry     Return   Return       Carry     Return Return    Carry     Return   Return       Carry
               Mean Mean            Mean Volatility Volatility      Volatility  Mean Mean        Mean Volatility Volatility    Volatility  Mean Mean        Mean Volatility Volatility    Volatility
 Arithmetic Mean:
 Equal-         4.8%   2.1%          3.9%     17.6%     18.2%        5.5%      3.8%   2.2%        3.2%     20.8%    21.5%       6.8%       5.8%   2.0%       4.5%     13.9%     14.2%       3.8%
 Weight        (1.5%) (1.5%)        (0.5%)                                    (2.5%) (2.6%)      (0.8%)                                   (1.7%) (1.7%)     (0.5%)
 Equal Risk-    4.5%     2.0%        3.6%     16.8%     17.3%        5.4%      3.7%   2.4%        2.8%     20.1%    20.7%       6.5%       5.3%   1.6%       4.4%     12.8%     13.1%       3.9%
 Weight        (1.4%) (1.5%)        (0.5%)                                    (2.4%) (2.5%)      (0.8%)                                   (1.5%) (1.6%)     (0.5%)
 Arithmetic Mean, Grains Only:
 Equal-         4.5%     1.7%        4.1%     22.3%     23.1%        7.8%      4.8%   2.5%        4.2%     24.3%    25.6%       9.8%       4.1%   0.9%       3.9%     20.1%     20.4%       5.1%
 Weight        (1.9%) (2.0%)        (0.7%)                                    (2.9%) (3.1%)      (1.2%)                                   (2.4%) (2.4%)     (0.6%)
 Equal Risk-   4.4%        1.9%      3.7%     21.9%     22.6%        7.6%      4.7%   2.8%        3.7%     23.9%    25.1%       9.5%       4.0%   1.0%       3.6%     19.7%     19.9%       5.1%
 Weight       (1.9%)      (1.9%)    (0.6%)                                    (2.9%) (3.0%)      (1.2%)                                   (2.4%) (2.4%)     (0.6%)
 Geometric Mean:
 Equal-        3.3%        0.4%      3.8%     17.6%     18.2%        5.5%      1.7% -0.1%         3.0%     20.8%    21.5%       6.8%       4.9%   1.0%       4.6%     13.9%     14.2%       3.8%
 Weight       (1.5%)      (1.5%)    (0.5%)                                    (2.5%) (2.6%)      (0.8%)                                   (1.7%) (1.7%)     (0.4%)
 Equal Risk-   3.2%     0.5%         3.5%     16.8%     17.3%        5.4%      1.7%   0.3%        2.6%     20.1%    20.7%       6.5%       4.6%   0.7%       4.4%     12.8%     13.1%       3.9%
 Weight       (1.4%) (1.5%)         (0.4%)                                    (2.4%) (2.5%)      (0.8%)                                   (1.5%) (1.6%)     (0.5%)
 Geometric Mean, Grains Only:
 Equal-        2.1%     -0.9%        3.8%     22.3%     23.1%        7.8%      1.9% -0.7%         3.8%     24.3%    25.6%       9.8%       2.2% -1.2%        3.8%     20.1%     20.4%       5.1%
 Weight       (1.9%) (1.9%)         (0.7%)                                    (2.9%) (3.0%)      (1.2%)                                   (2.4%) (2.4%)     (0.6%)
 Equal Risk-      2.1%    -0.6%      3.4%     21.9%     22.6%        7.6%      2.0% -0.3%         3.3%     23.9%    25.1%       9.5%       2.2% -0.9%        3.6%     19.7%     19.9%       5.1%
 Weight          (1.8%)   (1.9%)    (0.6%)                                    (2.8%) (3.0%)      (1.1%)                                   (2.3%) (2.3%)     (0.6%)
 Short Term       3.6%                         0.7%                            3.2%                        0.5%                            4.0%                       0.8%
 Interest Rate   (0.1%)                                                       (0.1%)                                                      (0.1%)
 (Arithmetic)
                                                Table 4B – Breakdown of Volatility of Long Horizon Returns
Table 4B provides the volatility of futures return on the commodity indices at horizons of 1-month, 1-year, 5-years and 10-years over the sample period
1877-2015. The volatility is also provided for the various components of futures returns, including the excess spot return (and raw return) of the commodity,
along with the interest rate-adjusted carry (and roll yield) over the same period.

                                                                                Equal-Weight:                                     Equal Risk-Weight
                                                                    1-month     1-year   5-year      10-year           1-month     1-year     5-year     10-year
                                   Futures Return                    17.6%      22.0%    22.3%       22.9%              16.8%      21.4%      22.2%      23.3%
                                   Excess Spot Return                18.2%      21.2%    18.4%       17.0%              17.3%      20.4%      18.4%      17.6%
                                   Spot Return                       18.2%      21.0%    17.5%       15.8%              17.3%      20.2%      17.5%      16.4%
                                   Interest Rate Adjusted Carry      5.5%       8.7%     13.2%       15.3%              5.4%        8.4%      13.2%      15.4%
                                   Roll Yield                        5.5%       8.7%     13.1%       15.3%              5.3%        8.4%      12.9%      15.2%




                                                                  Table 4C - Aggregate Asset Returns
Table 4C provides the arithmetic mean excess return and volatility of government bonds and aggregate stocks over the full sample and two subsample
periods. Standard errors are included in parenthesis.

                                                              Full sample                         1877-1945                           1946-2015
                                                        Return Mean     Volatility       Return Mean       Volatility           Return Mean     Volatility
                                        U.S. Bonds          1.1%             5.5%            0.5%              3.1%                1.7%           7.1%
                                                           (0.5%)                           (0.4%)                                (0.8%)
                                        U.S. Equities       6.7%            17.0%            6.1%              19.3%               7.4%          14.4%
                                                           (1.4%)                           (2.3%)                                (1.7%)
                                                      Table 5
                                     Commodity Index Returns and Aggregate States

Table 5 reports the mean and volatility of the returns on the commodity futures indices for six states over the period 1877-
2015: (i) backwardation, (ii) contango, (iii) high inflation (inflation above its mean), (iv) low inflation (inflation below its
mean), (v) expansion (trough-to-peak based on NBER dating), and (vi) recession (peak-to-trough based on NBER dating).
The returns on the commodity indices are broken down into two components: (i) its excess spot return, and (ii) its interest
rate adjusted carry (i.e., its roll yield plus the short interest rate). For each of these states, the table also reports the  of the
index against U.S. government bonds and the aggregate U.S. stock market.


 Equal-Weight:
                                     Full Sample   Backwardation   Contango   High Inflation   Low Inflation   Expansion   Recession

 Number of Months                       1667           791           876           808             859           1207        460
 Return Mean                            4.8%           7.7%          2.1%        14.8%            -4.7%          9.4%       -7.4%
                                       (1.5%)         (2.2%)        (2.0%)       (2.2%)           (2.0%)        (1.7%)      (3.2%)

 Excess Spot Return Mean                2.1%          -2.9%          6.5%        10.4%            -5.8%          6.3%       -9.0%
                                       (1.5%)         (2.2%)        (2.1%)       (2.2%)           (2.1%)        (1.7%)      (3.3%)

 Interest Rate Adjusted Carry Mean      3.9%          12.2%         -3.6%         5.5%             2.3%          4.3%        2.9%
                                       (0.5%)         (0.7%)        (0.5%)       (0.7%)           (0.6%)        (0.5%)      (1.0%)

 Return Volatility                     17.6%          18.0%         17.3%        17.7%            17.2%         16.6%       19.8%
 Beta with Bond                         -0.24          -0.29        -0.20         -0.27           -0.13          -0.27       -0.15
 Beta with Stock                        0.25           0.19          0.28         0.18             0.29          0.23        0.23



 Equal Risk-Weight:
                                     Full Sample   Backwardation   Contango   High Inflation   Low Inflation   Expansion   Recession

 Number of Months                       1660           778           882           805             855           1207        453
 Return Mean                            4.5%           7.9%          1.5%        14.1%            -4.5%          8.9%       -7.3%
                                       (1.4%)         (2.2%)        (1.9%)       (2.0%)           (2.0%)        (1.6%)      (3.1%)

 Excess Spot Return Mean                2.0%          -2.1%          5.5%         9.9%            -5.5%          6.0%       -8.7%
                                       (1.5%)         (2.2%)        (2.0%)       (2.1%)           (2.0%)        (1.6%)      (3.1%)

 Interest Rate Adjusted Carry Mean      3.6%          11.3%         -3.2%         5.2%             2.1%          4.0%        2.5%
                                       (0.5%)         (0.7%)        (0.5%)       (0.7%)           (0.6%)        (0.5%)      (1.0%)

 Return Volatility                     16.8%          17.4%         16.3%        16.8%            16.5%         15.9%       18.7%
 Beta with Bond                         -0.23          -0.38        -0.14         -0.26           -0.13          -0.28       -0.12
 Beta with Stock                        0.25           0.23          0.26         0.18             0.29          0.22        0.25
                                              Table 6
              Commodity Index Futures Returns and Aggregate States: Multivariate Analysis


We perform a series of multivariate regressions of the return of the commodity index on a 1/-1 binary variable for the
business cycle, average ex ante carry, and contemporaneous inflation. Inflation and business cycle variables are
demeaned. The sample period covers 1877-2015. The regressions are run at 1-month, 1-year and 5-year horizons.



         Horizon: Monthly
                                           Business Cycle   Carry     Inflation     Intercept     R-squared
         Equal-Weight, Coefficient:           0.0503        0.21        1.27          4.65%          0.08
         Equal-Weight, t-Stat:                  3.08        1.95        10.70          3.23
         Equal Risk-Weight, Coefficient:      0.0490        0.33        1.19          4.15%         0.08
         Equal Risk-Weight, t-Stat:             3.10        3.11        10.21          3.00

         Horizon: One Year
                                           Business Cycle   Carry     Inflation     Intercept     R-squared
         Equal-Weight, Coefficient:           0.0470        0.12        1.76         4.60%          0.31
         Equal-Weight, t-Stat:                 2.65         1.66        6.75          3.79
         Equal Risk-Weight, Coefficient:      0.0490        0.13        1.72         4.28%          0.31
         Equal Risk-Weight, t-Stat:            2.82         1.76        6.65          3.59

         Horizon: Five Years
                                           Business Cycle   Carry     Inflation     Intercept     R-squared
         Equal-Weight, Coefficient:           -0.0011       0.03        1.97          4.45%          0.39
         Equal-Weight, t-Stat:                 -0.03        0.77        4.08           3.54
         Equal Risk-Weight, Coefficient:      -0.0060       0.03        1.99          4.04%         0.40
         Equal Risk-Weight, t-Stat:            -0.17        0.72        4.20           3.26
                                             Table 7
            Commodity Index Futures Returns and Investment Styles: Multivariate Analysis

 We perform a series of multivariate regressions of the return of the commodity index on the investment styles of
 momentum, value and carry. Momentum of the index is measured by its previous 12-month return, value measured
 as the negative 48-month return 12-months ago (i.e., long-term reversal), and carry measured as the
 backwardated/contango value of the commodity index. The sample period covers 1877-2015. Panel A reports the
 regressions run at 1-month, 1-year and 5-year horizons. Panel B reports regressions of realized monthly commodity
 index returns across six states of nature (average backwardation, average contango, high inflation, low inflation,
 expansions, and recessions) on the monthly prediction model estimated in panel A.

 Panel A: Predictive Regression Model of Commodity Returns on Momentum, Value and Carry
        Horizon: Monthly
                                            Momentum         Value          Carry         Intercept       R-squared
        Equal-Weight, Coefficient:             0.25          0.08           0.28            4.47%           0.02
        Equal-Weight, t-Stat:                  3.31          1.78           2.44             2.89
        Equal Risk-Weight, Coefficient:        0.29          0.08           0.36            4.36%           0.02
        Equal Risk-Weight, t-Stat:             3.87          2.01           3.16             2.94

        Horizon: One Year
                                            Momentum         Value          Carry         Intercept       R-squared
        Equal-Weight, Coefficient:            0.11           0.06           0.18            4.89%            0.04
        Equal-Weight, t-Stat:                 1.26           1.51           2.21             3.30
        Equal Risk-Weight, Coefficient:       0.14           0.06           0.18            4.58%           0.05
        Equal Risk-Weight, t-Stat:            1.64           1.34           2.18             3.14

        Horizon: Five Years
                                            Momentum         Value          Carry         Intercept       R-squared
        Equal-Weight, Coefficient:            -0.01          0.01           0.08            5.18%           0.01
        Equal-Weight, t-Stat:                 -0.36          0.54           2.21             3.01
        Equal Risk-Weight, Coefficient:       -0.01          0.01           0.07            4.90%           0.01
        Equal Risk-Weight, t-Stat:            -0.30          0.20           1.88             2.77


 Panel B: Predictive Regression Model of Commodity Returns on Momentum, Value and Carry in Various
 Aggregate States
Horizon: Monthly
                              Full Sample   Backwardation   Contango   High Inflation   Low Inflation   Expansion     Recession
Momentum      coefficient:       0.25           0.40          0.12         0.04              0.23         0.15           0.28
              t-Stat:            3.31           3.44          1.26         0.39              2.14         1.62           1.97
Value         coefficient:       0.08          -0.02          0.16         0.06              0.14         0.04           0.12
              t-Stat:            1.78          -0.36          2.82         0.88              2.42         0.75           1.44
Carry         coefficient:       0.28           0.11          0.54         0.55              0.19         0.25           0.34
              t-Stat:            2.44           0.58          2.04         3.14              1.22         1.84           1.60
Intercept     coefficient:      4.47%          4.28%         6.35%        13.33%           -2.90%        7.62%         -2.63%
              t-Stat:            2.89           1.43          2.22         5.59             -1.37         4.37          -0.74
R-squared                        0.02           0.02          0.02         0.02              0.02         0.01           0.02
                                                                  Table 8
                                                         Asset Allocation Analysis

                                                            Table 8A
                                       Asset Allocation Performance and Aggregate States
    Table 8A reports the mean, volatility, and Sharpe ratio of (a) each individual asset class, (b) the optimal mean-
    variance portfolio, (c) an equal-weighted portfolio of the assets, (d) a 60/40 portfolio of 60% stocks and 40% bonds,
    and (e) a 54%/36%/10% portfolio of stocks / bonds / commodities. These are reported for the full sample, and
    conditional on the six states: (i) average backwardation, (ii) average contango, (iii) high inflation (inflation above its
    mean), (iv) low inflation (inflation below its mean), (v) expansion (trough-to-peak based on NBER dating), and (vi)
    recession (peak-to-trough based on NBER dating). By construction, the optimal mean-variance portfolio has the
    highest Sharpe ratio unconditionally over the full sample period, 1877-2015.

                                                       Full Sample   Backwardation   Contango     High Inflation   Low Inflation   Expansion   Recession


Mean:           Bond                                      1.1%           0.3%          1.9%           0.5%             1.8%          1.1%        1.3%
                Commodity                                 4.8%           7.7%          2.1%          14.8%            -4.7%          9.4%       -7.4%
                Stock                                     6.7%           4.7%          8.5%           5.6%             7.8%         12.3%       -7.9%
                Optimal Portfolio                         3.4%           2.9%          3.9%           4.4%             2.4%          5.8%       -2.9%
                Equally Weighted Portfolio                4.2%           4.2%          4.2%           7.0%             1.6%          7.6%       -4.7%
                60/40 Portfolio                           4.5%           2.9%          5.9%           3.5%             5.4%          7.8%       -4.2%
                10% Commodities, 90% 60/40 Portfolio      4.5%           3.4%          5.5%           4.7%             4.4%          8.0%       -4.5%

Volatility:     Bond                                      5.5%           4.6%          6.1%           6.3%             4.5%          5.3%        5.7%
                Commodity                                17.6%          18.0%         17.3%          17.7%            17.2%         16.6%       19.8%
                Stock                                    17.0%          15.3%         18.4%          14.4%            19.1%         14.8%       21.2%
                Optimal Portfolio                         7.1%           6.5%          7.6%           6.6%             7.5%          6.3%        8.6%
                Equally Weighted Portfolio                9.3%           8.7%          9.8%           8.4%             9.9%          8.3%       11.1%
                60/40 Portfolio                          10.6%           9.6%         11.4%           9.3%            11.6%          9.2%       13.2%
                10% Commodities, 90% 60/40 Portfolio     10.1%           9.1%         10.9%           8.8%            11.1%          8.7%       12.5%

Sharpe ratio:   Bond                                      0.21           0.06          0.31           0.07             0.39          0.20        0.23
                Commodity                                 0.27           0.43          0.12           0.84            -0.27          0.57        -0.37
                Stock                                     0.40           0.31          0.46           0.39             0.41          0.83        -0.37
                Optimal Portfolio                         0.48           0.44          0.51           0.67             0.32          0.92        -0.33
                Equally Weighted Portfolio                0.45           0.49          0.43           0.83             0.16          0.92        -0.42
                60/40 Portfolio                           0.42           0.31          0.52           0.38             0.46          0.85        -0.32
                10% Commodities, 90% 60/40 Portfolio      0.45           0.38          0.51           0.53             0.39          0.91        -0.36


                                                             Table 8B
                                             Portfolio Sharpe Ratios in 20-year periods
                Period       Optimal Portfolio   Equally Weighted Portfolio     60/40 Portfolio    10% Commodities, 90% 60/40 Portfolio
              1877 - 1895           0.08                    0.00                     0.27                              0.21
              1896 - 1915           0.46                    0.60                     0.32                              0.46
              1916 - 1935           0.30                    0.24                     0.31                              0.30
              1936 - 1955           0.95                    0.92                     0.75                              0.82
              1956 - 1975           0.42                    0.60                     0.23                              0.34
              1976 - 1995           0.59                    0.61                     0.57                              0.59
              1996 - 2015           0.67                    0.54                     0.59                              0.58
                                                                         Figure 1

                                             The Cumulative Returns on Commodity Indices

Figure 1A-B graphs the cumulative returns on each commodity index, including two versions of the breakdown of the
return into spot return and the realized roll yield (i.e., carry). The figures show the cumulative returns in terms of (i)
excess-of-cash spot returns and (ii) interest-rate adjusted carry (roll yield plus the short rate), as well as in terms of (i) spot
returns and (ii) roll yield (with no short rate adjustment). The graph covers the sample period 1877-2015.


                                                       Figure 1A: Equal-Weighted Index
   1000%                                                                      1000%
                      Return                                                                         Return
                      Excess-of-Cash Spot Return                                                     Spot Return
    800%                                                                       800%
                      Interest-Rate Adjusted Carry                                                   Roll Yield

    600%                                                                       600%


    400%                                                                       400%


    200%                                                                       200%


        0%                                                                          0%


   -200%                                                                      -200%
        1877     1897        1917     1937     1957      1977     1997             1877     1897      1917       1937     1957     1977     1997




                                                     Figure 1B: Equal Risk-Weighted Index
1000%                                                                       1000%
                  Return                                                                           Return
                  Excess-of-Cash Spot Return                                                       Spot Return
 800%                                                                        800%
                  Interest-Rate Adjusted Carry                                                     Roll Yield

 600%                                                                        600%


 400%                                                                        400%


 200%                                                                        200%


   0%                                                                         0%


 -200%                                                                      -200%
      1877     1897       1917      1937     1957      1977     1997             1877     1897     1917      1937       1957     1977     1997
                                                   Figure 2
                                Asset Allocation Involving Commodity Futures

Figure 2A-C graphs the mean-variance opportunity set of long-term U.S. government bonds, commodities, and U.S.
stocks over the full sample (1877-2015) and two subsample periods (1877-1945 and 1946-2015). The figures assume that
the realized mean, volatility and correlation across these asset classes were known ex ante and are constant over time.

                                      Figure 2A – Full Sample (1877-2015)




                                                                                 Optimal weights
                                                                       Bond           54%
                                                                       Commodity      17%
                                                                       Stock          29%




                                       Figure 2B – Subsample (1877-1945)




                                                                                 Optimal weights
                                                                       Bond           72%
                                                                       Commodity      7%
                                                                       Stock          21%




                                       Figure 2C – Subsample (1946-2015)




                                                                                     Optimal weights
                                                                       Bond               39%
                                                                       Commodity          29%
                                                                       Stock              31%
