NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

DIVERGENT PATHS:
STRUCTURAL CHANGE, ECONOMIC RANK, AND
THE EVOLUTION OF BLACK-WHITE EARNINGS DIFFERENCES, 1940-2014

Patrick Bayer
Kerwin Kofi Charles
Working Paper 22797
http://www.nber.org/papers/w22797

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 2016, Revised September 2017

We are grateful to Paul Eliason, Olga Kozlova and Quinn McInerney for excellent research
assistance. We also thank Joe Altonji, Peter Arcidiacono, Leah Boustan, David Card, Joe Hotz,
Larry Katz, Damon Jones, Pat Kline, Thomas Lemieux, Bob Margo, Enrico Moretti, Marianne
Wannamaker and seminar and conference participants at Duke, Princeton, UCLA, and the NBER
for many helpful comments and suggestions. The views expressed herein are those of the authors
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2016 by Patrick Bayer and Kerwin Kofi Charles. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Divergent Paths: Structural Change, Economic Rank, and the Evolution of Black-White Earnings
Differences, 1940-2014
Patrick Bayer and Kerwin Kofi Charles
NBER Working Paper No. 22797
November 2016, Revised September 2017
JEL No. J15,J31,J71,K42,N32,N92
ABSTRACT
This paper presents new evidence on the evolution of black-white earnings differences among all
men at different points in the distribution. We study two dimensions of earnings gaps: the blackwhite difference in earnings; and the difference between a black man’s position in the black
earnings and the position he would hold in the white distribution. After narrowing from 1940 to
the mid-1970s, the median black-white earning gap has since grown as large as it was in 1950.
Even as his relative earnings improved then worsened, the median black man’s relative position
in the earnings distribution has remained essentially constant. Black men at higher percentiles
have experienced significant gains in relative earnings since 1940. Unlike blacks at the median
and below, whose relative earnings changes have been chiefly the result of narrowing and
stretching of the overall earnings distribution, higher percentile blacks have also experienced
significant positional gains over the past 70 years.

Patrick Bayer
Department of Economics
Duke University
213 Social Sciences
Durham, NC 27708
and NBER
patrick.bayer@duke.edu
Kerwin Kofi Charles
Harris School of Public Policy
University of Chicago
1155 East 60th Street
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
kcharles@uchicago.edu

1

Introduction
Among the most important historical features of American society has been

the stubborn persistence of racial differences in any number of socioeconomic
outcomes. Not surprisingly, these differences have been the focus of a large body
of scholarship in the social sciences, with the difference in labor market outcomes
being particularly intensely studied by economists. 1 This paper presents new
estimates of the black-white difference in earnings among prime-aged men since
1940 and assesses the role played by different types of factors in driving relative
earnings changes. Our analysis extends and differs from previous work in several
ways, and the paper’s results substantially revise current understanding about
how and why earnings differences have changed over the past seven decades.
Previous work on racial earnings differences has mostly studied mean or
median differences in wages among workers. By contrast, we measure differences
among all men, including those not working for pay; separately examine changes
at the top, middle and bottom of the earnings distribution, and use annual
earnings as the measure of earnings. Perhaps the main reason we make these
modifications to the standard approach is the recent increase in non-work among
U.S men (Charles et al. 2016; Moffit 2012), with disproportionately large
reductions for blacks because of rising incarceration and labor force nonparticipation (Western 2002; Neal and Rick 2014).
Like other recent authors (Chandra 2000, 2003; Western and Pettit 2005),
we include all men in our analysis to deal with the well-known problem (Butler
and Heckman 1978; Heckman, Lyon, and Todd 2000) that results from
examining only workers are unlikely to be valid representations of changes for
the population as a whole, especially in an era of historically large rates of nonwork. Changing work patterns also explain why we use the holistic measure of
annual earnings, which subsumes the effect of changes in the wage and in the

Important examples of work on black-white earnings or wage gaps include Smith and Welch
(1989), Bound and Freeman (1992), and Card and Dinardo (2002). See comprehensive review of
literature on wage and earnings difference in handbook chapter by Altonji and Blank (1999).
Among the other economic outcomes studied in the literature on difference by race are wealth
(Barsky, Bound, Charles and Lupton 2002; Oliver and Shapiro 2006) and long-run changes in
relative per capita income (Margo 2016).
1

1

probability or intensity of working. Finally, because various political, social, and
economic changes over the past 70 years, including rising overall earnings
inequality (Autor, Katz and Levy 2008), may have differentially affected the
relative labor market outcomes for blacks at different points in the distribution,
our analysis moves beyond the traditional exclusive focus on the mean or median.
The analysis in this paper consists of three parts. We first present new facts
about racial differences in earnings over the past seven decades. We study two
dimensions of racial earnings differences: the earnings level gap, which has been
the focus of virtually all of the existing literature; and what we call the earnings
rank gap, which, as far as we know, has not been previously documented.
Whereas the level gap at a given percentile is the difference in earnings between
black and white men at the same percentile of their respective earnings
distributions, the rank gap measures how far below his percentile in the black
distribution a black man’s earnings would rank in the white distribution. These
two measures give a more comprehensive picture of black relative earnings than
does either alone.
Using quantile regressions, we find that after narrowing consistently from
1940 to 1970, the black-white difference in median annual earnings among all
men has since widened substantially, growing by the end of the Great Recession
to its size in 1950. Studying only men with positive earnings, as was the
convention in most previous work, yields a different picture of the evolution of
the earnings level gap: a decline in the gap over 1940-1970 with little change after
that, entirely missing the widening median gap in annual earnings among all
black and white men since 1970.2 Like the median gap, the gap in earnings levels
at the 90th among all men has worsened in recent decades after closing over
1940-1970, but the recent re-widening has been quite modest by comparison.
Rank earnings gaps have evolved quite differently from differences in
earnings levels. Among all men, the median black man’s earnings would have
placed him at the 24th percentile of the white earnings distribution in 1940.
Years after the end of the Great Recession, his position had scarcely budged,
2 The early part of this “slowdown” in convergence among workers has been famously
documented by Bound and Freeman (1992) and Juhn, Murpy and Pierce (1991).

2

rising to only the 27th percentile. In fact, during 1940-1970, when the blackwhite difference in median earnings among all men fell, and despite massive
migration by blacks away from the South to places more hospitable to them, the
median rank gap among all men worsened, before recovering by the end of the
sample period to where it was in 1940. By contrast, at the upper end of the
distribution, the earnings rank of the black man at the 90th percentile has
steadily improved, rising from about the median to the 75th percentile of the
white earnings distribution over the study period.3
What explains these changes in black relative earnings? We argue that the
cumulative effect of the various factors that affect earnings gaps operate through
two distinct types of forces. Positional convergence shifts the relative positions of
blacks and whites within the earnings distribution. Labor market discrimination
and occupational exclusion or racial skill differences as might arise from
differences by race in school quality are examples of factors likely to affect this
type convergence. What we call distributional convergence, by contrast, arises
from changes in the shape of the overall earnings distribution that affect blackwhite relative earnings because blacks and whites occupy different initial
positions in that distribution. Factors responsible for this type of convergence
might include skill-biased technical change, declining residual earnings
inequality, or institutional changes like higher wage minima or declining
unionization.
The second part of the paper quantitatively assesses the relative importance of
positional versus distributional convergence over the past seventy-plus years. We
formally decompose decade-by-decade changes in black relative earnings using a
non-parametric method that builds on the seminal work of Juhn, Murphy, and
Pierce (1991, 1993) (henceforth JMP) who introduce these decomposition
methods to literature.4 The decomposition method that we develop is a non-

These findings echo results from other work showing growing intra-race heterogeneity in wages
(Grodsky and Pager 2001) and income (Darity and Myers 1998).
4 Previous work using decomposition methods in the spirit of Juhn, Murphy and Pierce (1991,
1993) to study changes in racial earnings gaps have typically analyzed median gaps among
workers and thus do not address participation, as we do. These papers have also generally
employed parametric decomposition methods rather than the non-parametric approach we
3

3

parametric generalization of Lemieux (2006). This generalization not only allows
us to account for non-participation but also, in the spirit of the key insight of
Lemieux’s paper, to capture the way that observable skill – i.e., educational
attainment – affects the earnings distribution in each time period in a completely
flexible way.
We find that relative earnings of black men at the median have risen and
fallen principally as the result of distributional convergence: the “Great
Compression” and the rise of the middle class from 1940-1970, and the growth in
overall earnings inequality since 1970.5 By contrast, positional convergence has
been substantially more important than distributional factors in driving changes
in relative earnings for blacks at the 90th percentile. Our method can also be
used to do a decomposition of the differential evolution of work status among
black and white men. We find that the especially rapid relative increase after
1970 in the fraction of black men with zero earnings has been primarily driven by
distributional forces that worsened labor market prospects after 1970 for all lowskilled men. Black men were disproportionately affected by these forces because
of their significant over-representation at the bottom of the earnings distribution.
The final part of the paper assesses the role of educational attainment in
explaining changes in racial earnings gaps. Two key results emerge from this
analysis. The first is that the median black man did not experience positional
earnings gains over the past seventy years chiefly because of the phenomenon of
rising labor market returns to schooling. Since 1960, massive historical racial
differences in elementary school and high school attainment have been sharply
reduced, and racial differences in school quality have also closed.6 One might,
therefore, have expected that these relative educational gains for blacks would
follow. See, for example, Maloney (1994) for the period 1940-60, Card and Lemieux (1996) for the
1980s, and Mason (1999) for the period 1967-88
5 Goldin and Margo (1992) provide a comprehensive analysis of the great compression in earnings
in the 1940s. The growth in overall income inequality in the U.S. over since at least 1970s has
been studied extensively in a massive literature. See Katz and Murphy (1992), Piketty and Saez
(2003), and Autor, Katz, and Kearney (2008).
6 See Collins and Margo (2006) and Neal (2006) for detailed analyses of the evolution of the
racial gap in educational attainment over our study period. The Brown v. Board of
Education decision led to improvements in schooling quality for blacks, with positive labor
market consequences (see, for example, Smith and Welch (1989) and Card and Krueger (1992).
See Brown (1982) for analysis of federal anti-discrimination efforts

4

have resulted in the median black man making positional earnings gains. These
positional gains did not materialize, however, because, while the difference in
completed schooling between the median black and median white man was
shrinking, the labor market returns for an extra unit of education, regarding both
wages and the probability of working, was rising dramatically. The positional
gains that low-skilled black men would have otherwise made by acquiring more
education were almost perfectly counteracted by what can be thought of as a
headwind as the labor market placed an ever-higher penalty upon the racial
differences in education that remained.7
The second main result concerning education is that the improvement that
the 90th percentile black man experienced in his earnings relative to his white
counterpart was chiefly the result of positional earnings gains made by higherskill blacks within higher education categories. Whether because of more equal
access to quality higher education, or because of the opening of high-skilled
occupations and professions, differences in earnings between black and white
men with at least a college education have systematically fallen over time.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes the earnings
process, presents the two measures of racial earnings differences we analyze, and
outlines the mechanisms that might contribute to changes in the racial earnings
gap. Section 3 describes the data used in our analysis and presents key summary
statistics. Our main estimates of the evolution of the level and positional earnings
gaps throughout the distribution are presented in Section 4. We describe and
present results from the decomposition analysis in Section 5. Section 6 examines
the multi-faceted role of education. Section 7 concludes with a discussion of the
broader implications of our findings.
2 Earnings Gaps: Formulation and Empirical Specification
Undergirding the analysis to follow is a simple formulation of the earnings
process, which leads naturally to two alternative summary measures of racial

7 This phenomenon is reminiscent of the “swimming upstream” idea of Blau and Kahn (1997) as
the main explanation for why gender wage gaps did not decline in the 1980s

5

earning differences that are the focus of our empirical work.8 We represent the
log earnings log(E) of white and black men in each period t as a function of an
individual’s level of skill q: !!! ! and !!! ! , respectively. We use white men as
the reference group and normalize white skill in each period to be distributed
uniformly on the unit interval.9 This normalization is without loss of generality
and convenient because !!! then simply maps each percentile q of the white skill
distribution to the corresponding level of earnings.
Consider a black man whose skill places him at the qth percentile of the black
skill distribution. This man’s skill (as perceived by the labor market) can be
mapped to the corresponding percentile of the white distribution as: !!! ! . The
function, !!! ! captures two reasons why the qth percentile black man may earn
less than the qth percentile black man. The first is the potential difference in the
actual skill of the black and white men who hold the same position in the skill
distributions for their respective races. The historical difference in the quality of
schools attended by blacks and whites is an obvious reason why the skill of the
! !! percentile black man might be less than the ! !! percentile white man.
The second reason why the ! !! ranked black man might earn less than the
! !! ranked white is a penalty that lowers the labor market return that black men
get for their skill, as might arise because of labor market racial discrimination.10
As in the famous formulation of Becker (1967), a race-specific price penalty
captures the idea that black men are paid as if their skills were less than they
actually are. This paper is not concerned with teasing apart the separate

We discuss the strengths and limitations of this single-index framework for decomposing
changes in earnings gaps, and relate it to the previous literature, in Section 5 below. The analysis
of the evolution earnings gaps presented in Section 4 does not require any of the corresponding
assumptions required for the decompositions.
9 Our analysis examines shifts in the black earnings distribution relative to the white earnings
distribution. This formulation is convenient for the definition of the earnings level and rank gaps
that we describe below. All of the results presented in the paper are qualitatively robust to using
either the male or full earnings distributions as the reference distribution.
10 Another possibility is any race-specific difference in job access over the study period due, for
example, to strong residential segregation within cities and the historical concentration of the
black population in the rural South.
8

6

importance of race-specific factors. Rather, we focus on the overall effect of
factors that affect the rank matching function, !!! ! .11
Given our characterization of the earnings process, the racial earnings level
gap at percentile ! is simply the difference in earnings between black and white
men at the qth percentiles of the earnings distributions of their respective races:
! ! ! = !!! ! − !!! ! = !!! !!! !

− !!! ! . While level gaps have been

studied extensively, much less attention has been paid to another summary
measure of racial earnings difference that flows naturally from the framework:
the difference between a black man’s position in the black earnings distribution
and the position his earnings would occupy in the white earnings distribution. We
call this second measure of racial earnings differences at percentile q, the rank
gap: ! ! !"#$ = !!! ! − !.
Figure 1 illustrates these two summary measures of racial earnings
differences. The figure plots two cdf’s for the log earnings of black and white men.
The horizontal line represents an arbitrary percentile, q. The earnings level gap at
q, ! ! ! , is the horizontal difference at !, read from the black and white cdf’s.
The rank that the !!! -ranked black man would hold in the white distribution, ! ! ,
is the position on the !-axis where the earnings of the ! !! black hits the white cdf.
The rank earnings gap, ! ! !"#$ , is the vertical difference between ! and this
value.
Regression Specifications for Estimating Earnings Gaps
We use quantile regressions to measure the two types of earnings gaps. For
the level gap, we estimate regressions of the form:
1 log !!" = !! (!) + !! (!)!! + !!" (!)

Distinguishing the contributions of actual skill differences and labor market discrimination has
been the focus of numerous studies (see, for example, Neal and Johnson (1996), Arcidiacono et al.
(2009), Lang and Manove (2011), Black et al. (2011), and Hilger (2016)). Conceptually, the
positional gaps that we measure capture the combination of both current labor market
discrimination and skill differences, which in turn are partly determined by historical educational
and labor market discrimination.
11

7

where r indicates a set of dummy variables for each category of race and
ethnicity. Assuming that white is the omitted race, the log earnings of the qth
ranked white man is given by: !! ! = !!! ! and !! ! measures the racial
earnings gap at the qth percentile: !! ! = !!! !!! !

− !!! ! = ! ! ! .

Besides being tightly linked to our specification of the earnings process,
quantile regressions have other attractive features for estimating earnings gaps
compared to measuring differences at the mean. As we show below, a large and
growing fraction of men are non-workers, creating an important selection
problem in the analysis of racial earnings inequality. The primary strategy
advanced in the literature for addressing this problem is to include those with
zero earnings in the estimation sample and use median regressions to study
earnings differences. 12 Quantile regressions also help to uncover possible
variation in the general price of skill and any race-specific penalty across the skill
distribution. By estimating (1) at both the median and the 90th percentile, we
study the evolution of the racial earnings gap in the middle and upper tail of the
earnings distribution.
To measure the rank earnings gap at a percentile q, we estimate quantile
regressions of the form:
2 !"#$(!!" ) = !! (!) + !! (!)!! + !!" (!)
where the dependent variable is the percentile rank the person’s earnings would
hold in the white earnings distribution. In this regression, at(q) is simply the
identity function, at(q) = q, and parameter bt(q) measures the earnings position
gap at a given percentile, ! ! (!"#$): !! ! = !!! ! − !.

12 By construction, this is a valid descriptive approach for studying the evolution of the racial gap
in actual earnings at the median. This is also a valid method for studying the evolution of the gap
in earnings potential at the median if employment is positively selected so that non-workers
would have earned less than the median earnings (Darity and Myers 1998; Vigdor 2006).
Similarly, this approach provides a valid way to study the evolution of the racial gap in well-being
if well-being is monotonic in earnings and the well-being of non-workers is less than the median
person in the earnings distribution.

8

3 Data and Summary Statistics
The paper uses decennial US Census data from 1940-2000, and the annual
American Community Survey (ACS) from 2005-2014. We construct ten samples,
one for each of the Census decades and three ACS samples: ‘2007’, which
includes data from 2005-2007, ‘2010’ which uses just the 2010 sample, and
‘2014’ which covers 2013-2o14. The 2007 and 2014 samples show results just
before and after the Great Recession. To ensure that the men studied have
completed schooling and are not yet retired we restrict the sample to ages 25-54.
We divide men into three categories of race and ethnicity: non-Hispanic black
(black), non-Hispanic white (white), and all others. Throughout, the paper
compares black and white outcomes while controlling for those of other races and
ethnicities. Because a large part of the workforce is in agriculture in the earliest
years we study, the paper uses labor market plus business and farm income as the
measure of earnings.13 As shown below, we conduct a series of extensions to our
main results using alternative sample and data definitions, finding qualitatively
similar results.
Figure 2a helps explain why our analysis uses annual earnings and includes
both workers and non-workers. The figure plots trends in rates of non-work for
blacks and whites in our sample, as derived from the two sources of information
about work behavior in the Census/ACS. The solid lines show that the fractions of
both black and white men who report not currently working have risen
dramatically since 1960. For black men, the rate went from only 18% in 1960 to
37.8% in 2010. Though starting from a lower basis, the rate for white men also
more than doubled over the same period, going from 7.9 to 18.6 percent. As the
Business and farm income is not measured in the 1940 Census, so we impute it by first using
the 1950 Census to calculate (i) the likelihood of having any business and farm income and (ii) the
ratio of the mean per capita business and farm income among those with positive amounts to the
mean earnings among those with positive earnings. Whenever possible, we estimate these two
numbers separately by state s, race r, age a, education e, industry i (agriculture vs. other)
categories as well as an indicator for whether the individual has positive labor market earnings p.
We then apply these imputations to the 1940 Census, randomly assigning a positive amount of
business and farm income to men in each (s, r, a, e, i, p) cell with the probability from calculation
(i) and the amount from calculation (ii) based on the mean earnings among those with positive
labor market earnings in the corresponding cell in 1940. When data is not available for a
particular cell, we fill in any missing cells by using data from nearby cells by dropping
conditioning variables in the following order: age, education, industry, state, race.
13

9

divergence between the two lines shows, blacks have become systematically more
likely than whites not to be currently working, with the racial gap in the shares
gr0wing by 9.1 percentage points between 1960 and 2010.14 The two broken lines
in the figure plot the share of black and white men who report earning zero
earnings during the entire previous year – the other measure of non-work in the
Census. This longer-term measure shows the same pattern as “not currently
working”: a sharp increase among both black and white men, with a growing
difference by race over time.
What accounts for this increase in non-work, and for its differential evolution
by race? The census reports the activity of men not currently working. Figure 2b
sorts non-workers across the three mutually exclusive categories: (i)
institutionalized; (ii) not institutionalized and out of the labor force, or (iii) in the
labor force but unemployed. While the type of institution is not recorded in the
Census/ACS beginning in 1980, the majority of men in our sample who are
institutionalized are incarcerated, as relatively few prime-aged men are in mental
institutions or nursing homes – the two other possible types of institutions (Neal
and Rick 2014).15 The sharp increase in incarceration rates in the U.S. over the
second half of our sample is also responsible for the vast majority of observed
changes in institutionalization rates for white and black men. The patterns we
show below are also consistent with what other sources reveal about
incarceration trends (Western 2006).
Figure 2b shows that rates of institutionalization for men in our sample have
increased sharply since 1980, more than doubling for both white (0.7 to 1.5
percent) and black men (3.3 to 8.0 percent) by 2014. Black-white differences in
these rates have also more than doubled from 2-3 percentage points in 19601980 to 6.5-7.6 percentage points in each sample since 2000. Labor force
participation rates have also changed substantially over time, falling sharply for
14 Recent papers have studied the decline in male employment rates since 2000 (Moffitt 2012;
Charles et al. 2016), but there has been much less attention to the fact that non-employment has
been growing since 1970 and that it has differed substantially across race in magnitude and
source.
15Neal and Rick (2014) provide a detailed analysis of the causes of recent sharp increase in the
severity of punishment in the U.S. criminal justice system and its impact on the racial
incarceration and labor force participation gaps.

10

both black and white men since the middle of the 20th Century. While 7.3 percent
of black men were out of the labor force (and not institutionalized) in 1960, this
figure peaked at 19.4 percent in 2000 and remains above 16 percent in the 200714 samples. The increase in the share of white men out of the labor force has been
similarly stark, albeit from lower initial levels, rising from 3.5 percent in 1960 to
over 9.8 percent by 2014. Following a similar trajectory as the incarceration gap,
the black-white out-of-the-labor-force gap rose from 5.3 percent in 1970 to a peak
of 10.4 percent in 2000 and remains above 6 percent in the 2007-2014 samples.
Unlike the other two dimensions of non-work, unemployment rates have not
exhibited a long-term secular increase for black and white men, but have rather
risen and fallen with general labor market conditions. In the ten samples shown
here, unemployment rates were highest in 2010 at 7.7 and 13.1 percent for white
and black men, respectively. A point worthy of note is that unemployment rates
for black men have been at least 50 percent greater than those of comparable
white men from 1950-2010. The black-white unemployment gap has remained
between 3.9-5.4 percent from 1980-2014 and remains near its highest level in the
latter stages of the recovery from the Great Recession in the 2014 sample.16
Overall, 22 percent of the 1960-2010 growth in racial gap in the probability of
work is due to the increasing unemployment gap, 43 percent to the expanding
“incarceration” gap, and 34 percent to the growing labor force participation gap.
Because we can only infer current incarceration from the institutionalization
variable, it is not possible to identify men who are unable to find work because of
prior incarceration. A significant portion of the increase in the labor force
participation and unemployment gaps may thus also be due to the effects of mass
incarceration. 17
Racial differences in annual earnings will be our focus in the work to follow.
Figure 3 plots real annual earnings (measured in 2014 dollars) over time among

See Ritter and Taylor (2011) on black white unemployment rate differences.
See Western (2002, 2006), Western and Pettit (2005) and Kling (2006) for an analysis of the
impact of incarceration on labor force participation and earnings upon release. Importantly, the
Census and ACS do not provide any information regarding whether an individual has previously
been incarcerated. Work by Kahn-Lang (2017) suggests that there may systematic non-reporting
of labor market outcomes by persons, especially blacks, with high incarceration risk.
16
17

11

the populations of black and white men, at the median and 90th percentile.
Median real earnings rose sharply for both black and white men through 1970
followed by a period of decline. Since 1970, real earnings have fallen by 19
percent for the median white man – from $52,200 to $42,100 in 2014 – and by
32 percent for the median black man – from $30,800 to $21,000 in 2014. By
contrast, at the 90th percentile, real earnings have risen by 18 percent for blacks
(from $58,300 to $69,000 in 2014) and 16 percent for whites (from $97,900 to
$114,000) since 1970.18
4 Benchmark Estimates of Earnings Level and Rank Gaps
We now present estimates of the earnings level and rank gaps between black
and white men holding the same position in the earnings distribution of their
respective races. In estimating the quantile regressions (1) and (2), we condition
on six 5-year age categories to account for cohort size and life-cycle effects.19 The
regressions do not control for skill. Later, we explore at length how much and by
what mechanism schooling accounts for the gaps we document.
Figure 4 plots the estimated median and 90th quantile earnings level gaps
from 1940-2014. We do not plot standard error bands in these and later figures
since the results are very precisely estimated. The solid lines plot earnings level
gaps among workers, while the dashed lines plot them among the population of
all men – workers plus non-workers. In 1940, the median black man in the
population had earnings roughly 100 log points less than his white counterpart.
Between 1940 and 1980, this gap closed by roughly 50 percent, with large
decreases during the 1940s and 1960s. Since 1980, however, the median level gap
in the population has re-widened, growing so considerably that by 2014 it
reached 68 log points - its level in 1950. When analysis ignores the growing
prevalence of non-work among men, the estimated median gap shrinks more
during 1940-1980 than was true in the population and the gap is stagnant after
Recognizing the difficulty of accounting for inflation over long horizons, the main point of
Figure 3 is to highlight the different experiences of men at the top versus middle of the earnings
distribution.
19 Since both race and age are discrete categories, none of the common difficulties associated with
the interpretation of quantile regressions apply here.
18

12

1980, missing the substantial worsening of the median black man’s relative
earnings in the population.
The lines with circular markers plot the estimated earnings level gap among
men at the top of the distribution. As at the median, the level gap at the 90th
percentile declined considerably from 1940 to 1980 before re-widening after
1980, although the re-widening was much smaller than that at the median.
Indeed, about half of the relative earnings gains from 1960 to 1980 for the 90th
percentile black man have held in recent decades, in contrast to the complete
erosion of the corresponding gains that occurred at the median. The 90th
percentile earnings level gap among working men has more closely tracked the
gap in the population.
Figure 4 also highlights how differently black and the top and middle of the
distribution experienced the Great Recession, compared to whites. While the gap
at the median increased by over 15 percentage points from 2007 to 2010, the gap
at the 90th percentile increased by only 2 percent over the same period. In fact,
the increase in the median earnings level gap in the Great Recession, which has
largely persisted through 2014, is responsible for the majority of the re-widening
of the median earnings level gap since 1980.
Figure 5 shows the earnings rank gaps at the median and the 90th percentile
for the population of all men.20 The earnings rank gap at the median presents a
starkly different picture of the evolution of racial earnings inequality compared to
the earnings level gaps. Whereas the median level gap shrank substantially over
1940-1970, the relative position of the median black man in the population
worsened considerably over the same time, falling from the 23rd percentile to the
18th percentile of the white male earnings distribution. Since 1980, as the median
level gap has re-widened, the median rank gap has remained essentially constant
at around 22-24 percentile points throughout this entire period, including the
Great Recession. Strikingly, then, while the median level gap among men has

20 The dependent variable in the regressions from which these estimates come is the individual’s
percentile rank in the white earnings distribution, although all of the results are qualitatively
robust to using percentile rank in the male or overall earnings distributions.

13

narrowed then widened substantially over the past 70-plus years, the relative
position of the median black man has changed very little.
Unlike the median, black men at the top of the earnings distribution have
experienced substantial rank gains over the study period. In particular, the
estimated rank gap at the 90th percentile closed from 37 percentile points in 1940
to 16 in 2014. The majority of these gains occurred from 1960 to 1980, and the
rank gap has remained essentially constant at around 16 percentile points in
every sample year from 2000 through 2014. Put another way, the 90th percentile
man in the black earnings distribution would rank at the 74th percentile of the
white earnings distribution in 2014 versus the 53rd percentile in 1940 or 1960.
One of the most surprising aspects of these results is that the relative position
of the median black man eroded between 1940 and 1970, even as the earnings
level gap closed considerably. This rank erosion within the national economy was
even more remarkable because it occurred during the second half of the Great
Migration when large numbers of black workers moved from the South to the
industrial cities elsewhere in the country. In 1940, almost 75 percent of primeaged black men lived in the South, where median earnings across for blacks and
whites was less than half their levels in other regions. By 1970, less than half of
the population lived in the South, where overall earnings had largely converged to
levels elsewhere.
Figure 6 plots the evolution of earnings gaps among all men within each of
the four Census regions (South, North, Midwest, and West) along with the
national rank gap. In 1940, median rank gaps in the different regions, and
especially in the South, were lower than the median rank gap nationally. The
large national rank gap in 1940 was chiefly due to blacks’ concentration in the
low-wage South. Between 1940 and 1970 the median rank gap grew substantially
within each region of the country, increasing from 16 to 26 percentile points
when averaged across regions.21 Yet, the national median rank gap widened by
only 3.5 percentile points over the same interval. This difference reflects the
impact of the reallocation of black men to higher wage regions, which partially
21 To the best of our knowledge, this sharp decline in the relative standing of black men within
each regional economy has gone undocumented in the literature to date.

14

mitigated the large decline in earnings position that black men experienced in
each regional economy.22 Differences between the national and regional position
gaps are much less pronounced in more recent decades as regional differences in
racial composition and, especially, earnings have narrowed sharply over the study
period.
How sensitive are our main results in Figures 4 and 5 to alternative sample
restrictions and data definitions? Table 1a-b present, respectively, estimated
median and 90th percentile level and rank gaps in selected years. Each row of the
tables shows results under different data or sample criteria than the baseline
results plotted in Figures 4 and 5 and reproduced in the top row of each panel of
the tables. The alternatives we assess include (i) broadening the age range of the
study from 25-54 to 19-64, (ii) considering only native-born white and black men,
(iii) using usual weekly earnings rather than annual earnings; and (iv) using a
narrower measure of earnings that excludes business and farm income. The
tables show results for 1940, 1970, 2000, 2007 (the last year before the Great
Recession), and 2014 – the most recent year in our data.23 Changes over these
years nicely capture the essential patterns in the benchmark estimates plotted in
Figures 4 and 5 for the two types of gaps.
Although they obviously differ across samples and restrictions, the point
estimates across the various specifications generally follow the same pattern as
our benchmark results. The only results that stand out as potentially different are
those using the wider age range, for which the there is a more obvious erosion of
earnings level and rank at the median in the Great Recession. The measured rank
gaps for the narrower earnings definition that excludes agricultural income is
also noticeably smaller in 1940 compared to the baseline earnings measure. As a
It is worth noting that some of the increases in within-region position gap might be explained
by the systematic migration of relatively high-skilled black men to the North, which might have
reduced the average black skill level in the South. Despite any such selection effects, the
systematic migration of black men to higher wage regions should have improved their position in
the national economy, all else equal. Appendix Table 5 reports a full set of earnings level and
position gaps for each region, revealing a number of interesting patterns, including, for example,
that both the racial earnings level and position gaps are now smaller in the South than the North
or Midwest.
23 The Appendix provides a full set of results – i.e., statistics or point estimates for each sample
year – for each figure and table presented in the paper. We do not present these additional
numbers in this table or elsewhere to avoid clutter.
22

15

result, the erosion of the position of the median black man in the 1940-70 period
– one of our key findings – is more pronounced in this alternative specification.
5 Decomposing Changes in Racial Earnings Gaps
The results we document: (i) in earnings rank versus level; (ii) at the median
versus the 90th percentile; (iii) nationally versus within region; and (iv) with and
without accounting for men with zero earnings, present a substantially richer and
more nuanced picture of the evolution of racial earnings inequality than has
previously appeared in the literature. To better understand the factors
responsible for these patterns, we decompose changes in racial earnings level
gaps into the two main types of forces implied by our specification of the earnings
process – distributional and positional convergence.
Given our formulation of the earnings process, the change over time in the
earnings level gap at a given percentile in period t can be written:

3

!!! !!! !

− !!! !

− !!! !!! !

− !!! (!)

Adding and subtracting terms yields the decomposition:

4

!!! !!! !

− !!! !!! !

− !!! ! − !!! !

[A]

+ !!! !!! !

− !!! !!! !
[B]

The first bracketed term [A] measures the effect on the earnings level gap of
changes in how skill, in general, and without regard to race, is rewarded in the
market. These changes to the overall structure of the earnings distribution
differentially affect white and black men solely because their initial positions
within the skill distribution as perceived by the market are not the same. These
changes are race-neutral, in the sense that they stretch out or compress both the
black and white earnings distributions leaving people’s relative position within

16

their own distribution, or in the overall earnings distribution, unchanged. 24 We
call this component of changes in racial earnings differences distributional
convergence or divergence. The general compression of earnings in the middle of
the 20th Century and the secular increase in the earnings inequality in more
recent decades are examples of the types of factors that cause this kind of change.
The second bracketed term [B] captures changes in how the market perceives
and rewards a black man relative to a white man in the same initial percentile
positions of their respective race’s earnings distribution. Anything producing a
relative change in the actual skill of the black man compared to the white, or
which changes the relative price paid to black versus white skill would be part of
[B]. Thus the relative increase in the quality of schools attended by black children
following the Brown v. Board of Education ruling, or a decline in wage
discrimination or occupation exclusion against blacks would be included in [B].25
We call this portion of the change in the earnings gap positional convergence or
divergence since it measures the effect of shifts in the relative positions of black
and white men within the overall earnings distribution.
Figure 7 graphically illustrates the two sets of forces. Both panels A and B of
the figure illustrate a decline in the earnings gap by showing changes in two pairs
of black and white earning distributions in pdf form. In Panel A, the earnings gap
at the median declines because the overall earnings distribution gets compressed
around the mean level of earning in the population – the solid vertical line. This
is what we call distributional convergence. In panel B, the racial earnings gap at
the median closes because the black earnings distribution changes position
relative to the white distribution; it advances relative to the white distribution,
which we illustrate as not having changed at all in this example. This is the most

24 We use the term ‘race-neutral’ here to refer to changes in the overall structure of the earnings
distribution including the fraction of men with zero earnings. Given the role of social and
economic policy in shaping aspects of the structure of the earnings distribution (including
incarceration), a number of researchers, e.g., Bonilla-Silva (2006) and Massey (2007), have
pointed out that racial motivations may shape ‘race-neutral’ policies that have a differential racial
impact given the relative position of blacks and whites in the economy and society. We fully
appreciate this point and use the terms ‘race-neutral’ in the narrow sense described.
25 Several important papers have assessed the role of improved school quality in driving changes
in the racial earnings gap – see, for example, Smith and Welch (1989), Card and Krueger (1992)
and Grogger (1996). Collins and Margo (2006) provide a complete review of this literature.

17

extreme form of positional convergence. In general, earnings gaps widen and
close through a combination of these two forces. We outline below a method for
decomposing the relative quantitative importance of these forces since 1940.
The framework that we develop above for decomposing earnings gaps
according to equation (4) is commonly referred to as a time invariant singleindex model of skill. It formed the basis for JMP, and its implications and
empirical validity have been studied extensively in the literature, most notably by
Card and Lemieux (1996).26 The single index assumption allows one to attribute
changes in earnings at a given quantile of the white earnings distribution to
distributional forces that affect both blacks and whites, plus a positional
component for any residual change in the relative earnings of a black man. This
straightforward

decomposition

would

not

be

possible

if

skill

were

multidimensional, and black and white men at a given quantile of the white
earnings distribution having different combinations of skills, each dimension of
which commanded a different price. The decomposition under the single-index
assumption provides a natural starting point for characterizing relative earnings
changes over the long historical period we study. In Section 6 below, we extend
this framework to two dimensions in order to explore the role of racial difference
in education level and its price.
Nonparametric Decomposition Method
The key objects in our decomposition are the two components of equation (4).
To

calculate

the

distributional

component,

we

use

a

nonparametric

counterfactual simulation that measures how the earnings gap would change
between time periods 0 and t if black and white men were to hold their relative
positions in the earnings distribution from period 0 but the level of earnings
associated with each position was as in period t. The difference between the
earnings gap in period 0 and the simulation measures the effect of distributional
convergence. And, since we compute the simulation by holding position constant,
26 It is important to note that our analysis of the employment gap below also relies on this singleindex assumption – i.e., implicitly assumes that the same index of skill affects earnings among
workers and the propensity to be employed.

18

the difference between the simulated and actual gap in period ! captures the
effect of any positional convergence on the change in the racial earnings gap.
Our approach can also be used to decompose changes in the racial makeup of
the set of men not working (i.e., with zero annual earnings) into positional and
distributional components. The counterfactual simulation, in this case, measures
how the employment gap would have changed if men held their initial positions
in the earnings distribution and the distribution is truncated from below at an
increasing threshold. The method is only valid when the incidence of non-work
monotonically increases, as has been true for both black and white men since
1970.
It is straightforward to extend this decomposition to condition on any discrete
characteristic simply by conditioning each component of equation (4) on that
characteristic. Since we condition on age in the earnings level and rank gaps
presented above, we continue to do so here for our benchmark decomposition. To
construct the simulated sample for each year t, then, we proceed as follows:
1. Randomly draw a large sample of observations from the sample at time t.
Let i(race, age) indicate an observation in this simulated data set.
2. For each i, randomly draw an individual j(race, age) in the same race and
age category in the sample at time 0. Assign j’s rank !!!" (!) within the
white earnings distribution at time 0.
3. Assign the earnings associated with this percentile rank in the white
earnings distribution at time t to individual i: !!! (!!! (!)).
Step 1 ensures that the simulated sample reflects the sample composition at time
t; Step 2 applies the rank function, !!!" ! , at time 0; and Step 3 applies the white
earnings function at time t, !!! (q).
Figure 8 graphically illustrates the two components into which the
decomposition splits earnings changes. The two dotted cdf’s in the figure are
black and white earnings in period 0, and the solid cdf’s are for black and white
earnings in period 1. In this example, the earnings gap at percentile ! falls from
AA’ to BB’ between the periods, as shown in the first panel.

19

The second panel shows what the gap would be in period 1 if there were only
distributional convergence and no positional convergence in the economy
between period 0 and 1. Since each person’s position in the white earning
distributions remains constant under pure distributional convergence, the period
1 earnings for the ! !" ranked white changes from !′ to !′, while the earnings of
the ! !" ranked black goes from ! to whatever earnings correspond to the earnings
of the ! ! ranked white person in period 1. This level of earnings is labeled ! in
the second panel. Had there been only distributional change, the racial earnings
gap at percentile ! would thus have been CB’. In fact, black earnings at percentile
! in period 1 were actually ! rather than !. There must therefore have been a
positional loss for blacks, which acted to counter the beneficial distribution. This
adverse positional force is seen in the decline of the black man’s rank in white
earnings distribution, qw, between periods 0 and 1. In this example, distributional
convergence and positional convergence act in opposite directions. In general,
these forces can either complement or oppose on another.27
Benchmark Decomposition Results
We conduct decompositions of decade-by-decade changes in earnings gaps at
the median and the 90th percentile and in the employment gaps over our study
period. Figures 9a-c plot the estimates of the relevant actual and accumulated
simulated gap in each year. An upward sloping simulated series indicates that
distributional forces acted to close the gap during those years; during periods
when the simulated series slopes down, distributional divergence acted to widen
the gap. The difference between the series represents the portion of the actual
gaps attributable to positional rather than distributional convergence up to that
time in the study period. We summarize the size and sign of the two forces in
Table 2, which aggregates the decade-by-decade results over three longer time
periods: 1940-70, 1970-2014, and 1940-2014.

27 See Appendix Figure 1 for an illustration of a case of positional and distribution forces acting in
the same direction.

20

We find very different results at the bottom, middle, and top of the
distribution. As the figures show, distributional forces enormously affected the
median earnings gap, both during 1940-70, when the compression of the
earnings distribution lowered the median gap by 64 log points, and during 19702014, when the increase in secular inequality (especially during the Great
Recession) reversed 39 log points of these gains.
By contrast, at the median, positional forces acted in the opposite direction to
and were much less important that than distribution factors. Consistent with
previous results showing that the median earnings rank gap even as the earnings
level gap closed sharply between 1940 and 1970, Figure 9a shows that
distributional convergence during these years would have shrunk the median gap
more than the narrowing that actually occurred, had blacks not experienced these
adverse positional shifts. The virtual coincidence of the patterns for the simulated
and actual earnings gaps since 1980 implies that essentially all of the changes in
the median gap over the second half of the study period have been driven by
distributional forces. Strikingly, even the large increase in the median earnings
gap during the Great Recession is not the result of any positional divergence in
the middle of the earnings distribution. Instead, the median black man’s earnings
were especially hard hit by the Great Recession because (i) he was initially
located 22-23 percentiles lower in the earnings distribution than the median
white man and (ii) the recession was progressively more devastating (for all men)
the lower one’s position within the earnings distribution.
The actual and simulated earnings gap at the 90th percentile plotted in Figure
9b closely track each other from 1940 to 1960, indicating that the closing of the
racial earnings gap at higher percentiles during this period was due entirely to the
compression of the upper tail of the overall earnings distribution rather than to
positional factors. Since 1960, however, the actual and simulated 90th percentile
earnings gaps have increasingly diverged, as positional forces have been the
dominant force driving relative earnings changes for black in the upper tail of the
earnings distribution. Indeed, had the earnings gap at the 90th been driven only
by distribution forces, with blacks simply holding their relative positions in the
earnings distribution as the upper reaches of the earnings distribution re21

widened in recent decades, there would have been a 75 log point earnings gap by
the end of the study period. Instead, because the position of the 90th percentile
black man has moved significantly upwards within the upper part of the earnings
distribution – especially from 1960-1980 - the earnings gap at the 90th remained
around 40 log points in 2014.
Distributional divergence has also been overwhelmingly important for
changes in the employment gap since 1970 (the interval over which we can
conduct our decomposition for this outcome). Figure 9c shows that the large
increase in the racial employment gap since 1970 was chiefly the result of blacks’
and whites’ relative positions in the earnings distributions in 1970. Significantly
over-represented in the lowest positive earnings percentiles in 1970, blacks were
disproportionately likely to become zero-earners as the threshold for working
moved ever-higher in earnings distribution.
Table 2 summarizes the decomposition results. Distributional forces acted to
decrease the earnings gap during the 1940-1970 period, and to widen gaps over
1970-2014 at both the median and 90th quantile, although this effect was smaller
at the top of the distribution. Positional forces have acted to close the racial
earnings gaps throughout the distribution, but the effect of these forces was much
larger at the top of the earnings distribution. Over the entire 1940-2014 period,
positional convergence has been responsible for nearly all of the gains at the 90th
percentile, but only 10 percent of the gains at the median and in the racial
employment gap since 1970.
6 Schooling and Racial Earnings Gaps
Both scholars and policy-makers have historically emphasized the importance
of schooling for racial differences in economic outcomes. In this section, we
examine the subtly complex role of education in shaping the relative labor market
performance of black men in the U.S. We assess the degree to which the various
results we document for positional versus distributional convergence are related
to key education-related changes in the economy over the study period.
Three Important Education-Related Changes in the Economy
22

There have been at least three major changes related to education that might
reasonably have been expected to affect racial earnings differences over the past
seventy years. The first of these was the large racial convergence in educational
attainment, which a large literature documents. 28 In our sample of prime-aged
men, the racial gap in years of schooling decreased by 75 percent from 3.5 to 0.9,
with most of the convergence occurring between 1960 and 1980. Perhaps more
striking than changes in years of schooling was how racial gaps in specific levels
of education evolved. In 1940, only 7.2 percent of black men had completed high
school, and just 1.6 percent had completed college, while comparable figures for
white men were 28.1 and 6.8 percent, respectively. As late as 1960, nearly 60
percent of black men in our sample had no more than an 8th grade educations
(compared to 27% for whites); only 20 percent were high school graduates
(compared to 50% for whites); and only 3% had a college degree (compared to
about 13% for whites). By 1980, so large were the relative gains for blacks,
especially in the middle of the education distribution, that fully 60% of black men
(compared to 81% of whites) were high school graduates. By 2014, only a tiny set
of men, of either race, had no more 8th grade educations; high school completion
rates were near 90 percent for each race, and college completion rates had
increased to 17.2 and 33.7 percent for black and white men, respectively.
The second major set of education-related changes over our study period was
the implementation of various desegregation and anti-discrimination policies
that should have improved the relative quality of the education received by
blacks. Following the landmark Brown v. Board of Education ruling, public
elementary and secondary schools, especially in the South, were forced to
desegregate. Many formerly segregated public and private universities opened
their doors to black students, and school finance reforms that reduced school
spending differences across districts were important results of this seminal
ruling. Also, as a result of Civil Rights legislation and policies, various higher
paying occupations opened up that had long excluded blacks.

28

See Collins and Margo (2006), Neal (2006) and Goldin and Katz (2009).

23

Although it is difficult to measure directly either improvement in relative
school quality following Brown directly, or falling occupational exclusion because
of Civil Rights policies, these policies should have improved the relative labor
market prospects of blacks relative to whites with the same level of schooling.
Table 3 presents evidence about this by examining changes in earnings rank
within education categories. For three education categories - (i) less than a HS
degree, (ii) exactly a HS degree, and (iii) college degree or more – the table
reports within-education rank gap estimates: where a black man at the median
(and 90th) among blacks with a given level of schooling ranks in the earnings
distribution of white men with the same schooling.
As the upper panel shows, median within-education rank gaps were larger
among the more highly educated in the earliest years of our study period. In
1940, for example, the median college-educated black man was 26.2 percentile
points behind the median white college-educated men. The median black man
with less than a high school degree, on the other hand, was 8.7 percentile points
behind his white counterpart in 1940. After 1940, higher educated blacks enjoyed
strong within-education rank gains at the median, while gains were much smaller
for those with only for those with only elementary or secondary schooling.
Among college-educated men the median earnings rank gap declined from the
23-26 percentile point range during 1940-1960 to only ten percentile points in
1980 and has remained at roughly this size ever since. Over the same period, the
within-education rank gap for the median high school-educated black man fell
from around 19 percentile points to roughly 15 points in 2014. Unlike changes in
relative attainment, which seem to have been largest at the bottom and middle of
the distribution, improvements in relative school quality and labor market access
were particularly pronounced at the upper end of the education distribution.
Racial convergence in both the amount and quality of schooling should have
improved the economic rank of black men. Yet, we have shown that there has
been minimal positional improvement for the median black man over the past
seventy years. This puzzling pattern suggests the presence of another major
change related to education that pushed in the opposite direction from the two
factors already mentioned. An obvious candidate explanation for this opposing
24

force is what we consider the third major education-related change in the
economy: the sharply rising return to education in the labor market which has
disproportionately hurt black relative earnings because of the significant
remaining racial gaps in education and school quality.
It is well known that the returns to education in the earnings of workers have
increased sharply in recent decades. Figure 10 highlights perhaps lessappreciated estimates of the effect of additional schooling on the probability of
working in the population.29 These extensive margin results show that in 1940
and 1950, the more highly educated were, if anything, slightly less likely to work
than their less-educated counterparts. In the 1960’s and 1970’s a man’s schooling
was essentially uncorrelated with whether he worked. Since the 1970s, however,
work status has become increasingly strongly selected by education. In 1980
college-educated men were 10 percentage points more likely to work than men
with less than a high school degree, and the gap had grown to 22 percentage
points by the end of the Great Recession and remains at that level today. The
difference in work probability between college-educated and high-schooleducated workers has also increased sharply in recent decades, rising from less
than 1 percentage point in 1970 and 2 percentage points in 1980 to over 11
percentage points in 2010 and 2014.
Positional Convergence – The Role of Education
To assess the quantitative importance of each of the mechanisms by which
schooling shapes racial positional convergence, we extend the decomposition
method developed above to account for education. We use two simulations to
decompose the overall positional gains or losses shown in Table 2 into the three
aspects of education-related changes we have discussed: (i) convergence in
educational attainment, (ii) within-education rank gains and (iii) positional
losses due to the rising return labor market returns to schooling.

29 The figure plots points esimates from linear probability models of likelihood of working on
controls for race, age and education category. Appendix Table 10 reports similar estimates from
OLS log annual earnings regressions.

25

Recall that the benchmark simulations presented earlier held each
individual’s rank within the overall earnings distribution constant and applied
the earnings associated with that rank in the next period. We begin here by
calculating conditional decompositions that hold constant an individual’s initial
position within the earnings distribution conditional on education and apply the
new earnings distribution for that education level from the next period.
Simulations that come from this procedure account explicitly for how the changes
to the earnings distribution in any given period have affected the returns to
education over and above any general changes in the dispersion of earnings
captured by our initial simulations.
It is straightforward to construct the decomposition conditional on education,
X, simply by simply by making all of the same calculations made for the
unconditional case separately for each discrete education bin – i.e., re-writing the
component [A] of equation (4) as:
!!! !!! !|! |! − !!! !!! !|! |!

− !!! !|! − !!! !|!

This procedure is a nonparametric version of the framework developed in
Lemieux (2006) and essentially extends the single-dimensional model of skill to
two dimensions – educational attainment and residual skill. A particularly
attractive feature of the method is that it captures the impact that education has
on the earnings distribution in a fully nonparametric way. As Lemieux (2006)
makes clear, it is not enough to model how mean wages vary with educational
attainment, as it shifts both the mean and variance of earnings.30 Our approach
extends this important insight about the impact of education to higher order
moments of the earnings distribution and, most importantly, incorporates the
increasing role of education in driving the likelihood of working.
We use a second auxiliary simulation to further separate the relative
importance of gains due to convergence in educational attainment versus withineducation positional convergence. This calculation requires a simple change to
30 Lemieux (2006) demonstrates, in particular, that the increase in education from 1980-2000
explains most of the rise in residual wage variance over this period.

26

the conditional simulations: rather than hold the share of men in each race-ageeducation category at the level observed in the initial time period, the auxiliary
simulation adjusts the share of men in each race-age-education cell to match that
of period t. The resulting difference in the earnings gap between the two new
simulations is attributed to educational convergence, while any remaining
unexplained positional convergence is attributed to within-education positional
changes.
Table 4 summarizes the results from these two simulations. The rows labeled
(A) and (B) of the table repeat the overall decomposition into distributional and
positional convergence as shown in Table 2, while those labeled (i)-(iii) report the
further decomposition of positional convergence into the three education-related
forces. The results show that convergence in educational attainment has been
important in driving positional convergence at the bottom and middle of the
earnings distribution, while within-education positional convergence has been
the primary driving force at the top of the distribution. Over the full study period,
for example, gains in position within education categories – row (ii) - have been
responsible for the majority of the positional gains at the 90th percentile (24.8 log
points), while convergence in educational attainment – row (i) – has been
responsible for even larger positional gains at the median (38.0 log points) and
the only of the three education-related forces to help close the employment gap
(by 8.1 percentage points).31
The results in row (iii), which we label “Returns to Education,” show why the
median black man’s position in the white earnings distribution has not
appreciably advanced from 1940-2014, despite the substantial gains that should
have come from convergence in educational attainment. These results, which
come from contrasting the decomposition conditional on education with the

Decade by decade results for Table 4 are shown in Appendix Table 11. Consistent with the
previous literature, the results imply that gains due to education convergence were largest
throughout the distribution in the 1970s and 1980s, but have been quite small since 1990. A
similar pattern holds for within-education positional convergence at each percentile, with the vast
majority of gains at each percentile coming in the 1960s and 1970s with positive but less
substantial gains ever since. It is important to note that any contemporaneous changes in
educational attainment and school quality take several decades to be fully reflected in the
distributional and positional convergence of the population of prime-aged men.

31

27

baseline decomposition, imply that education-related changes in the earnings
distribution – over and above the general compression and expansion of the
earnings distribution – have been especially harmful to black men at the middle
and bottom of the distribution. In particular, the increasing importance of
education for wages and, especially, for the likelihood of working would have
widened the median earnings gap by 47.7 log points. This amount almost
perfectly counterbalances the positional gains that would have otherwise been the
result of convergence in educational attainment, school quality, and labor market
access. The growing importance of education for work has also played an
important role in the racial employment gap, again counteracting – much like at
the median – any positional gains that black men should have made due to
convergence in educational attainment.
The results in Table 4 show that convergence in educational attainment and
the decline of within-education positional gaps have indeed helped to close racial
earnings and employment gaps throughout the distribution over our study
period. Because significant educational differences remain, however, the
substantial increase in the returns to education in the labor market from 19702014 has largely thwarted the large positional gains that would have otherwise
occurred over the past several decades.
7 Conclusion
A large gap in the relative earnings of black and white men has been a
stubbornly persistent feature of the US labor market since the end of slavery. A
conventional view in economics has been that, over the last 75 years, the racial
earnings gap initially converged quite sharply through the mid-1970s, due in
large part to racial convergence in educational attainment and the Civil Rights
legislation of the 1960s, and has stagnated ever since. In this paper, we argue that
this perspective misses several key aspects of the dynamics of the earnings gap.
First, the conventional understanding is based on studies using samples of
employed persons, thereby ignoring the growing fraction of both white and black
men that are not working, including those affected by the sharp increase in
incarceration in the US since 1980. Incorporating non-work sharply alters the
28

picture of the evolution of the earning gap over the past thirty years. In
particular, measured this way the median earnings gap has re-widened
substantially rather than simply stagnated as is now as large as in 1950.
A second key feature of the median earnings gap is that it has risen and fallen
largely in step with changes to the overall structure of the earnings distribution
over the period studied. In particular, the sharply growing gap since 1980 is
explained completely by the stretching of the earnings distribution, and, perhaps
even more surprisingly, the initial closing of the gap from 1940-70 is largely
accounted for by the compression of earnings and returns to education that
occurred in this period, especially in the 1940s. Indeed, the relative position of
the median white and black men in the earnings distribution has changed very
little since 1940.
We find that education has played a subtly complex role in the evolution of
racial earnings gaps at the median. The limited rank gains for black men at the
median reflect the combination of strong but opposing forces related to
education. On the one hand, there has been considerable racial convergence in
educational attainment. But sharp increases in the returns to education on both
the intensive (among workers) and extensive (the propensity to work) margins
have had the effect of magnifying the impact of the remaining educational
differences by race, minimizing any real positional rank convergence at the
median.
While the existing literature has focused almost exclusively on the evolution of
the earnings gap at the mean or median, a key feature of our work is that we
separately study the lower and upper parts of the earnings distribution. In
contrast to the median, black men at the 90th percentile have had important
positional gains. In fact, these gains accounted for the vast majority of the decline
in the earnings gap from 1940-2014 at the 90th percentiles. Positional gains at the
top of the distribution were largely attributable to within-education positional
convergence, especially at the college level during the 1960s and 1970s. Potential
explanations for these improvements include the elimination of the exclusionary
practices that existed at the beginning of the study period in many professions
and occupations and most colleges and universities. More recently, affirmative
29

action in college admissions may have better equalized effective college quality
for high-ability black students, shrinking racial differences in unobserved skills
within the upper part of the earnings distribution.
At the bottom of the earnings distribution, sharp increases in incarceration,
labor force non-participation, and unemployment since 1970 have especially
devastated the working lives of poor black men. In the heart of the Great
Recession, for example, fully 37.8 percent of prime aged black men were not
working compared to 18.6 percent of white men. An advantage of the
nonparametric decomposition approach this paper employs is that it directly
measures the role structural changes in the labor market in driving this large
increase in the racial working gap. Strikingly, given the relative position of black
men in the education and earnings distributions in 1970, the large decline in the
overall fraction of men working and the sharp economy-wide increase in the role
of education on the propensity to work would have been expected to have had an
even greater impact on the racial working gap. In fact, a non-trivial amount of
racial educational convergence in the lower portion of the skill distribution has
prevented the working gap from increasing even further in the 1970-2014 period.
There are three main implications of the analysis for understanding racial
earnings inequality. First, our results highlight the lack of progress made in
closing the gaps in labor market outcomes for black and white men in the United
States over the past seventy years. Consistent with previous work, our results
illustrate the success Civil Rights Era legislation in closing the racial gap in both
attainment and school quality, especially during 1960-1980. But at the bottom
and middle of the earnings distribution, structural changes to the labor market
have overwhelmed these gains, causing both the racial employment gap and
median earnings gap to widen significantly since 1970.
Second, our analysis demonstrates how race-neutral changes in the structure
of earnings can powerfully and differentially affect the labor market prospects of
black and white men. The rise of the middle class and the great compression of
the earnings distribution in the middle of the 20th Century, for example, greatly
benefitted black male workers precisely because they were over-represented in
the middle and lower portions of the earnings distribution at the time. Similarly,
30

the more recent secular growth in overall earnings inequality and, especially, the
sharp increase in the returns to education on both the intensive and extensive
margins has disproportionately harmed black men, eliminating the gains that
would have naturally come from educational and skill convergence. Conversely,
race-neutral economic changes and related public policy decisions that improve
the prospects of all workers in the lower and middle portions of the earnings
distributions will have the side effect of reducing racial economic inequality.
Finally, our results draw attention to the divergence in the labor market
prospects of black men over the past several decades. While the entire economy
has experienced a marked increase in earnings inequality, this increase has been
even more dramatic for black men, with those at the top making gains within the
earnings distribution, and those at the bottom badly affected by mass
incarceration and declining labor market options for the less-skilled. In fact,
when the number of men with zero earnings is taken into account, the Gini index
of earnings inequality among black men in the United States is 63.4 in our 2014
sample. While it is difficult to make exact international comparisons based on
earnings, this is as high as the level of income inequality in the most unequal
countries in the world.

31

References
Altonji, Joseph and Rebecca Blank (1999) “Race and Gender in the Labor
Market,” in Handbook of Labor Economics, eds. Orley Ashenfelter and David
Card, Elsevier Science.
Arcidiacono, Peter, Patrick Bayer, and Aurel Hizmo (2010) “Beyond Signaling
and Human Capital: Education and the Revelation of Ability,” American
Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 2(4): 76-104
Autor, David H., Lawrence F. Katz and Melissa S. Kearney (2008) “Trends in U.S.
Wage Inequality: Revising the Revisionists ,” Review of Economics and
Statistics, Vol. 90, No. 2 (May), pp. 300-323.
Barsky, Robert, John Bound, Kerwin Charles and Joseph Lupton (2002)
“Accounting for the Black-White Wealth Gap: A Nonparametric Approach,”
Journal of the American Statistical Association, 97: 663-73.
Becker, Gary (1967) Human Capital and the Personal Distribution of Income:
An Analytical Approach (No. 1). Institute of Public Administration.
Black, Dan, Amelia Haviland, Seth Sanders, and Lowell Taylor (2006) "Why Do
Minority Men Earn Less? A Study of Wage Differentials among the Highly
Educated," The Review of Economics and Statistics 88.2: 300-313.
Blau, Francine D., and Lawrence M. Kahn (1997) "Swimming Upstream: Trends
in the Gender Wage Differential in the 1980s." Journal of Labor Economics: 142.
Bonilla-Silva, Eduardo (2006) Racism without racists: Color-blind racism and
the persistence of racial inequality in the United States. Rowman & Littlefield
Publishers.
Bound, John and Richard B. Freeman (1992) “What Went Wrong? The Erosion of
Relative Earnings and Employment Among Young Black Men in the 1980s ,” The
Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 107, No. 1 (February), pp. 201-232.
Brown Charles (1982) “The Federal Attack on Labor Market Discrimination: The
Mouse That Roared?” In Ehrenberg Ronald G., ed., Research in Labor
Economics, Vol. 5. Greenwich, Conn.: JAI Press, pp. 33–68
Brown, Charles (1984) "Black-White Earnings Ratios Since the Civil Rights Act of
1964: The Importance of Labor Market Dropouts," The Quarterly Journal of
Economics, (February), 99(1), pp. 31-44.
Butler, Richard, and James Heckman (1978) " The Impact of Government on the
Labor Market Status of Black Americans: A Critical Review." In Hausman, L., et
32

al., eds., Equal Rights and Industrial Relations, Chapter 9. Madison: Industrial
Relations Research Association.
Card, David and John E. DiNardo (2002) “Skill-Biased Technological Change and
Rising Wage Inequality: Some Problems and Puzzles,” Journal of Labor
Economics, 2002, 20(4), 733-83.
Card, David and Alan B. Krueger (1992) “School Quality and Black-White
Relative Earnings: A Direct Assessment,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol.
107, No. 1. (February), pp. 151-200.
Card, David and Alan B. Krueger (1993) “Trends in Relative Black-White
Earnings Revisited,” American Economic Review, Vol. 83, No. 2, (May), pp. 8591
Card, David and Thomas Lemieux (1996) “Wage dispersion, returns to skill, and
black-white wage differentials,” Journal of Econometrics, Vol. 74, pp. 319-361
Chandra, Amitabh (2000) “Labor-Market Dropouts and the Racial Wage Gap:
1940-1990,” American Economic Review, Vol. 90, No. 2, (May), pp. 333- 338
Chandra, Amitabh (2003) “Is the Convergence in the Racial Wage Gap Illusory?”
NBER Working Paper No. 9476, January 2003
Charles, Kerwin Kofi, Erik Hurst, and Matthew J. Notowidigdo (2016) "The
Masking of the Decline in Manufacturing Employment by the Housing
Bubble," Journal of Economic Perspectives, 30(2): 179-200.
Collins, William J. and Robert Margo (2006) “Historical Perspectives on Racial
Differences in Schooling in the United States,” in Handbook of Economics of
Education, Eds. Eric A. Hanushek and Finis Welch, Elsevier.
Darity, William, Jr., and Myers, Samuel, Jr. (1998) Persistent Disparity: Race
and Economic Inequality in the United States since 1945. Northampton, MA:
Elgar, 1998.
Goldin, Claudia Dale, and Lawrence F. Katz (2009) The Race between Education
and Technology. Harvard University Press.
Goldin, Claudia and Robert A. Margo (1992) “The Great Compression: The Wage
Structure in the United States at Mid-Century,” Quarterly Journal of Economics,
Vol. 107, No. 1 (February), pp. 1-34.
Grodsky, Eric and Devah Pager (2001) “The Structure of Disadvantage:
Individual and Occupational Determinants of the Black-White Wage Gap,”
American Sociological Review, Vol. 66, No. 4 (August), pp. 542-567.
33

Grogger, Jeff (1996) "Does School Quality Explain the Recent Black/White Wage
Trend?" Journal of Labor Economics: 231-253.
Heckman, James, T. Lyons & Petra Todd. (2000) “Understanding Black-White
Wage Differentials 1960-1990,” American Economic Review, May.
Hilger, Nathaniel (2016) “The Great Escape: Intergenerational Mobility in the
United States Since 1940,”
Johnson, William, Yuichi Kitamura, and Derek Neal (2000) "Evaluating a Simple
Method for Estimating Black-White Gaps in Median Wages." The American
Economic Review 90.2: 339-343.
Juhn, Chinhui, Kevin M. Murphy, and Brooks Pierce (1991) "Accounting for the
Slowdown in Black-White Wage Convergence." Workers and Their Wages: 10743.
Juhn, Chinhui, Kevin M, Murphy and Brooks Pierce (1993) “Wage Inequality and
the Rise in Returns to Skill.” Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 101, No. 3
(June), pp. 410-442.
Kahn-Lang, Ariella (2017) “Missing Black Men? The Impact of Under-Reporting
on Estimates of Black Male Outcomes” Working Paper, Harvard Kennedy
School.
Katz, Lawrence and David Autor (1999) “Changes in the Wage Structure and
Earnings Inequality,” in Orley Ashenfelter and David Card eds. Handbook of
Labor Economics, Vol 3A. Amsterdam: Elsevier Science, North Holland, pp.
1463-555.
Katz, Lawrence and Kevin Murphy (1992) “Changes in Relative Wages, 19631987: Supply and Demand Factors ,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol.
107, No. 1 (February), pp. 35-78.
Kling, Jeffrey R. (2006) "Incarceration Length, Employment, and Earnings." The
American Economic Review 96.3: 863.
Lang, Kevin and Michael Manove (2011) "Education and Labor Market
Discrimination." The American Economic Review, 101: 1467-1496.
Lemieux, Thomas (2006) “Increasing Residual Wage Inequality: Composition
Effects, Noisy Data, or Rising Demand for Skill?” The American Economic
Review, Vol. 96, No. 3 (June), pp. 461-498.
Machado, Jose A. and Jose Mata (2005) “Counterfactual Decomposition of
Changes in Wage Distributions Using Percentile Regression,” Journal of Applied
Econometrics, 20, pp. 445-465.
34

Maloney, Thomas N. (1994) “Wage Compression and Wage Inequality Between
Black and White men in the United States, 1940-1960,” The Journal of Economic
History, 54(2), pp. 358-81.
Margo, Robert A. (1995) “Explaining Black-White Wage Convergence, 19401950,” Industrial and Labor Relations Review, Vol. 48, No. 3 (April), pp. 470481.
Mason, Patrick (1999) "Male Interracial Wage Differentials: Competing
Explanations," Cambridge Journal of Economics, May 1999, 23(3) pp. 261-99.
Massey, Douglas S. (2007) Categorically Unequal: The American Stratification
System: The American Stratification System. Russell Sage Foundation.
Moffit, Robert (2012) "The U.S. Employment-Population Reversal in the 2000s:
Facts and Explanations", Brookings Papers for Economic Activity, Fall.
Murphy, Kevin M. and Finis Welch (1992) “The Structure of Wages,“ The
Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 107, No. 1 (February), pp. 285-326
Myrdal, Gunnar (1944) An American Dilemma: The Negro Problem and Modern
Democracy. New York: Harper & Row.
Neal, Derek A. (2006) “Why Has Black-White Skill Convergence Stopped?” in
Handbook of the Economics of Education, Vol 1 ed. By Eric A. Hanushek and
Finis Welch, pp. 511-576, Elsevier.
Neal, Derek A. and Armin Rick (2014) “The Prison Boom and the Lack of Black
Progress after Smith and Welch” NBER Working Paper No. 20283, (July).
Oliver, Melvin L., and Thomas M. Shapiro. Black wealth, white wealth: A new
perspective on racial inequality. Taylor & Francis, 2006.
Pager, Devah (2007) Marked: Race, Crime and Finding Work in an Era of Mass
Incarceration, The University of Chicago Press, Chicago, IL.
Piketty, Thomas and Emmanuel Saez (2003) “Income Inequality in the United
States, 1913-1998,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 118(1), pp. 1-39
Ritter, Joseph A., and Lowell J. Taylor (2011) "Racial Disparity in
Unemployment," The Review of Economics and Statistics 93.1: 30-42.
Smith, James P. and Finis R. Welch (1989) “Black Economic Progress After
Myrdal,” Journal of Economic Literature, Vol. 27, No. 2 (June), pp. 519-564.

35

Vigdor, Jacob (2006) “The New Promised Land: Black-White Convergence in the
American South, 1960-2000,” NBER Working Paper (March).
Western, Bruce (2002) “The Impact of Incarceration on Wage Mobility and
Inequality ,” American Sociological Review, Vol. 67, No. 4 (Augusr), pp. 526546.
Western, Bruce (2006) Punishment and inequality in America. Russell Sage
Foundation.
Western, Bruce and Becky Pettit (2005) “Black White Wage Inequality,
Employment Rates, and Incarceration,” American Journal of Sociology, Vol. 111,
No. 2 (September), pp. 553-578.

36

Figure 1: Racial Earnings Level and Earning Rank Gaps.

Note: Figure displays fraction of non-Hispanic black and white men aged 25-54 not working according to two
measures: not currently working and zero annual earnings in the previous year. The measure of earnings is labor
market earnings plus business and farm income. Sources: Census, 1940-2000; American Community Survey, 20052014. The sample year labeled '2007' combines ACS samples from 2005-07 and '2014' combines those from 2013-14.

Note: Figure displays fraction of non-Hispanic black and white men aged 25-54 not currently working for three
mutually exclusive reasons: institutionalized, not institutionalized but out of the labor force, in the labor force but
unemployed. Sources: Census, 1940-2000; American Community Survey, 2005-2014. The sample year labeled
'2007' combines ACS samples from 2005-07 and '2014' combines those from 2013-14.

Note: Figure displays real earnings, in thousands of 2014 dollars, of the median and 90th quantile non-Hispanic
black and white men measured in the population of all men aged 25-54. Sources: Census, 1940-2000; American
Community Survey, 2005-2014 .The sample year labeled '2007' combines ACS samples from 2005-07, '2014'
combines those from 2013-14.

Note: Figure displays earnings level gap, measured in log points, for the median and 90th quantile for non-Hispanic
black and white men aged 25-54. Gaps are reported for the sample of workers and the population of all men,
including non-workers. Sources: Census, 1940-2000; American Community Survey, 2005-2014 .The sample year
labeled '2007' combines ACS samples from 2005-07 and '2014' combines those from 2013-14.

Note: Figure displays earnings rank gap, measured in percentiles, for the median and 90th quantile in the
population of all non-Hispanic black and white men aged 25-54, including non-workers. Sources: Census,
1940-2000; American Community Survey, 2005-2014 .The sample year labeled '2007' combines ACS
samples from 2005-07 and '2014' combines those from 2013-14.

Note: Figure displays median earnings rank gap, measured in percentiles, for the population of all nonHispanic black and white men aged 25-54, including non-workers. Gaps are shown for the four major Census
regions as well as the U.S. as a whole. Sources: Census, 1940-2000; American Community Survey, 20052014. The sample year labeled '2007' combines ACS samples from 2005-07 and '2014' those from 2013-14.

Figure 7: Two Sources of Changes in Racial Earnings Gaps
A. Distributional Convergence

B. Positional Convergence

Figure 8: Illustrating Decomposition Method
I.

II.

III.

Note: Figures 9a-c display actual and simulated racial employment gaps and
median and 90th quantile earnings level gaps. Sources: Simulated - Author's
calculations. Actual - Census, 1940-2000; American Community Survey,
2005-2014 .The sample year labeled '2007' combines ACS samples from
2005-07 and '2014' combines those from 2013-14.

Note: Figure displays estimates from linear probability regression of employment on education and age.
Increased likelihood of working for college-educated workers versus those with less than and exactly a HS
degree, respectively, are shown. Sources: Census, 1940-2000; American Community Survey, 2005-2014.
The sample year labeled '2007' combines ACS samples from 2005-07, '2014' combines those from 2013-14.

Table 1a: Median Earnings Level and Rank Gaps, Under Alternative Sample and Data Specifications
1940

1970

2000

2007

2014

Baseline

-0.999
(0.008)

-0.523
(0.008)

-0.528
(0.010)

-0.560
(0.004)

-0.684
(0.004)

Age 19-64

-0.960
(0.009)

-0.533
(0.006)

-0.588
(0.003)

-0.614
(0.005)

-0.846
(0.008)

Native-Born men

-0.990
(0.008)

-0.515
(0.008)

-0.552
(0.011)

-0.591
(0.005)

-0.762
(0.005)

Weekly Earnings

-0.827
(0.006)

-0.466
(0.005)

-0.466
(0.004)

-0.489
(0.004)

-0.602
(0.005)

Only Labor Mkt. Earnings

-0.973
(0.014)

-0.491
(0.003)

-0.520
(0.004)

-0.543
(0.005)

-0.707
(0.008)

Baseline

-26.58
(0.08)

-30.03
(0.11)

-24.02
(0.05)

-22.77
(0.12)

-22.10
(0.12)

Age 19-64

-23.76
(0.12)

-18.86
(0.07)

-17.24
(0.05)

-16.39
(0.11)

-20.06
(0.15)

Native-Born men

-25.19
(0.08)

-30.24
(0.12)

-24.66
(0.06)

-23.38
(0.13)

-25.24
(0.13)

Weekly Earnings

-27.34
(0.14)

-30.98
(0.34)

-23.02
(0.04)

-22.34
(0.13)

-22.00
(0.16)

Only Labor Mkt. Earnings

-17.07
(0.13)

-24.57
(0.20)

-20.96
(0.06)

-19.64
(0.12)

-21.52
(0.16)

Earnings Level Gap

Earnings Rank Gap

Notes: Each main cell of the table reports the coefficient that characterizes the differences between nonHispanic black and non-Hispanic white men from 50th quantile (median) regressions of the individual's log
earnings (top panel) or percentile rank of earnings (lower panel) on race/ethnicity and controls for age. All
specifications include the population all men, including those with zero earnings. The rows in each panel
report results for five alternative specifications: (i) baseline results using the dependent variable - annual
labor market earnings plus business and farm income, (ii) expanding the age range to 19-64 from 25-54,
(iii) restricting the sample to native-born men for each race/ethnicity, (iv) an alternative dependent
variable - weekly earnings (i.e., annual earnings divided by weeks worked), and (v) an alternative
dependent variable - only labor market earnings. The columns report results for the sample of the Census
or American Community Survey described in the column heading. The sample year labeled '2007'
combines ACS samples from 2005-07 and '2014' combines those from 2013-14. Standard errors are in
parentheses.

Table 1b: 90th Quantile Earnings Level and Rank Gaps, Under Alternative Sample and Data Specifications
1940

1970

2000

2007

2014

Baseline

-0.797
(0.006)

-0.491
(0.003)

-0.442
(0.003)

-0.449
(0.004)

-0.485
(0.003)

Age 19-64

-0.734
(0.010)

-0.444
(0.005)

-0.405
(0.002)

-0.437
(0.006)

-0.485
(0.006)

Native-Born men

-0.799
(0.006)

-0.491
(0.003)

-0.442
(0.003)

-0.435
(0.004)

-0.499
(0.003)

Weekly Earnings

-0.719
(0.007)

-0.444
(0.004)

-0.405
(0.001)

-0.428
(0.005)

-0.459
(0.002)

Only Labor Mkt. Earnings

-0.792
(0.003)

-0.431
(0.013)

-0.413
(0.002)

-0.425
(0.004)

-0.461
(0.005)

Baseline

-36.72
(0.31)

-28.42
(0.52)

-15.91
(0.11)

-16.20
(0.17)

-15.76
(0.15)

Age 19-64

-26.52
(0.35)

-21.82
(0.19)

-13.32
(0.14)

-13.16
(0.19)

-13.27
(0.19)

Native-Born men

-36.72
(0.31)

-28.57
(0.53)

-16.44
(0.12)

-16.40
(0.17)

-16.52
(0.16)

Weekly Earnings

-37.26
(0.44)

-25.38
(0.36)

-13.46
(0.13)

-14.55
(0.20)

-14.98
(0.17)

Only Labor Mkt. Earnings

-31.85
(0.22)

-26.75
(0.36)

-15.03
(0.14)

-15.06
(0.20)

-15.08
(0.17)

Earnings Level Gap

Earnings Rank Gap

Notes: Each main cell of the table reports the coefficient that characterizes the differences between nonHispanic black and non-Hispanic white men from 90th quantile regressions of the individual's log earnings (top
panel) or percentile rank of earnings (lower panel) on race/ethnicity and controls for age. All specifications
include the population all men, including those with zero earnings. The rows in each panel report results for five
alternative specifications: (i) baseline results using the dependent variable - annual labor market earnings plus
business and farm income, (ii) expanding the age range to 19-64 from 25-54, (iii) restricting the sample to nativeborn men for each race/ethnicity, (iv) an alternative dependent variable - weekly earnings (i.e., annual earnings
divided by weeks worked), and (v) an alternative dependent variable - only labor market earnings. The columns
report results for the sample of the Census or American Community Survey described in the column heading.
The sample year labeled '2007' combines ACS samples from 2005-07 and '2014' combines those from 2013-14.
Standard errors are in parentheses.

Table 2: Decomposition of Changes in Racial Earnings and Employment Gaps - Positional Vs. Distributional Convergence
1940-1970
Median Earnings Level Gap
Total Change
(A) Distributional Convergence
(B) Positional Convergence
90th Quantile Earnings Level Gap
Total Change
(A) Distributional Convergence
(B) Positional Convergence
Employment Gap
Total Change
(A) Distributional Convergence
(B) Positional Convergence

0.476
0.643
-0.167
0.306
0.192
0.114

1970-2014

1940-2014

-0.193
-0.392
0.199

0.283

0.019
-0.177
0.196

0.325

0.251
0.032

0.015
0.310

-0.105
-0.095
-0.010

Notes: The three panels of this table describe a series of decompositions of the change in the racial employment gap and
earnings gaps at the 50th and 90th quantiles, respectively, for the time horizon shown in the column heading. All estimates
use the sample of all men including those with zero earnings, conditioning on age. The total change in the racial employment
and earnings gap at each quantile is decomposed into two components: the portion due to (A) distributional shifts in the
overall structure of the earnings distribution and (B) shifts in the relative position of black and white men within the earnings
distribution.

Table 3: Racial Earnings Rank Gaps within Education Category - 1940-2014
1940

1970

2000

2007

2014

-26.20
(1.63)

-17.00
(0.83)

-9.26
(0.15)

-11.12
(0.26)

-11.19
(0.30)

HS Degree

-19.95
(0.66)

-16.62
(0.39)

-15.95
(0.16)

-14.00
(0.16)

-15.58
(0.20)

Less than HS

-8.70
(0.19)

-13.95
(0.18)

-15.03
(0.26)

-13.83
(0.38)

-14.05
(0.24)

College Degree or More

-9.14
(0.80)

-3.98
(0.30)

-3.81
(0.07)

-4.47
(0.14)

-4.35
(0.16)

HS Degree

-16.39
(4.01)

-12.58
(0.86)

-9.82
(0.24)

-10.73
(0.20)

-11.49
(0.16)

Less than HS

-21.33
(0.12)

-17.94
(0.25)

-14.24
(0.28)

-16.23
(0.46)

-16.52
(0.47)

Median
College Degree or More

90th Quantile

Notes: Each main cell of the table reports the coefficient that characterizes the differences between non-Hispanic black and
non-Hispanic white men aged 25-54 in the education category shown in the row heading from 90th quantile regressions of the
individual's percentile rank in the white earnings distribution on race/ethnicity and controls for age categories. All
specifications use the sample of all men, including those with zero earnings. The columns report results for the sample of the
Census or American Community Survey described in the column heading. The sample year labeled '2007' combines ACS
samples from 2005-07 and '2014' combines those from 2013-14. Standard errors are in parentheses.

Table 4: Decomposition of Changes in Racial Earnings and Employment Gaps - The Role of Education
1940-1970

1970-2014

1940-2014

Median Earnings Level Gap
Total Change
(A) Distributional Convergence
(B) Positional Convergence
(i) Convergence in Educational Attainment
(ii) Within-Education Positional Convergence
(iii) Returns to Education

0.476
-0.193
0.643
-0.392
-0.167
0.199
0.133
0.247
-0.065
0.194
-0.236
-0.242

0.283
0.251
0.032
0.380
0.129
-0.477

90th Quantile Earnings Level Gap
Total Change
(A) Distributional Convergence
(B) Positional Convergence
(i) Convergence in Educational Attainment
(ii) Within-Education Positional Convergence
(iii) Returns to Education

0.306
0.019
0.192
-0.177
0.114
0.196
-0.097
0.052
0.101
0.147
0.110
-0.003

0.325
0.015
0.310
-0.045
0.248
0.107

Employment Gap
Total Change
(A) Distributional Convergence
(B) Positional Convergence
(i) Convergence in Educational Attainment
(ii) Within-Education Positional Convergence
(iii) Returns to Education

-0.105
-0.095
-0.010
0.081
-0.024
-0.067

Notes: The three panels of this table describe a series of decompositions of the change in the racial employment gap and
earnings gaps at the 50th and 90th quantiles, respectively, for the time horizon shown in the column heading. All estimates use
the sample of all men including those with zero earnings, conditioning on age. The total change in the racial employment and
earnings gap at each quantile is first decomposed into two components: the portion due to (A) distributional shifts in the overall
structure of the earnings distribution and (B) shifts in the relative position of black and white men within the earnings
distribution Shifts in relative position are then further decomposed into components due to (i) racial convergence in educational
attainment, (ii) within-education category positional convergence, and (iii) changes in the relative position of black and white
men due to education-related changes in the earnings distribution.

Appendix Figure 1: Positional and Distributional Convergence Acting in
Same Direction

Appendix Table 1: Labor Market Outcomes for Non-Hispanic Black and White Men - Summary Statistics, 1940-2014
Black Men

1940

1950

1960

1970

1980

1990

2000

2007

2010

2014

Not Currently Working - All Explanations
Institutionalized (Incarcerated)
Out of Labor Force
Unemployed

0.140

0.162
0.032
0.073
0.057

0.182
0.041
0.073
0.068

0.168
0.035
0.097
0.036

0.240
0.033
0.128
0.079

0.281
0.062
0.130
0.089

0.348
0.089
0.194
0.065

0.322
0.083
0.160
0.079

0.378
0.083
0.163
0.131

0.351
0.080
0.162
0.109

Fraction w/ Zero Earnings in Previous Year

0.110

0.113

0.102

0.102

0.165

0.187

0.210

0.206

0.283

0.266

White Men

1940

1950

1960

1970

1980

1990

2000

2007

2010

2014

Not Currently Working - All Explanations
Institutionalized (Incarcerated)
Out of Labor Force
Unemployed

0.106

0.088
0.012
0.046
0.030

0.080
0.012
0.035
0.033

0.076
0.009
0.044
0.023

0.101
0.007
0.054
0.040

0.106
0.010
0.058
0.038

0.132
0.013
0.090
0.029

0.145
0.013
0.093
0.038

0.186
0.015
0.094
0.077

0.171
0.015
0.098
0.057

Fraction w/ Zero Earnings in Previous Year

0.076

0.070

0.045

0.039

0.055

0.061

0.073

0.081

0.119

0.116

0.049
0.091

0.037
0.069

Notes: The cells of the table report the mean for non-Hispanic black and white men aged 25-54 in the sample of the Census or American Community Survey described in the column
heading. The sample year labeled '2007' combines ACS samples from 2005-07 and '2014' combines those from 2013-14. The measure of earnings is labor market earnings plus business
and farm income.

Appendix Table 2: Real Earnings of Non-Hispanic Black and White Men - Summary Statistics, 1940-2014
Real Earnings - including Business and Farm Income (thousands of 2014 dollars)
Black
Men with Positive Earnings
Mean
Median
All Men
Median
90th Percentile
White
Men with Positive Earnings
Mean
Median
All Men
Median
90th Percentile

1940

1950

1960

1970

1980

1990

2000

2007

2010

2014

9.69
8.45

17.24
17.19

24.60
24.39

35.49
33.86

36.47
34.38

38.23
32.60

42.94
35.74

41.42
34.28

41.24
32.57

39.91
31.51

6.09
16.98

15.23
29.96

21.19
41.19

30.81
58.27

28.74
63.22

27.17
67.02

27.50
71.49

27.03
71.98

21.71
70.57

21.00
69.00

1940

1950

1960

1970

1980

1990

2000

2007

2010

2014

20.57
17.59

32.08
29.96

47.21
41.99

60.96
54.00

55.84
50.29

61.12
50.72

68.81
52.24

68.22
51.42

64.59
48.85

64.65
48.10

16.84
38.45

28.19
50.69

40.39
74.78

52.17
97.93

48.57
91.95

48.00
105.05

48.25
116.44

47.31
117.51

43.43
111.82

42.13
114.00

Notes: The cells of the table report the mean for non-Hispanic black and white men aged 25-54 in the sample of the Census or American Community Survey described in the
column heading. The sample year labeled '2007' combines ACS samples from 2005-07 and '2014' combines those from 2013-14. Real earnings are measured in thousands of
2014 dollars and include labor market earnings plus business and farm income.

Appendix Table 3: Racial Earnings Level Gaps - Median and 90th Quantile - 1940-2014

Men with Positive Earnings
Median

90th Quantile

Number of Observations
All Men
Median

90th Quantile

Number of Observations

1940

1950

1960

1970

1980

1990

2000

2007

2010

2014

-0.913
(0.009)

-0.555
(0.034)

-0.584
(0.008)

-0.446
(0.003)

-0.387
(0.001)

-0.382
(0.004)

-0.358
(0.002)

-0.385
(0.003)

-0.357
(0.006)

-0.394
(0.005)

-0.773
(0.008)

-0.534
(0.025)

-0.583
(0.005)

-0.455
(0.016)

-0.336
(0.001)

-0.378
(0.006)

-0.372
(0.003)

-0.405
(0.004)

-0.394
(0.007)

-0.416
(0.005)

252,682

84,815

313,864

326,734

1,943,928

474,109

2,682,870

1,593,014

509,038

1,993,642

-0.999
(0.008)

-0.677
(0.019)

-0.663
(0.007)

-0.523
(0.008)

-0.511
(0.003)

-0.553
(0.007)

-0.528
(0.010)

-0.560
(0.004)

-0.715
(0.013)

-0.684
(0.004)

-0.797
(0.006)

-0.551
(0.004)

-0.594
(0.007)

-0.491
(0.003)

-0.368
(0.002)

-0.424
(0.004)

-0.442
(0.003)

-0.449
(0.004)

-0.470
(0.004)

-0.485
(0.003)

274,760

91,741

330,694

342,759

2,089,550

513,806

2,975,183

1,752,969

590,373

2,340,588

Notes: Each main cell of the table reports the coefficient that characterizes the differences between non-Hispanic black and non-Hispanic white men aged 25-54 from 50th
(median) and 90th quantile regressions of the individual's log earnings on race/ethnicity and controls for age categories. The specifications shown in the upper panel use the
sample of men with positive earnings while those shown in the lower panel use the sample of all men, including those with zero earnings. The columns report results for the
sample of the Census or American Community Survey described in the column heading. The sample year labeled '2007' combines ACS samples from 2005-07 and '2014' combines
those from 2013-14. Standard errors are in parentheses.

Appendix Table 4: Racial Earnings Rank Gaps - Median and 90th Quantile - 1940-2014

Men with Positive Earnings
Median

90th Quantile

Number of Observations
All Men
Median

90th Quantile

Number of Observations

1940

1950

1960

1970

1980

1990

2000

2007

2010

2014

-27.22
(0.16)

-28.73
(0.33)

-31.24
(0.12)

-29.41
(0.24)

-20.60
(0.08)

-19.25
(0.17)

-18.68
(0.13)

-18.18
(0.13)

-15.65
(0.23)

-16.55
(0.09)

-35.57
(0.34)

-33.73
(0.83)

-35.65
(0.89)

-27.68
(0.24)

-15.62
(0.13)

-14.76
(0.33)

-12.98
(0.14)

-13.31
(0.20)

-11.06
(0.25)

-12.11
(0.17)

252,682

84,815

313,864

326,734

1,943,928

474,109

2,682,870

1,593,014

509,038

1,993,642

-26.58
(0.08)

-29.31
(0.18)

-32.46
(0.14)

-30.03
(0.11)

-24.17
(0.06)

-23.79
(0.19)

-24.02
(0.05)

-22.77
(0.12)

-22.00
(0.20)

-22.10
(0.12)

-36.72
(0.31)

-36.12
(0.72)

-37.38
(0.36)

-28.42
(0.52)

-18.41
(0.21)

-17.70
(0.27)

-15.91
(0.11)

-16.20
(0.17)

-15.10
(0.30)

-15.76
(0.15)

274,760

91,741

330,694

342,759

2,089,550

513,806

2,975,183

1,752,969

590,373

2,340,588

Notes: Each main cell of the table reports the coefficient that characterizes the differences between non-Hispanic black and non-Hispanic white men aged 25-54 from 50th
(median) and 90th quantile regressions of the individual's percentile rank in the white earnings distribution on race/ethnicity and controls for age categories. The specifications
shown in the upper panel use the sample of men with positive earnings while those shown in the lower panel use the sample of all men, including those with zero earnings. The
columns report results for the sample of the Census or American Community Survey described in the column heading. The sample year labeled '2007' combines ACS samples from
2005-07 and '2014' combines those from 2013-14. Standard errors are in parentheses.

Appendix Table 5: Within-Region Racial Earnings Level and Rank Gaps - Median - 1940-2014
Sample of All Men; Conditional on Age
1940
1950
1960
1970
1980
Earnings Level Gap
North
-0.558
-0.397
-0.400
-0.397
-0.463
(0.022)
(0.011)
(0.022)
(0.009)
(0.002)

1990

2000

2007

2010

2014

-0.511
(0.016)

-0.535
(0.005)

-0.546
(0.011)

-0.693
(0.023)

-0.692
(0.011)

South

-0.875
(0.011)

-0.713
(0.013)

-0.758
(0.008)

-0.639
(0.008)

-0.539
(0.003)

-0.562
(0.009)

-0.490
(0.004)

-0.503
(0.004)

-0.644
(0.013)

-0.588
(0.006)

Midwest

-0.450
(0.016)

-0.307
(0.018)

-0.349
(0.011)

-0.308
(0.016)

-0.358
(0.008)

-0.560
(0.025)

-0.560
(0.010)

-0.698
(0.014)

-0.955
(0.040)

-0.960
(0.022)

West

-0.511
(0.045)

-0.384
(0.036)

-0.410
(0.013)

-0.403
(0.016)

-0.435
(0.007)

-0.452
(0.022)

-0.462
(0.008)

-0.473
(0.010)

-0.640
(0.027)

-0.653
(0.022)

-22.85
(0.31)

-23.59
(0.60)

-25.31
(0.40)

-26.90
(0.40)

-23.81
(0.17)

-25.17
(0.50)

-26.48
(0.23)

-24.78
(0.33)

-24.90
(0.58)

-24.56
(0.33)

South

-14.84
(0.22)

-20.45
(0.40)

-23.74
(0.20)

-25.91
(0.18)

-22.06
(0.09)

-21.62
(0.22)

-21.05
(0.12)

-20.02
(0.15)

-19.88
(0.29)

-18.98
(0.16)

Midwest

-16.52
(0.43)

-21.05
(0.58)

-25.20
(0.47)

-24.03
(0.07)

-20.52
(0.23)

-23.35
(0.55)

-24.54
(0.21)

-24.77
(0.29)

-23.65
(0.45)

-24.60
(0.27)

West

-19.82
(1.37)

-26.81
(1.52)

-30.74
(0.42)

-28.50
(0.67)

-21.93
(0.15)

-20.83
(0.73)

-22.66
(0.33)

-21.77
(0.48)

-21.90
(0.84)

-22.23
(0.42)

Eanings Rank Gap
North

Notes: Each main cell of the table reports the coefficient that characterizes the differences between non-Hispanic black and non-Hispanic white men from 50th
quantile (median) regressions of the individual's log earnings (top panel) or percentile rank of earnings (lower panel) on race/ethnicity and controls for age. All
specifications include the population all men, including those with zero earnings. The rows in each panel report results for the four Census regions. The columns
report results for the sample of the Census or American Community Survey described in the column heading. The sample year labeled '2007' combines ACS samples
from 2005-07 and '2014' combines those from 2013-14. Standard errors are in parentheses.

Appendix Table 6: Racial Earnings Level and Rank Gaps - Median - Alternative Specificatoons - 1940-2014
1940

1950

1960

1970

1980

1990

2000

2007

2010

2014

-0.999
(0.008)

-0.677
(0.019)

-0.663
(0.007)

-0.523
(0.008)

-0.511
(0.003)

-0.553
(0.007)

-0.528
(0.010)

-0.560
(0.004)

-0.715
(0.013)

-0.684
(0.004)

Age 19-64

-0.960
(0.009)

-0.676
(0.025)

-0.682
(0.004)

-0.533
(0.006)

-0.571
(0.004)

-0.588
(0.009)

-0.588
(0.003)

-0.614
(0.005)

-0.822
(0.011)

-0.846
(0.008)

Native-Born men

-0.990
(0.008)

-0.677
(0.019)

-0.665
(0.007)

-0.515
(0.008)

-0.502
(0.003)

-0.575
(0.007)

-0.552
(0.011)

-0.591
(0.005)

-0.770
(0.013)

-0.762
(0.005)

Weekly Earnings

-0.827
(0.006)

-0.529
(0.007)

-0.586
(0.004)

-0.466
(0.005)

-0.457
(0.002)

-0.478
(0.005)

-0.466
(0.004)

-0.489
(0.004)

-0.611
(0.008)

-0.602
(0.005)

Only Labor Mkt. Earnings

-0.973
(0.014)

-0.603
(0.016)

-0.645
(0.012)

-0.491
(0.003)

-0.485
(0.002)

-0.545
(0.008)

-0.520
(0.004)

-0.543
(0.005)

-0.731
(0.013)

-0.707
(0.008)

-26.58
(0.08)

-29.31
(0.18)

-32.46
(0.14)

-30.03
(0.11)

-24.17
(0.06)

-23.79
(0.19)

-24.02
(0.05)

-22.77
(0.12)

-22.00
(0.20)

-22.10
(0.12)

Age 19-64

-23.76
(0.12)

-23.47
(0.27)

-24.97
(0.17)

-18.86
(0.07)

-17.19
(0.04)

-15.83
(0.18)

-17.24
(0.05)

-16.39
(0.11)

-17.05
(0.22)

-20.06
(0.15)

Native-Born men

-25.19
(0.08)

-28.72
(0.20)

-32.46
(0.14)

-30.24
(0.12)

-24.57
(0.06)

-24.25
(0.20)

-24.66
(0.06)

-23.38
(0.13)

-23.48
(0.21)

-25.24
(0.13)

Weekly Earnings

-27.34
(0.14)

-30.15
(0.17)

-32.40
(0.14)

-30.98
(0.34)

-24.00
(0.08)

-23.21
(0.20)

-23.02
(0.04)

-22.34
(0.13)

-22.59
(0.16)

-22.00
(0.16)

Only Labor Mkt. Earnings

-17.07
(0.13)

-17.03
(0.20)

-22.15
(0.13)

-24.57
(0.20)

-19.53
(0.06)

-20.25
(0.16)

-20.96
(0.06)

-19.64
(0.12)

-20.00
(0.13)

-21.52
(0.16)

Log Earnings Gap
Baseline

Eanings Rank Gap
Baseline

Notes: Each main cell of the table reports the coefficient that characterizes the differences between non-Hispanic black and non-Hispanic white men from 50th quantile (median)
regressions of the individual's log earnings (top panel) or percentile rank of earnings (lower panel) on race/ethnicity and controls for age. All specifications include the population
all men, including those with zero earnings. The rows in each panel report results for five alternative specifications: (i) baseline results using the dependent variable - annual
labor market earnings plus business and farm income, (ii) expanding the age range to 19-64 from 25-54, (iii) restricting the sample to native-born men for each race/ethnicity, (iv)
an alternative dependent variable - weekly earnings (i.e., annual earnings divided by weeks worked), and (v) an alternative dependent variable - only labor market earnings. The
columns report results for the sample of the Census or American Community Survey described in the column heading. The sample year labeled '2007' combines ACS samples
from 2005-07 and '2014' combines those from 2013-14. Standard errors are in parentheses.

Appendix Table 7: Racial Earnings Level and Rank Gaps - 90th Quantile - Alternative Specificatoons - 1940-2014
1940

1950

1960

1970

1980

1990

2000

2007

2010

2014

-0.797
(0.006)

-0.551
(0.004)

-0.594
(0.007)

-0.491
(0.003)

-0.368
(0.002)

-0.424
(0.004)

-0.442
(0.003)

-0.449
(0.004)

-0.470
(0.004)

-0.485
(0.003)

Age 19-64

-0.734
(0.010)

-0.514
(0.025)

-0.572
(0.007)

-0.444
(0.005)

-0.369
(0.003)

-0.390
(0.008)

-0.405
(0.002)

-0.437
(0.006)

-0.457
(0.005)

-0.485
(0.006)

Native-Born men

-0.799
(0.006)

-0.551
(0.004)

-0.594
(0.007)

-0.491
(0.003)

-0.368
(0.002)

-0.444
(0.004)

-0.442
(0.003)

-0.435
(0.004)

-0.485
(0.004)

-0.499
(0.003)

Weekly Earnings

-0.719
(0.007)

-0.489
(0.009)

-0.502
(0.041)

-0.444
(0.004)

-0.315
(0.001)

-0.370
(0.005)

-0.405
(0.001)

-0.428
(0.005)

-0.441
(0.005)

-0.459
(0.002)

Only Labor Mkt. Earnings

-0.792
(0.003)

-0.468
(0.007)

-0.478
(0.005)

-0.431
(0.013)

-0.318
(0.006)

-0.373
(0.005)

-0.413
(0.002)

-0.425
(0.004)

-0.438
(0.007)

-0.461
(0.005)

-36.72
(0.31)

-36.12
(0.72)

-37.38
(0.36)

-28.42
(0.52)

-18.41
(0.21)

-17.70
(0.27)

-15.91
(0.11)

-16.20
(0.17)

-15.10
(0.30)

-15.76
(0.15)

Age 19-64

-26.52
(0.35)

-28.85
(0.42)

-30.04
(0.43)

-21.82
(0.19)

-15.13
(0.12)

-13.67
(0.20)

-13.32
(0.14)

-13.16
(0.19)

-12.91
(0.30)

-13.27
(0.19)

Native-Born men

-36.72
(0.31)

-36.17
(0.73)

-37.45
(0.35)

-28.57
(0.53)

-18.57
(0.22)

-17.86
(0.27)

-16.44
(0.12)

-16.40
(0.17)

-15.47
(0.31)

-16.52
(0.16)

Weekly Earnings

-37.26
(0.44)

-31.41
(0.83)

-30.80
(0.33)

-25.38
(0.36)

-15.29
(0.14)

-15.07
(0.27)

-13.46
(0.13)

-14.55
(0.20)

-14.97
(0.29)

-14.98
(0.17)

Only Labor Mkt. Earnings

-31.85
(0.22)

-29.09
(0.26)

-31.45
(0.28)

-26.75
(0.36)

-16.00
(0.11)

-15.97
(0.27)

-15.03
(0.14)

-15.06
(0.20)

-12.73
(0.13)

-15.08
(0.17)

Log Earnings Gap
Baseline

Eanings Rank Gap
Baseline

Notes: Each main cell of the table reports the coefficient that characterizes the differences between non-Hispanic black and non-Hispanic white men from 90th quantile
regressions of the individual's log earnings (top panel) or percentile rank of earnings (lower panel) on race/ethnicity and controls for age. All specifications include the population
all men, including those with zero earnings. The rows in each panel report results for five alternative specifications: (i) baseline results using the dependent variable - annual labor
market earnings plus business and farm income, (ii) expanding the age range to 19-64 from 25-54, (iii) restricting the sample to native-born men for each race/ethnicity, (iv) an
alternative dependent variable - weekly earnings (i.e., annual earnings divided by weeks worked), and (v) an alternative dependent variable - only labor market earnings. The
columns report results for the sample of the Census or American Community Survey described in the column heading. The sample year labeled '2007' combines ACS samples
from 2005-07 and '2014' combines those from 2013-14. Standard errors are in parentheses.

Appendix Table 8: Decomposition of Changes in Racial Earnings and Employment Gaps - Positional Vs. Distributional Convergence
1940-1950

1950-1960

1960-1970

1970-1980

1980-1990

1990-2000

2000-2007

2007-2014

Median Earnings Level Gap
Total Change
(A) Distributional Convergence
(B) Positional Convergence

0.322
0.417
-0.096

0.014
0.134
-0.120

0.141
0.092
0.049

0.012
-0.134
0.146

-0.043
-0.064
0.021

0.025
-0.014
0.040

-0.032
-0.056
0.024

-0.156
-0.124
-0.031

90th Quantile Earnings Level Gap
Total Change
(A) Distributional Convergence
(B) Positional Convergence

0.246
0.217
0.029

-0.043
-0.033
-0.011

0.103
0.008
0.095

0.123
-0.006
0.128

-0.056
-0.058
0.002

-0.018
-0.068
0.050

-0.007
-0.018
0.011

-0.022
-0.027
0.004

-0.050
-0.031
-0.019

-0.024
-0.015
-0.009

-0.008
-0.013
0.005

0.016
-0.003
0.019

-0.039
-0.034
-0.005

Employment Gap
Total Change
(A) Distributional Convergence
(B) Positional Convergence

Notes: The three panels of this table describe a series of decompositions of the change in the racial employment gap and earnings gaps at the 50th and 90th
quantiles, respectively, for the time horizon shown in the column heading. All estimates use the sample of all men including those with zero earnings,
conditioning on age. The total change in the racial employment and earnings gap at each quantile is decomposed into two components: the portion due to (A)
distributional shifts in the overall structure of the earnings distribution and (B) shifts in the relative position of black and white men within the earnings
distribution.

Appendix Table 9: Educational Attainment of Non-Hispanic Black and White Men, 1940-2014
1940

1950

1960

1970

1980

1990

2000

2007

2010

2014

Black Men
Eight Years or fewer
HS Degree or more
College Degree or more

0.846
0.072
0.016

0.711
0.139
0.021

0.565
0.223
0.033

0.342
0.378
0.051

0.158
0.624
0.102

0.059
0.788
0.124

0.035
0.845
0.140

0.029
0.860
0.159

0.028
0.866
0.159

0.025
0.881
0.172

Years of Education

5.60

6.75

7.99

9.62

11.39

12.34

12.52

12.71

12.78

12.88

White Men
Eight Years or fewer
HS Degree or more
College Degree or more

0.539
0.281
0.068

0.386
0.410
0.091

0.274
0.514
0.127

0.160
0.658
0.181

0.079
0.810
0.263

0.031
0.898
0.289

0.019
0.926
0.313

0.017
0.930
0.317

0.016
0.934
0.323

0.016
0.939
0.337

Years of Education

9.13

10.08

10.90

11.84

12.90

13.49

13.57

13.60

13.66

13.73

Notes: The cells of the table report the mean for non-Hispanic black and white men aged 25-54 in the sample of the Census or American Community Survey described in the
column heading. The sample year labeled '2007' combines ACS samples from 2005-07 and '2014' combines those from 2013-14. The category HS Degree or more is
equivalent to 12+ years of education, while College Degree or more is equivalent to 16+ years of education.

Appendix Table 10: Impact of Education on the Earnings of Workers and Likelihood of Working - 1940-2014
Dependent Variable: Log Earnings

Sample: Men with Positive Earnings

1940

1950

1960

1970

1980

1990

2000

2007

2010

2014

College Degree or more

0.915
(0.006)

0.515
(0.010)

0.630
(0.005)

0.618
(0.004)

0.625
(0.002)

0.893
(0.005)

0.923
(0.002)

1.019
(0.004)

1.091
(0.006)

1.073
(0.004)

Some College

0.630
(0.007)

0.315
(0.010)

0.399
(0.005)

0.366
(0.004)

0.399
(0.002)

0.538
(0.005)

0.519
(0.002)

0.557
(0.004)

0.566
(0.007)

0.547
(0.004)

HS Degree

0.519
(0.005)

0.300
(0.010)

0.307
(0.003)

0.276
(0.003)

0.323
(0.002)

0.377
(0.005)

0.329
(0.002)

0.331
(0.004)

0.313
(0.006)

0.312
(0.004)

# Observations

252,682

84,815

313,864

326,734

1,943,928

474,109

2,682,870

1,593,014

509,038

1,993,642

Dependent Variable: Indicator for Positive Earnings

Sample: All Men

1940

1950

1960

1970

1980

1990

2000

2007

2010

2014

College Degree or more

0.007
(0.002)

0.006
(0.003)

0.036
(0.001)

0.051
(0.001)

0.099
(0.001)

0.155
(0.002)

0.182
(0.001)

0.176
(0.001)

0.222
(0.002)

0.218
(0.001)

Some College

0.017
(0.002)

0.001
(0.003)

0.031
(0.001)

0.043
(0.002)

0.083
(0.001)

0.133
(0.002)

0.157
(0.001)

0.146
(0.001)

0.168
(0.002)

0.165
(0.001)

HS Degree

0.022
(0.001)

0.028
(0.002)

0.034
(0.001)

0.044
(0.001)

0.077
(0.001)

0.107
(0.002)

0.114
(0.001)

0.105
(0.001)

0.108
(0.002)

0.105
(0.001)

# Observations

274,760

91,741

330,694

342,759

2,089,550

513,806

2,975,183

1,752,969

590,373

2,340,588

Notes: The table reports coefficients for three education categories (some high school or less is excluded) from OLS regressions of log earnings (upper panel) and and indicator
for positive earnings (lower panel) that include controls for race/ethnicity and age categories. The log ernings regressionsl use the sample of men with positive earnings while
the positive-earnings regressionsl use the sample of all men, including those with zero earnings. The columns report results for the sample of the Census or American
Community Survey described in the column heading. The sample year labeled '2007' combines ACS samples from 2005-07 and '2014' combines those from 2013-14. Standard
errors are in parentheses.

Appendix Table 11: Decomposition of Changes in Racial Earnings and Employment Gaps - Positional Vs. Distributional Convergence
1940-1950

1950-1960

1960-1970

1970-1980

1980-1990

1990-2000

2000-2007

2007-2014

Median Earnings Level Gap
Total Change
(A) Distributional Convergence
(B) Positional Convergence
(i) Convergence in Educational Attainment
(ii) Within-Education Positional Convergence
(iii) Returns to Education

0.322
0.014
0.141
0.012
-0.043
0.025
-0.032
-0.156
0.417
0.134
0.092
-0.134
-0.064
-0.014
-0.056
-0.124
-0.096
-0.120
0.049
0.146
0.021
0.040
0.024
-0.031
0.026
0.083
0.024
0.100
0.123
-0.008
-0.009
0.041
-0.042
-0.083
0.061
0.151
0.026
0.040
0.013
-0.037
-0.080
-0.120
-0.036
-0.105
-0.129
0.007
0.020
-0.035

90th Quantile Earnings Level Gap
Total Change
(A) Distributional Convergence
(B) Positional Convergence
(i) Convergence in Educational Attainment
(ii) Within-Education Positional Convergence
(iii) Returns to Education

0.246
-0.043
0.103
0.123
-0.056
-0.018
-0.007
-0.022
0.217
-0.033
0.008
-0.006
-0.058
-0.068
-0.018
-0.027
0.029
-0.011
0.095
0.128
0.002
0.050
0.011
0.004
-0.040
-0.037
-0.020
0.042
-0.002
-0.006
0.015
0.003
0.034
-0.022
0.089
0.089
0.013
0.042
-0.004
0.007
0.035
0.049
0.026
-0.002
-0.009
0.014
-0.001
-0.006

Employment Gap
Total Change
(A) Distributional Convergence
(B) Positional Convergence
(i) Convergence in Educational Attainment
(ii) Within-Education Positional Convergence
(iii) Returns to Education

-0.050
-0.024
-0.008
0.016
-0.039
-0.031
-0.015
-0.013
-0.003
-0.034
-0.019
-0.009
0.005
0.019
-0.005
0.013
0.022
0.005
0.001
0.040
-0.011
-0.004
0.009
0.018
-0.036
-0.021
-0.027
-0.009
0.000
-0.009

Notes: The three panels of this table describe a series of decompositions of the change in the racial employment gap and earnings gaps at the 50th and 90th quantiles, respectively, for the time
horizon shown in the column heading. All estimates use the sample of all men including those with zero earnings, conditioning on age. The total change in the racial employment and earnings gap at
each quantile is first decomposed into two components: the portion due to (A) distributional shifts in the overall structure of the earnings distribution and (B) shifts in the relative position of black
and white men within the earnings distribution Shifts in relative position are then further decomposed into components due to (i) racial convergence in educational attainment, (ii) within-education
category positional convergence, and (iii) changes in the relative position of black and white men due to education-related changes in the earnings distribution.

