                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                   LEVERAGE DYNAMICS WITHOUT COMMITMENT

                                        Peter DeMarzo
                                          Zhiguo He

                                      Working Paper 22799
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w22799


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                  November 2016




We thank Anat Admati, Harry DeAngelo, Douglas Diamond, Mike Fishman, Konstantin
Milbradt, Paul Pfleiderer, Adriano Rampini, Josef Zechner, and seminar participants at Duke,
London School of Economics, MIT, NYU, Princeton, Stanford, USC, and WFA for helpful
comments. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2016 by Peter DeMarzo and Zhiguo He. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Leverage Dynamics without Commitment
Peter DeMarzo and Zhiguo He
NBER Working Paper No. 22799
November 2016
JEL No. G32

                                          ABSTRACT

We analyze equilibrium leverage dynamics in a dynamic tradeoff model when the firm is unable
to commit to a leverage policy ex ante. We develop a methodology to characterize equilibrium
equity and debt prices in a general jump-diffusion framework, and apply our approach to the
standard Leland (1998) setting. Absent commitment, the leverage ratchet effect (Admati et al.
2015) distorts capital structure decisions, leading shareholders to take on debt gradually over time
and never voluntarily reduce debt. On the other hand, countervailing effects of asset growth and
debt maturity cause leverage to mean-revert towards a long run target. In equilibrium, bond
investors anticipate future leverage increases and require significant credit spreads even when the
distance to default is large. As a result, the tax benefits of future debt increases are fully
dissipated, and equilibrium equity values match those in a model where the firm commits not to
issue new debt.

In our model, leverage is dependent on the full history of the firm’s earnings. Despite the absence
of transactions costs, an increase in profitability causes leverage to decline in the short-run, but
the rate of new debt issuance endogenously increases so that leverage ultimately mean-reverts.
The target level of leverage, and the speed of adjustment depends critically on debt maturity;
nonetheless, in equilibrium shareholders are indifferent toward the debt maturity structure.


Peter DeMarzo
Graduate School of Business
Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305
and NBER
pdemarzo@stanford.edu

Zhiguo He
University of Chicago
Booth School of Business
5807 S. Woodlawn Avenue
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
zhiguo.he@chicagobooth.edu
1.      Introduction
Understanding the determinants of a firm’s capital structure, and how its leverage is likely to
evolve over time, is one of the central questions in corporate finance. Leverage and its expected
dynamics are crucial to valuing the firm, assessing its credit risk, and pricing its financial claims.
The optimal response of leverage to shocks, such as the 2007-2008 financial crisis, are important
to forecasting the likely consequences of the crisis and its aftermath, and to evaluate alternative
policy responses.

        Despite its importance, a fully satisfactory theory of leverage dynamics has yet to be
found. Many models assume the absolute level of debt is fixed; for example, in the traditional
framework of Merton (1974), as well as Leland (1994, 1998), the firm is committed not to
change its outstanding debt before maturity, irrespective of the evolution of the firm’s
fundamentals. As a result, the dynamics of firm leverage is driven solely by the stochastic
growth in value of the firm’s assets-in-place. More recent work that allows the firm to restructure
its debt over time typically assumes that all existing debt must be retired (at a cost) before any
new debt can be put in place.1 These assumptions are neither innocuous, as the constraints on
leverage generally bind, nor are they consistent with practice, where firms often borrow
incrementally over time. See, for example, Figure 1, which shows debt adjustments over time
for American and United Airlines, together with evolutions of their enterprise values.

        In contrast, we study a model in which equity holders lack the ability to commit to their
future leverage choices, and can issue or buyback debt at the current market price at any time.
Aside from corporate taxes and bankruptcy costs, there are no other frictions or transactions
costs in our model. In such a setting, when debt can be freely adjusted over time, it is feasible
for the firm to avoid the standard leverage “tradeoff” by simply increasing debt to exploit tax
shields when cash flows are high, and reducing debt to avoid distress costs when cash flows fall.




1
 See e.g. Fischer, Heinkel, Zechner (1989), Titman and Tsyplakov (2007), Goldstein, Ju, and Leland (2001) and
Strebulaev (2007), Dangl and Zechner (2016).

                                                     1
Figure 1. Time-series of outstanding book debt and enterprise value for American and United Airlines, for 15
years before they went bankruptcy in 2011 and 2002, respectively. Book debt is calculated as the sum of “long-term
debt” and “debt in current liabilities”, and market equity is calculated as “stock price” multiplying “common shares
outstanding.” Data source: WRDS.

       But although such an ideal policy is feasible, absent commitment an important agency
friction emerges with regard to the firm’s future leverage choices. As emphasized by Admati et
al. (2016), equity holders will adjust leverage to maximize the current share price rather than
total firm value. They demonstrate a “leverage ratchet effect,” in which equity holders are never
willing to voluntarily reduce leverage, but always have an incentive to borrow more -- even if
current leverage is excessive and even if new debt must be junior to existing claims. While the
leverage ratchet effect is itself quite general, they calculate numerically a dynamic equilibrium
only for a specialized model in which debt is perpetual and the firm does not grow but is subject
to Poisson shocks.

       Solving the dynamic tradeoff model without commitment is challenging because of the
dynamic interdependence of competitive debt prices today and equity’s equilibrium
leverage/default policies in the future. In this paper we develop a methodology to solve for such
an equilibrium in a general setting that allows for finite maturity debt, asset growth, investment,
and both Brownian and Poisson shocks. In this equilibrium, equity holders increase debt
gradually over time, at a rate which increases with the current profitability of the firm. On the




                                                        2
other hand, following negative shocks, equity holders never voluntarily reduce leverage, but only
allow it to decline passively via debt maturity and asset growth.

         In our model, equity holders keep issuing debt to exploit tax benefits even after the firm’s
leverage passes above the “optimal” level with commitment, leading to excessive inefficient
default.2 Interestingly, we show that equity holders obtain the same value in equilibrium as if
they commit not to issue any debt in the future, but over-borrowing raises the probability of
default and so lowers the price of debt. This low debt price offsets the tax advantage of leverage
sufficiently so that, on the margin, equity holders are indifferent to leverage increases. In other
words, the extra tax shield benefits that tempt equity holders are exactly dissipated by the
bankruptcy cost caused by excessive leverage.

         We apply our methodology to the special case of geometric Brownian motion (as in
Leland 1994) and solve for the equilibrium debt price and issuance policy in closed form.
Because equity holders refuse to buy back debt once it is issued, debt issuance is effectively
irreversible in equilibrium, which slows its initial adoption. Debt accumulates over time at a rate
that increases with profitability, while if profits decline sufficiently, new issuance falls below the
rate of debt maturity and the debt level falls. Leverage thus becomes path dependent, and we
show explicitly that the firm’s outstanding debt at any point of time can be expressed as a
weighted average of the firm’s earnings history. The endogenous adjustment of leverage leads
the firm’s interest coverage ratio to mean revert gradually in equilibrium, with the speed of
adjustment decreasing with debt maturity and asset volatility. These dynamics differ from abrupt
adjustment to a “target” leverage level, a common implication from models with an exogenous
adjustment cost (for instance, Fischer, Heinkel, Zechner, 1989; Goldstein, Ju, Leland, 2001; and
Strebulaev, 2007; etc.).

         We compare our model without commitment to two benchmarks with full commitment.
In the first case equity holders commit not to issue any debt in the future, and in the second case
they commit to maintain a constant outstanding debt obligation (i.e., always issue the same
amount of new debt to replace debt that is maturing) as in Leland (1998). The central difference
between our model and these two benchmark models is the endogenous mean-reverting firm

2
 As a simplification, we assume a zero recovery rate in default. This assumption implies the irrelevance of seniority
of debt in different vintages, and hence removes any dilution motive for debt issuance. Our results continue to hold
with a positive recovery rate and any new debt restricted to be junior to existing claims.

                                                         3
leverage and its implications on equilibrium debt prices, as bond investors anticipate future
leverage changes. Recall that in response to positive profitability shocks the firm issues more
debt, pulling the firm back toward default. In fact, the mean-reversion is sufficiently strong that
credit spreads remain strictly bounded away from zero even when the firm’s interest-coverage-
ratio is arbitrarily large. In contrast, in standard models such as Leland (1998), the firm’s
interest-coverage-ratio follows a geometric Brownian motion and hence implied credit spreads
vanish as the firm’s “distance to default” increases.

       We also study the optimal debt maturity structure, which we model in terms of a constant
required repayment (or amortization) rate stipulated in the debt contract. Our model without
commitment to future leverage policies provides a fresh perspective on this question. We show
that equity holders are indifferent to the maturity structure of the firm’s future debt issuance.
Short maturity debt leads to higher leverage on average, as equity holder issue debt more
aggressively knowing leverage can be reversed when debt matures. Nevertheless, the gain from
additional tax shields is offset by increased default costs. Thus, the agency costs associated with
the leverage ratchet effect persist even as debt maturity becomes instantaneous.

       The choice of debt maturity structure does affect the value of equity if the firm is forced
to borrow a fixed amount upfront. Indeed, this question has been studied in the Leland (1998)
setting, and often long-term debt, which minimizes rollover risk, is preferred (He and Xiong,
2012; Diamond and He, 2014). In contrast, we show that without commitment, firms prefer
short-term debt for any positive targeted debt financing. Shareholders of a firm with shorter-term
debt are more willing to allow leverage to decline following negative shocks, and this future
equilibrium leverage policy lowers the required default premium today.

       Finally, we consider the interaction of the firm’s leverage and investment policies. When
the firm cannot commit to its investment policy, leverage distorts investment due to debt
overhang. Compared to a fixed debt policy as in Leland (1998), the no commitment leverage
policy leads to greater under-investment (due to debt overhang) when profitability is high, but
less under-investment when profitability is low. Even more interesting is the effect of agency
frictions in the investment decision on the firm’s leverage policy. We show that when the firm
does not commit to its investment decision, the leverage ratchet effect becomes more severe and




                                                 4
the rate of debt issuance increases: Shareholders are even more tempted to increase debt if they
can simultaneously cut investment later on if they wish.

          Our paper is most closely related to Admati et al. (2016). They demonstrate the leverage
ratchet effect in the context of a one-time leverage adjustment, and then numerically evaluate a
dynamic equilibrium in a stationary model with regime shocks and perpetual debt. Our paper
studies leverage dynamics in a much richer continuous-time framework that allows for both asset
growth and debt maturity, as well as both Brownian and Poisson shocks. We develop a general
methodology to solve for an important class of equilibria, and for the standard workhorse model
of Leland (1994), we solve for the equilibrium in closed-form, allowing for deeper analysis.

          Dangl and Zechner (2016) explore a related model in which the firm can choose how
much maturing debt to rollover, but cannot increase the aggregate face value of debt without first
repurchasing all existing debt (at par plus a call premium and a proportional transaction cost).
Rolling over debt maintains the firm’s tax shields, a force present in our model, and dilutes
current creditors given a strictly positive recovery and pari-passu debt, which we do not allow.
They show that when debt maturity is long, equity holders will rollover existing debt fully as it
comes due, except for when leverage is so low that recapitalization to a higher face value of debt
is imminent (in which case it is not worthwhile to issue debt that will be shortly replaced at a
cost).     If debt maturity is sufficiently short, however, then when facing high leverage
shareholders may rollover only a portion of the maturing debt so that the total face value of debt
gradually declines. This behavior abruptly reverses when the firm approaches default as
shareholders maximize dilution (and minimize equity injections) by again rolling over debt
fully.3 Importantly, they show that firm value is not monotonic in debt maturity; depending on
parameters, an interior optimal maturity may exist that trades off the transactions costs of debt
rollover (which favors long maturities) with the benefit from debt reductions given high leverage
(which favors short maturities). 4 As in our model, the choice of debt maturity becomes an
important commitment device that allows for future debt reductions in the face of negative
shocks.



3
  In our model, because there is no dilution motive, the rate of debt issuance strictly declines as the firm approaches
default.
4
  The same trade-off would apply in our model if we were to adopt the same assumption on transaction costs.

                                                          5
       In a somewhat different context, Brunnermeier and Yogo (2009) stress the advantage of
short-term debt in providing the firm with flexibility to adjust debt quickly in the face of shocks
to firm value, but that long-term debt is more effective at reducing costs from rollover risk. Abel
(2016) considers a dynamic model with investment in which firms adjust leverage by issuing
debt with instantaneous maturity. He assumes i.i.d. regime shocks to profitability and shows that
in response to a shock, (i) shareholders never reduce the amount of debt, and (ii) only firms that
are borrowing constrained (i.e. have borrowed an amount equal to 100% of firm value) choose to
increase debt.

       Our paper proceeds as follows. In Section 2 we introduce a general continuous-time
model of the firm and develop our methodology for solving for a continuous equilibrium.
Section 3 applies our general results to the special case when cash flows are lognormal with
possible jumps and derives a closed-form solution for security prices and debt issuance. Section
3.4 analyzes debt dynamics and shows that the firm gradually adjusts leverage towards a target
level. We also compare our equilibrium with standard benchmarks such as Leland (1998), and
evaluate the firm’s choice of debt maturity. Section 5 extends the model to include agency costs
of investment, and Section 0 concludes.


2.     A General Model
We begin by outlining a general jump-diffusion model of cash flows that encompasses typical
settings used in the literature. We include both taxes and bankruptcy costs as in a standard
tradeoff model. We depart from the existing literature by assuming equity holders can issue or
repurchase debt at any time at the current market price, and analyze the optimal no-commitment
leverage policy in equilibrium. This policy depends on equilibrium debt prices, which in turn
depend on the firm’s future leverage as they determine the likelihood of default. Despite this
interdependence, we are able to characterize the time-consistent leverage policy explicitly and
show that the rate of debt issuance depends on the ratio of tax benefits to the price sensitivity of
debt to new issues. We also show that equity values can be computed as though the firm
committed not to issue new debt.




                                                 6
2.1. The Firm and Its Securities

All agents are risk neutral with an exogenous discount rate of r  0 .5 The firm’s assets-in-place
generate operating cash flow (EBIT) at the rate of Yt which evolves according to

                                    dYt   Yt  dt   Yt  dZ t   Yt   dN t ,                                  (1)

where the drift  Yt  and the volatility  Yt  are general functions that satisfy regularity

conditions; dZt is the increment of standard Brownian motion; dNt is Poisson increment with

intensity of  Yt   0 ; and  Yt   is the jump size given the Poisson event.6

         Denote by Ft the aggregate face value of outstanding debt. The constant coupon rate of

the debt is c  0 , so that over t , t  dt  debt holders receive coupon payments of cFt dt in total.7

Equity holders pay tax  (Yt  cFt )dt , where    is a nondecreasing function of the firm’s profit

net of interest. When the marginal tax rate is positive (    0 ), the net after tax cost to the firm
of the marginal coupon payment is 1    , reflecting the debt tax shield subsidy.

         For simplicity we assume that debt takes the form of exponentially maturing coupon
bonds with a constant amortization rate   0 . More specifically, each instant there are  Ft dt

units of required principal repayments from maturing bonds, corresponding to an average bond
maturity of 1  . Together with the aggregate coupon of cFt dt , over t , t  dt  equity holders are

required to pay debt holders the flow payment of  c    Ft dt in order to avoid default.

         We assume investors recover zero value from the assets-in-place when equity holders
default. The key implication of this assumption, which will simplify our analysis, is that debt
seniority becomes irrelevant. In addition, because there are no claims to divide in default, old
debt holders do not get “diluted” by new debt holders in bankruptcy even if the new debt has


5
  Alternatively, we can interpret the model as written under a fixed risk-neutral measure that is independent of the
firm’s capital structure decision.
6
  We have simplified notation by assuming the jump size  Yt  conditional on cash flow Yt is deterministic. We can
easily generalize the model to allow a random jump size  Yt  , as long as the law of  Yt  depends on Yt only.
7
 The coupon rate c is fixed and arbitrary in our model; in practice, there may be limits/adjustments to the tax
deductibility of the coupon if it is far from the par coupon rate.

                                                            7
equal (or higher) priority. We make the zero recovery value assumption to emphasize that our
results are not driven by the “dilution” effect which often arises when issuing pari-passu debt
(e.g., Brunnermeier and Oehmkhe, 2014; Dangl and Zechner, 2016). Dropping this assumption,
and allowing firms to only issue new debt which is junior to existing claims, would not change
our qualitative results.8

         Equity holders control the outstanding debt Ft through endogenous issuance/repurchase

policy dt , where t represents the cumulative debt issuance over time. We focus our main

analysis on a class of equilibria in which along the equilibrium path equity holders find it optimal
to adjust the firm’s outstanding debt smoothly with order dt . More specifically, we conjecture
that at each instant the adjustment to existing debt is d t  Gt dt , where Gt specifies the rate of
issuance at date t, and verify later that other issuance policies, including discrete ones, are
suboptimal in equilibrium From now on, we call this equilibrium “smooth” equilibrium, and call
Gt the equity holders’ issuance policy, which could be issuing new debt if Gt  0 or

repurchasing existing debt in which case Gt  0 . Given our debt maturity assumption, the

evolution of outstanding face value of debt Ft is given by

                                                dFt   Gt   Ft  dt .                                             (2)

Thus, the face value of debt will grow only if the rate of issuance more than offsets the
contractual retirement rate. To highlight the economic forces at play, and in contrast to the bulk
of the literature, we assume zero transaction costs in issuing or repurchasing debt.9

         Given the equity holders’ expected issuance/repurchase policy Gt  , debt holders price

the newly issued or repurchased debt in a competitive market. Denote by pt the endogenous




8
  This alternative setting adds significant complexity, as debt securities issued at different times would have distinct
prices. In contrast, given zero recovery value, newly issued debt is identical to all existing debt, independent of its
seniority or timing of issuance. (Note also that a positive recovery rate with pari-passu debt and no constraints on
debt issuance is not tenable as firms would issue debt at an explosive rate prior to default.)
9
  It is common in the dynamic capital structure literature, e.g. Fischer, Heinkel, and Zechner (1989) and Leland,
Goldstein, and Ju (2000), to assume that firms--in order to adjust their capital structure--have to buy back all of their
existing debt and then reissue new debt, and that there is a positive adjustment cost associated with this transaction.
We eliminate this artificial constraint to highlight equity holders’ intrinsic incentives to adjust leverage at any time.

                                                           8
debt price per unit of promised face value (which we derive shortly based on a standard valuation
equation). Then over t , t  dt  the net cash flows to equity holders are equal to

                                                                                                            
                            Yt            (Yt  cFt )   c    Ft                     Gt pt            dt .            (3)
                                                                                                
                    operating cash flow     tax payment  debt interest & principal debt issuance/repurchase
                                                                                                             

        The firm continues to operate until the operating cash flow Yt drops below some

sufficiently low level (which may depend on the outstanding debt level Ft ), at which point

equity holders find it optimal to default on their contractual payment to debt holders (we will
later characterize the optimal default boundary). As in the literature (Leland 1994, 1998),
shareholders cannot commit to a certain default policy, but instead default strategically. After
default, debt holders take over the firm but recover zero by assumption.

2.2. Equilibrium Analysis

We focus on Markov perfect equilibria in which the two payoff-relevant state variables are: the
firm’s exogenous operating cash flow Yt , and the outstanding aggregate debt face value Ft ,

which is an endogenous state variable. We will analyze the equity’s value function V Yt , Ft  and

the debt price p Yt , Ft  . Denote by  B the equilibrium default time; presumably, this is the first

time that the state pair Yt , Ft  falls into the endogenous default region, which we denote by B .

For the value of equity, given future issuance policies and debt prices (Gs , ps ) : s  t , when the

firm is in the survival region, i.e., Yt , Ft   B , we have

                                      B
                 V (Y , F )  t   e                    Ys   (Ys  cFs )   c    Fs  Gs ps  ds Yt  Y , Ft  F  . (4)
                                            r  s t 

                                  t                                                                                       

For debt prices, similarly we have

                                                      B
                            p(Y , F )  t   e                                  c   dt Yt  Y , Ft  F  .
                                                              r   s t 
                                                                                                                               (5)
                                            t

Clearly, the equity value V (Y , F ) equals zero in the default region, as does the debt price
p(Y , F ) given our zero recovery assumption.


                                                                           9
An Optimality Condition

Recall that we are interested in an equilibrium when there is no commitment of equity holders to
future leverage policies. Thus at any point in time, the issuance policy Gs for s  t has to be

optimal in solving the equity holders’ instantaneous maximization problem at time s , given the
equity’s value function and equilibrium debt prices.

In this section we consider the necessary and sufficient conditions for optimality of the equity
holders’ debt issuance policy Gt . The Hamilton-Jacobi-Bellman (HJB) equation for equity

holders is

                                                                                                                 
                              
     rV Y , F   max G Y   (Y  cF )                 c
                                                               F           Gp Y , F   (G   F )VF Y , F  
                                                                                      
     required return           after-tax cash flow coupon&principal payment new debt issuance   evolution of dF     (6)
                                              1
                       (Y )VY Y , F    (Y ) 2 VYY Y , F    Y  V Y   Y    V Y  
                                 2                
                                                      evolution of dY


In the first line, the objective is linear in G with a coefficient of p Y , F   VF Y , F  which

represents the (endogenous) marginal benefit of increasing debt. If equity holders find it optimal
to adjust debt smoothly, then it must be that this coefficient equals zero everywhere, i.e.

                                               p Y , F   VF Y , F   0 .                                         (7)

This first-order condition (FOC) must hold for any Y , F  along the equilibrium path.10 But to

be sure that this policy is globally optimal, we must check that there is no discrete adjustment to
the debt level that shareholders would prefer. We show next that global optimality holds if and
only if the debt price is weakly decreasing in the firm’s total debt, i.e., pF Y , F   0 .

           PROPOSITION 1 (OPTIMALITY                OF   SMOOTH DEBT POLICY). Suppose the debt price
            p  VF Y , F  is weakly decreasing in the total face value F of the firm’s debt, i.e., the


10
  This relation holds trivially in the default region B , as for defaulted firm the debt price p  0 and V  Y , F   0
implies V  Y , F   0 as well. It is worth pointing out that the zero-bankruptcy-recovery assumption is not necessary
           F


for p  0 at default. Even with a strictly positive recovery, as long as newly issued debt is junior to any pre-existing
debt, newly issued debt is worthless at the moment of default as existing debt gets all the recovery.


                                                             10
        value of equity V (Y , F ) is convex in F . Then condition (7) implies that the policy Gt is

        an optimal debt issuance policy for shareholders. Conversely, if the policy Gt is optimal,

        then p  VF Y , F  is weakly decreasing in F for all equilibrium states Y , F  .

PROOF. Equity holders are solving the following problem each moment along the optimal path

                             max  V (Y , F  )    p(Y , F  )  V (Y , F ) .                                   (8)

For the proposed smooth policy to be optimal,   0 must be optimal in (8). This problem has
the first-order condition VF  p   pF  0 at   0 , which implies that p  VF . To check for

global optimality, suppose that equity holders choose any   0 . Then equity’s gain is
                                                                                       
        V Y , F     V Y , F     p Y , F      VF Y , F    d    p Y , F    d 
                                                           0                            0
                                                                                       
                                                         VF Y , F    d    p Y , F    d                 (9)
                                                          0                       0 
                                                                                                 monotonicity of p
                                                           
                                                         VF Y , F     p Y , F    d   0
                                                          0                    
                                                                       FOC in Equation (7)



where in the second line we have used the condition that p is weakly monotone in F . Note the

above inequalities still hold if   0 ; in this case p  F     p  F    but d  0 . Finally, the

condition that the debt price is weakly decreasing in F implies that equity’s value is convex in F,
i.e. pF  0  VFF  0 .

Now we prove the second part. First of all, it is easy to see p Y , F  is continuous in F from (5).

If p Y , F  is weakly increasing in F, the above argument in (9) implies that any  is a

profitable deviation. But if p Y , F  is not monotone in F, then for some Y, due to continuity

                                                                                            
there must exist two face values F1 and F2 with F1  F2 , so that p Y , Fˆ  p Y , F1   p Y , F2 

for Fˆ   F1 , F2  . Now setting   F2  F1  0 and F  F1         in (9) leads to a strictly positive
deviation gain. 




                                                      11
Equity Valuation

The First-Order Condition (FOC) in (7), which implies a zero-profit condition for equity holders
in adjusting the debt burden instantaneously, has deep implications for the equilibrium in our
model. Plugging condition (7) into the equity HJB equation (6), the sum of terms involving G
equals zero and we have the following revised HJB equation for equity:

                  rV Y , F   Y   (Y  cF )   c    F   (Y )VY Y , F    FVF Y , F 
                                                                                                            (10)
                               12  (Y )2 VYY Y , F    Y  V Y   Y  , F   V Y , F   .

This equation says that in the no-commitment equilibrium, the equity value can be solved as if
there is no debt adjustment Gt  0 , except for the natural retirement at rate  .

        Intuitively, because equity holders gain no marginal surplus from adjustments to debt,
their equilibrium payoff must be the same as if they never issue/repurchase any debt. This
implies that we can solve for the equilibrium equity value V Y , F  , without the knowledge of

the equilibrium debt price p Y , F  (which does not enter equation (10)). In other words,

        PROPOSITION 2 (NO-TRADE EQUITY VALUATION). Let V 0 (Y , F ) be the value of equity

        if the firm were committed not to issue or buyback debt ( Gt  0 ). Then the value V of

        equity in a smooth equilibrium is equal to V 0 .

PROOF. Immediate from (10) and the fact that the boundary conditions are unchanged. 

        This result, while perhaps striking at first, is analogous to the Coase (1972) conjecture for
durable goods monopoly: the firm is a monopolist issuer of its own debt. When the firm is unable
to commit to restricting its future sales, it trades sufficiently aggressively to dissipate any surplus
from trading.11

Optimal Debt Issuance

        Given the equity value V , we can invoke the FOC in (7) to obtain the equilibrium debt
price p Y , F   VF Y , F  . Finally, to confirm that this outcome indeed represents an

11
   A closely related result appears in DeMarzo and Urosevic (2001) in a model of trade by a large shareholder
trading off diversification benefits and price impact due to reduced incentives. In equilibrium, share prices are
identical to those implied by a model with no trade.

                                                          12
equilibrium, we must verify whether p Y , F   VF Y , F  is weakly decreasing in F , or

equivalently that the equity value is convex in F .

         Now that we have determined the equilibrium values for equity and debt, how can we
find the optimal leverage policy G? Note that we have determined the equilibrium debt price
using the optimality p  VF , where the equity value V is equivalent to the no-trade value from
(10) and therefore independent of G. On the other hand, we can also calculate the debt price
directly based on debt holders expected cash flows using (5). This calculation will depend on the
timing of default, which does depend on the rate of debt issuance. Thus the leverage policy G
must be chosen to make these two methods of valuing the debt consistent.12

         First, let us consider the HJB equation that should hold for the debt price from (5), which
is given by

          rp Y , F   c   1  p Y , F    (G *   F ) pF Y , F  
               coupon                               
          required return                debt retirement         evolution of debt dF
                                                                                                                           (11)
                             (Y ) pY Y , F    (Y ) pYY Y , F    Y   p Y   Y  , F   p Y , F   .
                                                 1
                                                 2
                                                           2

                            
                                         
                                                        
                                                               evolution of cash flow dY




         Next, starting with the HJB equation (10) for equity value V Y , F  , if we differentiate by

F and use the optimality condition p  VF , we obtain

     rp Y , F    (Y  cF )c   c      p Y , F    FpF Y , F 
                                                                                                                           (12)
                        (Y ) pY Y , F   12  (Y )2 pYY Y , F    Y    p Y   Y  , F   p Y , F   .

Although equation (12) is written in terms of the debt price p , we emphasize that it follows
mechanically from the valuation equation (10) for equity, together with the FOC (7) for the
optimal issuance policy. Finally, adding (12) to (11), we obtain a simple expression for G
shown below:




12
  Intuitively, if G = 0 and the firm never issues additional debt, the debt price would exceed its marginal cost to
shareholders, -VF, due to the incremental tax shield. By increasing the rate of issuance, the likelihood of default will
increase and the price of debt will fall to the point that (7) holds.

                                                                 13
       PROPOSITION 3 (EQUILIBRIUM DEBT ISSUANCE). Let V (Y , F ) be the no-trade value of
       equity. Then if V is convex in F, there exists a unique smooth trade equilibrium with
       debt issuance policy

                                               (Y  cF )c         (Y  cF )c
                              G* Y , F                                         .             (13)
                                               pF  Y , F        VFF Y , F 

       Under this policy, the debt price given by (5) satisfies p  VF .

PROOF. For a smooth policy to be optimal, (7) is necessary. But then (6) and (7) imply (12),
which combined with (11) imply (13). Then p  VF follows since their HJB equations and
boundary conditions are equivalent, and the global optimality of the policy (13) follows from
Proposition 1 and convexity of V. 

       Note that the convexity of equity value V implies that, no matter how high the current
level of debt, the rate of issuance G * is always positive provided a strictly positive tax benefit
   0 . We can interpret the policy (13) as follows. The rate of issuance of debt is such that the
rate of devaluation of the debt induced by new issuances just offsets the marginal tax benefit
associated with the coupon payments:

                          G* Y , F   pF Y , F   c    Y  cF  .

       Thus, if there were no tax subsidy    0 , then G * Y , F   0 , i.e. without a tax subsidy

equity holders choose not to increase debt. On the other hand, they choose not to actively reduce
debt via buybacks either, despite that fact that there are deadweight costs of bankruptcy. This
result is consistent with the leverage ratchet effect of Admati et al. (2016) – even if the firm’s
current leverage is excessive, equity holders never actively reduce debt but always have an
incentive to increase debt when it provides a marginal tax benefit.

Summary

In sum, for the general model in which equity holders are free to issue or repurchase any amount
of debt at the prevailing market price, one can solve for the no commitment equilibrium as
follows:



                                                     14
     (i)      Solve for the equity holder’s value function V Y , F  assuming that G  0 , i.e. equity

              holders commit to not issue any future debt, using (10);

     (ii)     Set the debt price p Y , F   VF Y , F  ;

     (iii)    Check the global second-order condition by verifying the debt price p Y , F  is

              weakly decreasing in aggregate debt F , or equivalently V Y , F  is convex in F ;

     (iv)     Finally, given p Y , F  we can solve for the optimal time consistent issuance policy

              G* Y , F  from (13).

In the remainder of the paper we will use this methodology to analyze several standard settings
examples.


3.          A Closed-Form Solution
We now apply the general methodology developed in the previous section to the widely used
framework of a lognormal cash flow process.13 The results from Section 2 allow us to fully
characterize an equilibrium in closed form, and evaluate the corresponding leverage dynamics.
We also extend the model to allow for jumps to cash flows and asset values, and show that the
solution is qualitatively unchanged.

3.1. Log-Normal Cash Flows

In the special case of lognormal operating cash flow, Yt follows a geometric Brownian motion so
that

                                  Yt   Yt and  Yt    Yt , with r   .                              (14)

Given the scale invariance of the firm in this special case, it is reasonable to analyze the model
using a unidimensional state variable equal to operating cash flow scaled by the outstanding face
value of debt Ft , i.e.



13
  This setting is consistent with e.g. Merton (1974), Fischer et al. (1989), Leland (1994), Leland and Toft (1996),
and follows the development of starting from cash flows rather than firm value as in Goldstein et al. (2001).

                                                        15
                                                              Yt
                                                       yt       .                                              (15)
                                                              Ft

As an interpretation, note that yt / c equals the firm’s interest coverage ratio, i.e. the ratio of

operating income Yt to total interest expense cFt , a widely used measure of leverage and

financial soundness. Alternatively, 1/ yt expresses the amount of debt as a multiple of the firm’s
cash flow (or EBIT).

           To maintain homogeneity, we make the common assumption of a constant tax rate, i.e.

                                            (Yt  cFt )    ( yt  c)  Ft ,                                 (16)

where the positive constant   0 is the marginal corporate tax rate that applies to both losses
and gains.14 With this setting, we conjecture and verify that the equity value function V Y , F 

and debt price p Y , F  are homogeneous so that

                                   Y                                              Y 
                    V Y , F   V  ,1 F  v  y  F and p Y , F             p  ,1  p  y  .           (17)
                                   F                                              F 

We will solve for the (scaled) equity value function v  y  and debt price p  y  in closed form.

           Given the evolution of our state variables Yt and Ft :

                                 dYt  Yt dt   Yt dZt , and dFt   Gt   Ft  dt ,                         (18)

the scaled cash-flows evolve as

                                dyt
                                          gt  dt   dZ t , where gt  Gt / Ft .                         (19)
                                 yt

As (19) shows, the scaled cash flow growth has the same volatility as total cash flow, as the
outstanding debt face value Ft in (2) grows in a locally deterministic way. The drift of the scaled
cash flow growth corresponds to the growth in operating cash flows less the net growth rate of
the debt gt   , where  is the debt amortization rate and gt  Gt / Ft is the endogenous growth


14
     The methods developed here could also be applied with different marginal tax rates for losses versus gains, e.g.
 ( y  c)    max( y  c,0) , though we do not pursue that here.

                                                           16
rate from debt issuance. The more new debt the firm issues, the faster the scaled cash-flows
shrink.

          Following the Leland tradition, equity holders cannot commit ex ante to a specific default
policy. When the scaled cash flow yt falls below some endogenous default boundary yb , equity
holders are no longer willing to service the debt, and therefore strategically default. At that event,
equity holders walk away and debt holders recover nothing by the assumption of a zero
liquidation value.

3.2. Model Solution

Recall from Section 2 that we can solve for the equilibrium equity value as if gt  0 and equity

holders do not actively adjust the firm’s outstanding debt Ft , even though they do. Using the
fact that

                  VY Y , F   v  y  , VF Y , F   v  y   yv  y  , and FVYY  v  y  ,          (20)

we can rewrite (10) with lognormal cash flows in terms of scaled cash-flow y as follows:

                                                                                        1
                  r    v  y   ( y  c   )   ( y  c)       yv '  y    2 y 2v ''  y  .   (21)
                                                                                             2

          There are two boundary conditions for the above Ordinary Differential Equation (ODE)
(21). First, when y   , default becomes unimportant and we can treat the debt as riskless, and
hence the equity value should converge to

                                    y (1   )                     c   c    y (1   ) c(1   )  
                  v ( y)                                                                           .      (22)
                                      r                         r  
                                                                       r      r          r 
                                    
                                        
                             unlevered asset-in-place value       tax shield    bond value



On the other hand, when y  yb , equity is worthless so v  yb   0 . Solving (21) with these two

boundary conditions, we obtain

          PROPOSITION 4. Given a constant tax rate  , the equity value function with no debt
          issuance is given by




                                                                           17
                                                                            
                                    y (1   ) c 1          1  y 
                           v( y )                           1       .                                                (23)
                                      r          r         1    yb  
                                                                              

        where the constant  is defined as


                             0.5        0.5 
                                                                                    2
                                                 2                              2
                                                                                         2 2  r   
                                                                                                          0,             (24)
                                                                    2

        and the optimal default boundary is given by

                                                   r     c 1      
                                     yb                                   .                                            (25)
                                                1   1       r        

PROOF. We can write the value function as
                                                                                                                       
                                                                                                            y 
                           v ( y )  E  e                     0  v ( yb )   v           v ( yb )   ,            (26)
                                               ( r  ) b
                v( y )                                                              ( y)
                                                                                equity value          yb 
                                                                                   without
                                                                                default option    option value of default



where the expression for E e ( r ) b  and  follows by solving the ODE

                                ( r  ) f ( y )  (  ) yf ( y )  12  2 y 2 f ( y )

with boundary conditions f ( yb )  1 and f ()  0 . Finally, the optimal default boundary yb is

determined by the smooth-pasting condition, v  yb   0 . 

        Having solved for the value of equity, recall from (7) that we can determine the
equilibrium debt price from the FOC p  y   VF Y , F  . Then from (20), and using (23),


                                                             c 1        y  
                                                                                    

                       p  y   VF  yv  y   v  y                  1     .                                    (27)
                                                                 r     yb  
                                                                                      

        Recall we need to verify the optimality of the issuance policy by checking the
monotonicity of the equilibrium debt pricing function. It is easy to see that p  y   0 in (27), i.e.

the greater the scaled cash flow the higher the debt price. As a result, the key condition in
PROPOSITION 1 – that the debt price decreases with total debt – follows because


                                                                     18
                                                       Y        y 2v( y )
                             pF Y , F   p  y     2                 0.                     (28)
                                                       F            F

Finally, we can apply PROPOSITION 3 combined with (28) to derive the equilibrium debt
issuance policy:

       PROPOSITION 5. Given a constant tax rate  , the equity value function and debt price
       are given by (26)-(27), and the equilibrium issuance policy is
                                                                                                  

                g  y 
                   *     G*
                            
                               c
                                         
                                           c
                                                    2
                                                       c
                                                               
                                                                  r    c  1  y  .              (29)
                                                                                   
                         F  FpF Y , F  yp  y  y v  y  c 1        yb 

       In equilibrium, the firm’s new debt issuance g *  y  is always positive, and is increasing in

       the scaled cash flow y.



       Thus, with lognormal cash flows, we can fully characterize equilibrium debt dynamics
and security pricing in closed form. Based on the equilibrium values for both equity and debt,
total firm value (or total enterprise value, TEV) can be expressed as a multiple of the firm’s cash
flow (i.e. TEV to EBIT) as

                                                                                1    y  
                                                                       1                   1
        v( y )  p ( y )             1   1 c 1        y 
                          v( y )                                               1     ,     (30)
               y                     r   yb    r   1    yb              r     yb  
                                                                                                  

where the first equality follows from the equilibrium condition for the debt price, and the last
equality uses the expression of yb in (25). Note that the firm’s TEV multiple is strictly

increasing with the scaled cash flow y . Consequently, holding the level of cash flows Y fixed,
total firm value decreases with the debt face value F , implying no gain to total firm value from
leverage. We will discuss this implication further when we compare TEV multiples across
different benchmark models with commitment.

3.3. Upward Jumps

In the standard lognormal setting, cash flows and asset values evolve continuously. Suppose,
however, that cash flows occasionally jump discontinuously, for example in response to new


                                                     19
product development. In that case, we might expect debt to adjust discontinuously as well. In this
section, we extend our prior model to allow for upward jumps and show that our prior solution,
in which shareholders issue debt smoothly, is essentially unchanged.

        Consider a jump-diffusion model in which cash flows occasionally jump from Yt to Yt

for some constant   1 . Specifically,

                                      dYt  Yt dt  Yt dZt     1 Yt  dNt ,                                         (31)

where dNt is a Poisson process with constant intensity   0 .15 In this extension, due to upward
jumps, the effective expected asset growth rate becomes

                                                  ˆ        1 ,                                                    (32)

and we continue to assume ˆ  r to ensure that the unlevered firm value is bounded.

        As before, we can solve for the equity value as if shareholders commit not to issue any
new debt. Because (31) still maintains scale-invariance, V Y , F   F  v  y  continues to hold,

and the HJB equation for the equity value becomes

                                                                                          1 2 2
                  r      v  y   1    y  c          yv '  y        y v ''  y   v  y  .   (33)
                                                                                          2

The last term in equation (33) captures upward jumps. The usual boundary conditions apply:
When leverage is negligible and y   , default risk disappears and v  y   v  y  ; while at the

point of default, we have value-matching v  yb   0 and smooth-pasting v '  yb   0 .

        Somewhat surprisingly, even with jumps, equilibrium security prices and debt dynamics
have exactly the same form derived before in the diffusion-only case:

        PROPOSITION 6. Suppose cash flows evolve as a log-normal diffusion with upward
        jumps as in (31). Then the equilibrium equity and debt values, default boundary, and
        debt issuance policy are given by (23), (27), (25), and (29) respectively, with  replaced

        by ˆ , given by (32), and  replaced by ̂ , which is the unique positive root of

15
  While we focus on upward jumps with a fixed size, allowing the upward jump to be stochastic is straightforward.
Downward jumps introduce an extra complication due to jump-triggered default, in addition to diffusion-triggered
default. See footnote 17 for more details.

                                                            20
                                                2 2            2   
                          W ( ˆ )   ˆ      ˆ             ˆ   r       0 .               (34)
                                                2               2    

PROOF. Note that the HJB equation (33) has the linear solution

                                                    y 1    c 1     
                                         v  y                             .                                (35)
                                                      r  ˆ       r 

The homogenous delayed differential equation

                          (r    ) f ( y)  (  ) yf ( y)  12 2 y 2 f ( y)  f (y)

has solutions of the form y  ˆ where ̂ solves the characteristic equation (34). In (34), because

W is convex, W     W      , W  0   r    0 , and W  1  ˆ  r  0 , W has a unique

positive real root (as well a unique negative real root ˆ  1 that can be ruled out by the upper
boundary condition). The remainder of the analysis follows exactly as in Section 3.2. 

        Consequently, although the firm’s profitability (i.e., cash-flow Yt ) may jump up
discretely, the equilibrium debt issuance policy continues to be smooth in the sense that it
remains of order dt . In response to positive jumps in the firm’s profitability, shareholders do
increase the debt issuance speed in equilibrium, but do not issue a discrete amount of debt
immediately. Consequently, leverage falls discretely before gradually mean-reverting. This
property holds even we set  2  0 so that the firm’s cash flows only grow with discrete
jumps!16,17

3.4. Positive Recovery Value

Thus far we have assumed that the in the event of default the liquidation value of the firm is zero.
This assumption simplifies the analysis as it implies that there is no difference between junior or
senior debt, nor any dilution motive for issuing debt.

16
   When the diffusion term vanishes, we must impose     0 so that cash flows decline faster than debt matures
between jumps. Otherwise, it is optimal for the firm to sustain 100% debt financing without risking default.
17
   If we allow negative jumps, there is an additional complication that jumps may trigger default. Nonetheless, the
analysis in Chen and Kou (2009), with certain special assumptions on jump distributions, suggests that one can still
solve for the equity valuation in closed-form. As long as the equity value function remains convex, the key
qualitative property of smooth debt issuance policy continues to hold in general diffusion-jump models, and we
leave to future research the exploration of such models.

                                                           21
         What if the firm has a positive recovery value in default, and the firm can issue pari passu
or even senior debt so that there is a dilution motive for debt issuance? Specifically, suppose that
given cash flows Y, the firm has a liquidation value L (Y ) equal to a fraction of its unlevered
value:

                                                     1 
                                         L(Y )          Y for   [0,1) .                                         (36)
                                                     r

These liquidation proceeds are paid to the firm’s creditors. But if the firm can issue senior or pari
passu debt without restriction, then by issuing new debt shareholders can dilute the claim of
existing creditors in default. Indeed, at the moment of default, shareholders have an incentive to
issue new debt to dilute the existing creditors fully, so that as a result they earn a zero recovery.
Because shareholders receive the proceeds from the new debt issued, this scenario is equivalent
to equity holders having the option to default on existing creditors and recover L (Y ) .18

         Interestingly, we can show that in this case the resulting equilibrium is equivalent to one
in which only a fraction (1   ) of the firm’s cash flows can be pledged to creditors (with
shareholders owning the rest  fraction of non-pledgeable cash flows separately). The optimal
default and issuance policies derived above continue to apply with the relevant measure of cash
flow equal to just the pledgeable component 1    y . The value of equity is then the sum of

the value from the pledgeable and non-pledgeable parts. The following proposition formalizes
this result:

         PROPOSITION 7. Suppose cash flows evolve as a log-normal diffusion as in (14), all debt
         is pari passu, and in the event of default the firm is worth L (Y ) as in (36). Then the
         equilibrium equity and debt values, default boundary, and debt issuance policy are:

                                                                                  yb
                                    v L ( y )  v( y (1  ))  L( y ) , ybL         ,                             (37)
                                                                                 1 

                               p L ( y )  p( y (1  )) , and g L ( y )  g * ( y (1  )) .                       (38)




18
  In other words, it is as if there is a complete violation of absolute priority so that equity holders receive the entire
recovery value of the firm (while debt holders recover nothing).

                                                            22
PROOF. It is straightforward to check that (37) satisfies the HJB equation (21) or (33) with the
boundary condition v L ( ybL )  L ( ybL ) and smooth pasting condition v L ( ybL )  L( ybL ) . The

                                                                            c
expressions for p L and g L follow from p ( y )  yv  v and g  y                 as in (27) and (29).
                                                                          yp  y 



       In this scenario, the smooth issuance policy g L applies only up to the default boundary

ybL . At the moment of default, the firm issues an infinite amount of debt to dilute existing

creditors. The main qualitative effect of a positive recovery rate is to raise the value of equity
(i.e. v L ( y )  v( y ) ) and reduce the equilibrium level of debt prior to default (because debt
issuance will match that of a firm with proportionally lower cash flows).

       It is interesting to observe that g L y  0 , so that shareholders issue less debt when the
firm edges closer to default (but before actual default). Even more surprising, we have
g L   0 , so that a firm with a dilution motive has less debt prior to default relative to the
baseline case without a dilution motive. The extra dilution motive is instead reflected by the
more aggressive default policy (and the associated infinite dilution at default), whereas the
reduced pledgeability of cash flows reduces debt capacity prior to default. This result contrasts
nicely with Dangl and Zechner (2016) who consider similar pari passu debt and positive
recovery, but shareholders are constrained by an upper bound on the rate of debt issuance.
Because of this constraint, shareholders in Dangl and Zechner (2016) raise debt at the maximum
speed possible for some period prior to default.


4.     Debt Dynamics
Now that we have solved for the equilibrium debt issuance policy and security pricing, we can
analyze the implications for observed debt dynamics. Although lack of commitment leads the
firm to always have a positive rate of debt issuance, the countervailing effect of debt maturity
and asset growth cause leverage to mean-revert towards a target. We begin by characterizing
this target as well as the speed of adjustment. We then compare the equilibrium without
commitment to two benchmark cases: the first is that the firm can fully commit not to
issue/repurchase any debt in the future, i.e. Gt  0 ; and the second is the Leland (1998)

                                                   23
assumption that the firm commits to keep the aggregate face value constant, i.e. Gt   Ft .
Finally, we consider the implications of alternative debt maturities.

4.1. Target Leverage and Adjustment Speed

From PROPOSITION 5, we see that the firm will issue debt at a faster rate when cash flows are
high, and the rate of issuance slows as the firm approaches default. Figure 2 illustrates the net
debt issuance rate given different debt maturities as a function of the firm’s current leverage.



                                  50%
                                               20yr 10yr     5yr                   2yr
                                  40%
  Net Debt Issuance Rate (gt)




                                  30%
                                  20%
                                  10%
                                   0%
                                          0%               20%               40%               60%       80%   100%
                                  (10%)
                                  (20%)
                                  (30%)
                                  (40%)
                                  (50%)
                                                                         % Debt / TEV (p/(v+p))

                          Figure 2: Net Debt Issuance versus Firm Leverage for Different Debt Maturities
                                                 Parameters:   2%,  40%,  30%, c(1   )  r  5% )

Because the mapping from the cash flow to leverage is strictly monotonic, there is a unique level
of the scaled cash flow yˆ g such that new net debt issuances occur at any given rate g. We can

compute yˆ g from (29) as follows:


                                                                              c 1       
                                                                                                  1/

                                                                 yˆ g  yb                      g .           (39)
                                                                             r    c          
                                                                                                  


                                                                                 24
We can interpret ŷ (i.e., when the new debt issuance exactly balances with retiring of existing

debt) as the “neutral” level of the scaled cash flow: at this point, the firm is neither accumulating
nor retiring debt, corresponding to the intersection points with x-axis in Figure 2. If cash flows
were fixed at this level, the firm’s debt would remain constant.19

           Without commitment, the firm’s debt is path dependent, with the current level of debt
equal to the cumulative past issuance net of debt retirement. Because the issuance rate varies
with the level of cash flows, this path dependence can be quite complex. Surprisingly, using our
expression for g * in PROPOSITION 5, we can derive the evolution of the firm’s debt explicitly as
a function of the firm’s initial debt position and its earnings history, as shown next.

           PROPOSITION 8. Given the debt issuance policy g* and initial debt face value F0  0 , the

           firm’s debt on date t given the cash-flow history Ys : 0  s  t is

                                                                                  1/ 
                                                       t  Ys     s t  
                                                                 

                                      Ft   F0 e      e
                                                  t
                                                                             ds                                   (40)
                                                       0  yˆ                 
                                                                            

                                                                               dF
PROOF: Using (29) the change in the face value of debt is (where we denote F  t )
                                                                               dt

                                                        
                          F  ( g * (Y / F )   ) F  
                                                                 r     c Y   F 1   F .                  (41)
                                                                                   
                                                           c 1       yb 
                                                                                  

Let H  F  , then H   F  1F and so (41) implies

                                                                                           
                                         
                      H  F 1 F   
                                                  r    c Y    F     Y   H
                                                                                        .
                                            c 1       yb               ˆ
                                                                                   y
                                                                                 



Given H 0 , this equation is a linear differential equation with general solution




19
     Recall though that the cash flows are expected to grow at rate  , and therefore ŷ is the scaled cash flow level
at which debt is expected to grow at the same rate as the cash flows. Therefore at ŷ , absent any cash flow shocks,
yt , as well as the firm’s interest coverage ratio yt / c , would be expected to remain constant (as can be seen from
(19)).

                                                            25
                                                          t    Ys    s 
                                                                      

                                Ht  e     t
                                                   H 0      e ds  .
                                                          0    yˆ        
                                                                        

(40) then follows from F  H 1/ . 

       Equation (40) implies that the firm’s debt at today equals the sum of discounted initial
debt F0 , and an appropriately “discounted” average of the firm’s intervening cash flows

Ys : 0  s  t . This point becomes transparent in the special case of F0  0 , i.e., when the firm
starts with no debt. Setting F0  0 in (40), we have

                                              1
                                                                              
                                                                               1/ 
                                                    e   ( s t ) Ys ds
                                                      t
                                    Ft                                                           (42)
                                             yˆ      0



           t
Since   e   ( s t ) ds  1  e t , (42) implies that in equilibrium debt starts at 0 and grows
          0


gradually with order of t/  , with the long run debt level dependent on the weighted average of
the firm’s historical earnings. The weight put on recent cash flows relative to more distant ones
depends on the product  . Intuitively, faster maturity allows leverage to shrink more quickly in
the face of declining cash flows. From (24) one can show that higher  is associated with lower
volatility, which makes the firm more aggressive about adding leverage when cash flows are
high. Finally, note that the only impact of the tax rate  is to rescale the debt level through ŷ .

       Equation (42) demonstrates clearly that once the firm is free to adjust leverage over time,
equilibrium debt dynamics depart strongly from the standard predictions of tradeoff theory.
Figure 3 simulates the evolution of debt for an initially unlevered firm, issuing debt with a five-
year maturity, using the same parameters as Figure 2. Leverage initially increases until it
approaches approximately 40% of firm value. Once it exceeds that level, the firm issues new
debt at a slower rate than its existing debt matures, and the total amount of debt declines.
Overall, the firm’s debt level evolves gradually based on a weighted average of past earnings.
This gradual adjustment of debt towards a target level, as simulated in Figure 3, resembles the
evolution of debt observed in practice (see, example, Figure 1).




                                                         26
          90
                         F
          80             V(Y)
          70             % D/TEV

          60
          50
          40
          30
          20
          10
           0
               0             2              4             6              8          10
                                                 Year

                             Figure 3: Simulation of Debt Evolution
                     (   2%,   40%,   30%, c(1  )  r  5%,   20% )

4.2. Full Commitment Benchmarks

To facilitate discussion, we now solve two other cases that serve as benchmark with
commitment. In each case, the firm’s relevant state variables evolve exactly as in (18), except
that the firm has the ability to commit to a certain future debt issuance policy.

No Future Debt Issues

We first consider the benchmark case in which the firm commits not to issue debt in the future,
i.e. gt  0 always. We call this case the “No Future Debt” case, and indicate the corresponding

solutions with the superscript “0” (representing the commitment to g  0 ).

       Recall that our methodology developed in Section 2 first called for solving the equity
value function as if there will be no future debt issues, even though the firm will choose to add
debt equilibrium, because the lack of commitment dissipates the benefits of the debt tax shield.
Therefore, from PROPOSITION 2, we have the equity value v0 ( y)  v( y) with the same default

boundary yb as calculated in PROPOSITION 4.


                                                 27
Indeed, the only change in this setting will be the debt pricing. Intuitively, new debt issues
(despite being junior) harm existing creditors by accelerating default, and thus debt holders are
willing pay more for the same promise today if the firm can commit not to issue more debt in the
future. With such a commitment, the firm’s scaled cash flow y evolves according to

                                            dyt
                                                      dt  dZ t ,                                                (43)
                                             yt

and thus the HJB equation for debt price can be written as

         rp 0 ( y )  c           1  p 0 ( y )                yp 0 ( y )  12  2 y 2 p 0 ( y ) ,        (44)
                  coupon                                
       required return        gain from principal repayment                    evolution of dy


with boundary conditions:

            1. No recovery value: p 0  yb0   0 , and

                                                                                                       c
            2. Risk-free pricing as the distance to default grows: p 0  y                               as y   .
                                                                                                       r

Using standard methods (see e.g. the proof of PROPOSITION 4) the solution for the debt price is

                                  c                                 c     y  
                         p  y 
                          0
                                        1  E e  ( r  ) b
                                                                   
                                                                   r   1   y   ,                             (45)
                                  r                                         b  

where the constant  is again given by (24). We summarize these results as follows:

       PROPOSITION 9. If the firm can commit not to issue future debt, i.e.. g  0 , then the
       equity value is unchanged, as is the default boundary, relative to the no commitment case.
       Default is delayed, however, and thus the debt price improves by the value of the debt tax
       shield

                                                        c   y  
                                                                                    
                                       0
                                     p ( y)  p( y )        1     .                                               (46)
                                                       r     yb  
                                                            
                                                                debt tax shield value


PROOF: Equation (46) follows immediately from (27), (45) and yb0  yb . 




                                                              28
        From (46), we observe that when the firm can fully commit not to issue any debt in the
future and hence is less likely to default, its debt will trade at a higher price than that of firms
who cannot commit. More interestingly, the premium is equal to the value of the tax shield,
consistent with the observation that, in the no commitment case, the firm issues new debt at a
rate so that expected bankruptcy costs offset the expected tax benefit. Thus, commitment to
gt  0 does not benefit equity holders, but does improve the value of the debt due to the
reduction in bankruptcy costs, which is just the expected tax benefit.

Fixed Face Value (Leland 1998)

Another relevant benchmark for our model without commitment is Leland (1998), who assumes
that firm commits to keep a fixed total face value F. Specifically, in Leland (1998), the firm
commits to replace the maturing debt (with intensity  ) by the same amount of newly issued debt

with the same coupon, principal, and maturity. We denote this case using the superscript “  ”,

which requires gt   always.

        The solution with constant face value is as follows. The scaled cash-flow yt in this case
follows

                                          dyt
                                                dt  dZt ,                                  (47)
                                           yt

and equity holders in equilibrium will default at a threshold yb to be derived shortly. Then,

using the same logic as we did to compute p , we have the analogous solution to (45):


                                             c     y  
                                                                  
                                                              p

                                    p  y 
                                     
                                                      1          ,                          (48)
                                             r     yb  
                                                                 

where the constant  p is defined by effectively lowering the drift by  (the rate of new debt

issues) in (24):

                                 0.52       0.5 
                                                       2 2
                                                              22  r   
                          
                                                                             0 .            (49)
                                                  2
                          p




                                                  29
Next, the equity value v  y  must solve

          rv   y   1    y  c     p   y   1  yv    y   12  2 y 2 v    y  ,                          (50)
                                                                        
        required return   net after-tax earnings   debt rollover gains/losses         evolution of state variable y


                                                                                                 y (1  ) c c  
                                                         
with boundary conditions v  yb  v  yb  0 and v  ( y ) 
                                                                                                   r 
                                                                                                            
                                                                                                            r r 
                                                                                                                    as y   .

Note that the second term in (50) captures the rollover gains/losses when equity holders
refinance the maturing debt, as emphasized by He and Xiong (2012): per dollar of face value, the
firm must repay principal at rate  , while equity holders commit to replace the maturing debt by

issuing  new bonds at price p .

        In the Appendix, we follow the approach of Leland (1998) to derive the equity value
function as

                                                                                               v                 y   p 
                                                                                                                             

                              y (1   )  c  yb (1   )  c   y                                  c 
                   v  y                                                                                 1          (51)
                                r       r  r           r   yb                                r         yb  
                                                                                                                              

where the constant  v is defined as


                                       
                                      
                                              0.52             0.5     2 2
                                                                                       2 2 r
                                                                                                      0,
                                                                    2
                                       v



                                                                                     
and the endogenous default boundary y b satisfying the smooth-pasting condition v  yb  0 is                                
                                                 r           c    c  
                                  yb                                  p  v .
                                           (1   v )(1   )  r  
                                                  
                                                                            r   

        In this case, the valuation multiple for the firm (TEV/EBIT) is given by

                                                                                                              v 1
                           v ( y )  p ( y ) 1    c  1    c   y 
                                                                                                                .          (52)
                                    y           r   ry  r   ryb   yb 

Since   0 , this multiple decreases in y for y sufficiently large, in which case the lost tax
benefits outweigh the gains from lower default costs.



                                                                    30
              Figure 4: Equity Values for Alternative Debt Issuance Policies
                 Parameters are r  5% , c  8% ,   0.1 ,   2% ,   25% ,   35% .




4.3. Model Comparisons and Implications

In this section we illustrate the implications of our model by comparing the no commitment
solution to other benchmarks with commitment.




                                                   31
Value Functions and Debt Issuance Policy

Figure 4 plots the equity value and debt issuance policies for the three models: the base model
without commitment ( g  g * , solid thick line), full commitment to no future debt ( g  0 , dashed

thin line), and Leland (1998) commitment to a fixed face value ( g   , dash-dotted thin line).

           As explained, the equity value in the no-commitment case coincides with the setting
when there are no future debt issues. With a fixed face value policy, the equity value is lower
when cash flows are low, as the firm is committed to continuing to issue debt even in the face of
large rollover losses. This effect gives rise to a higher default boundary yb than the default

boundary in the other two cases yb  yb0 , as indicated in the top plot of Figure 4.20 On the other
hand, when cash flows are high, the equity value in the fixed face value case is higher than that
in either case with g  0 or g  g * . Relative to the g  0 case where tax benefits are lost as debt
matures, the firm in the fixed face value case maintains its debt and so enjoys greater tax
benefits. On the other hand, the firm in the fixed face value case commits to a debt policy that is
much less aggressive than the no-commitment case, hence incurring a much lower bankruptcy
cost.

           Figure 5 illustrates the debt price and valuation multiple for each policy. Not surprisingly,
as shown in PROPOSITION 9, the debt price with “no future debt issuance” g  0 dominates that
without commitment, simply because future debt issuance pushes the firm closer to the default
boundary. This also explains why in the bottom panel, the TEV multiple without commitment is
always lower than that under commitment of g  0 (recall equity values are the same under these
two cases).

           From (46), we see that the debt price premium due to “no future debt issuance” grows
with the firm’s distance to default. This implies that the debt of firms that cannot commit will
exhibit large credit spreads even when the firm’s current total leverage is very low--but, of
course, the future leverage might be high. In fact, even for almost zero current leverage, the


20              
     However, yb  yb could potentially occur, especially when the tax benefit    is high. Recall yb is the default
                                                               
policy as if equity holder obtains no tax benefit, while for y , the firm with fixed debt face value indeed captures
                                                               b
some tax benefit (hence, a high  pushes equity holders to default later).

                                                          32
credit spreads for firms without commitment are non-zero. In contrast, the credit spreads for
almost zero leverage firms are zero for the other two benchmark cases.




       Figure 5: Debt Price and TEV Multiple for Alternative Debt Issuance Policies
                   Parameters are r  5% , c  8% ,   0.1 ,   2% ,   25% ,   35% .

       Relative to our base case, the fixed face value (Leland 1998) case generates a lower debt
price for low y but higher debt price for high y . This is due to the endogenous issuance policy g *
plotted in Figure 4. There, we observe that the debt issuance policy without commitment is
increasing in y , and slower (faster) than the fixed face value policy when y is low (high), and
investors price the debt in anticipation of these future leverage polices.



                                                     33
         The next proposition summarizes the comparison of debt values across three models,
depending on the firm’s profitability state y . Figure 5 corresponds to the case of yb  yb , so for

sufficiently low y , the debt price in the case of fixed face value p  drops below the other two
cases.

         PROPOSITION 10. We always have p  y   p 0  y  . For y   we have

                                         p  y   p  y   p0  y 

         For sufficiently low y so that y  min  yb , yb  , we have

                                 p   y   p  y   p 0  y  if yb  yb
                                                                                 .
                                 p  y   p 0  y   p   y  if yb  yb

                                                                                             y   p  c  
                                                                                                       

                                                                    c 
PROOF: p  y   p  y  is implied by (46). When y   , p  y                          1      
                     0                                                       

                                                                    r                      yb       r 
                                                                                                       
                                                             

which exceeds p  y 
                           1    c    1          y   1    c  
                                                                               . To show that p  y   p0  y  ,
                         
                                                          
                                r                      b 
                                                         y          r  
                                           
                                               p
                      y    y 
we need to show that                               holds when y   , which is equivalent to  p   ; but
                      yb   yb 
the latter holds by comparing (49) and (24). The second part of result is obvious as the debt price
drops to zero at the default boundary. 

          Finally, as indicated in (30), in our no commitment case the firm’s TEV multiple is
strictly increasing in the scaled cash flow y . Consequently, holding the level of cash flows Y
fixed, total firm value decreases with the debt face value F . In other words, in the no
commitment equilibrium there is always a loss to total firm value from leverage – the tax
benefits of debt more than offset the resulting bankruptcy costs due to future debt increases. This
result is shown in the TEV-multiple-against-leverage plot in the bottom panel of Figure 5: there,
the solid line (i.e., the no commitment case) achieves its maximum at zero leverage. In contrast,




                                                                34
TEV multiples in both commitment cases have an interior maximum.21 This interior maximum is
often viewed as the “optimal” leverage in the traditional trade-off theory, though of course in a
dynamic context it may be far from optimal ex-post once shocks are realized (see, e.g., Fischer,
Heinkel, Zechner (1989) and Strebulaev (2007)).

A Comparison of Leverage Dynamics

           In two benchmark cases with commitment, the scaled cash-flows follow a geometric
Brownian motion with exogenous drifts, i.e., dyt yt       dt   dZt for the case of no future

debt issuance, and dyt yt   dt   dZt for the fixed face value case. In our model with no
commitment, the equilibrium evolution of the firm’s scaled cash-flows is:

                                                            
            dyt       g *  yt   yt dt   yt dZt      
                                                                            r     cyt      
                                                                                                  yt dt   yt dZt .   (53)
                                                                      1    c    yb   

The equilibrium debt issuance policy g*  yt  in (29) is increasing in yt , implying that yt grows

slower when yt is higher. In fact, the firm’s scaled cash-flows are mean-reverting towards the

steady-state value (recall the definition of yˆ g in (39)).22


                                                                 c 1       
                                                                                          1/

                                      yˆ g       yb                                                              (54)
                                                         
                                                                   r      c         
                                                                                          




21
  This is evident in the bottom panel of Figure 5, as both dashed and dash-dotted lines have a positive slope at
zero leverage, and drop to zero when leverage reaches 100%.
22
     Strictly speaking, to ensure   yt to mean revert over its equilibrium region yt   yb ,  , one has to show that
yˆ    yb so that the drift of yt is positive when yt  yb , which is indeed the case for our baseline parameters.
However, yˆ    yb could occur for sufficiently large  (so            0 in (54)).

                                                                   35
                         Aggregate Debt Face Value Ft                                     Scaled Cash-flows yt=Yt /Ft
          1.4
                                                                           0.24
          1.3           Baseline no commitment g*                                         Baseline no commitment, g*
                        No future debt issuance, g=0                       0.22           No future debt issuance, g=0
                        Fixed face value Leland '98, g=                                   Fixed face value Leland '98, g=
          1.2
                                                                            0.2

          1.1
                                                                           0.18

            1                                                              0.16

          0.9                                                              0.14


          0.8                                                              0.12

                                                                            0.1
          0.7

                                                                           0.08
          0.6
                                                                           0.06
          0.5
                                                                           0.04
          0.4
                0   1         2          3         4      5   6   7               0   1    2          3         4           5   6   7
                                          time                                                         time



   Figure 6: Aggregate debt face values (left panel) and scaled cash-flows dynamics (right
                                  panel) for three models.
         With fixed cash-flow shocks dZ and r  5% , c  8% ,   0.1 ,   2% ,   25% ,   35% .

        We are interested in the firm leverage dynamics implied by three different models. For
given underlying cash-flow shocks dZt  , the left panel of Figure 6 plots the debt face value Ft,

while the right panel shows the dynamics of scaled cash-flow yt , which tracks one-to-one to the
firm’s interest-coverage-ratio (or book leverage). Because the underlying shocks are the same,
the differences across these three different models are purely due to their different debt issuance
policies. In this sample path, negative shocks in the early years cause the firm in our baseline no
commitment case to issue less debt compared to the fixed face value case which commits to
g  , but of course since g *  0 the firm has more debt than it would in the no issuance case.
Later, when the firm has positive shocks, the firm issues debt even faster than it matures and the
debt level grows. As a result, yt in the no commitment case (blue solid line) has a larger upward
drift initially, but this reverses near the end of the sample path.

4.4. Debt Maturity Structure

In our model, the firm commits to a constant debt maturity structure, i.e., all debt has an expected
maturity of 1/  . This assumption is common in much of the dynamic capital structure literature




                                                                      36
which treats the debt maturity structure as a parameter.23 It is beyond the scope of this paper to
relax the full commitment assumption on the firm’s debt maturity structure policy; for some
recent research, see He and Milbradt (2016).

           We can consider, however, the consequences of the initial maturity choice. What if the
firm can choose the debt maturity  to commit to for the future? In this section, we first show if
the firm does not need to borrow a fixed amount upfront, then it is indifferent between all debt
maturity choices. We then show that if the firm is restricted to borrow a fixed amount initially,
then debt with shortest maturity becomes optimal. Finally, we analyze the role of leverage
commitment with ultra-short-term debt which matures instantaneously.

Optimal Debt Maturity without Fixed Borrowing

We have seen that from (30) that the firm’s TEV multiple is increasing in the scaled cash-flows
y  Y / F . Consequently, value-maximizing firms should set the optimal initial debt face value
to be F0*  0 . Given this choice, (30) implies that the firm’s TEV multiple no longer depends on

the debt maturity structure  . This indifference result is deeper than it appears: Although the firm
starts with no initial debt, recall that (42) says the firm will begin issuing debt immediately, and
the debt maturity  does affect those future debt contracts. Nevertheless, in our model this
dynamic consideration has no bite on the optimal maturity choice by equity holders: Although
different maturity structures lead to very different future leverage dynamics, any gains from tax
savings are offset by increased bankruptcy costs.

           In fact, this irrelevance result is fairly general in our model. Imagine the following
thought experiment, in which equity holders -- facing the state pair Yt , Ft  and the existing debt

maturity structure  -- are offered with a one-time chance of choosing  ' for the firm’s future

debt. That is, the firm’s existing debts continue to retire at the old speed  , but the newly issued

debts are with the new maturity and hence will retire at the new speed  ' . The following

proposition shows that equity holders are indifferent among all choices of  ' .




23
     To mention a few, Leland (1998), Leland and Toft (1996), He and Xiong (2012), and Diamond and He (2014).

                                                        37
        PROPOSITION 11. In a no-commitment equilibrium with smooth debt issuance, the firm’s
        equity value is independent of the maturity structure  ' of new debt.

PROOF: For equilibria in which equity holders are taking smooth debt issuance polices, equity
holders obtain zero profit by issuing future debt, and their value will be the same as if equity
does not issue any future debt. As a result, the equity value depends on the maturity structure 

of existing debt, but not on the maturity structure  ' of future debt. 

        The logic of Proposition 9 and hence the indifference result can be further generalized to
a setting in which the firm is free to choose any maturity structure for its newly issued debt any
time. Again, the equity value only depends on the maturity structure of existing debt.

        Note, however, that while equity holders are indifferent between alternative maturity
structures, different maturity choices will lead to very different patterns and levels of future
leverage. For example, Figure 7 shows the total enterprise value, debt amount, and leverage
(debt value/TEV) for the firm given identical productivity shocks, but financed either using five-
year or one-year debt. In both cases the initial TEV and equity value is the same, but leverage
evolves very differently. With longer-term debt, debt changes gradually, as the firm issues debt
more slowly, and leverage is lower on average. With shorter-term debt, the firm issues debt
more rapidly knowing it can decrease debt quickly by not rolling over maturing debt. Because it
can adjust debt more quickly, the firm has higher leverage on average.24




24
  Of course, in our model we have assumed away transactions costs associated with issuing or rolling over debt.
Such considerations would make long-term debt less costly, as in Dangl and Zechner (2016).

                                                      38
100                        F       TEV         % D/TEV                      100              F       TEV        % D/TEV
 90                                                                          90
 80                                                                          80
 70                                                                          70
 60                                                                          60
 50                                                                          50
 40                                                                          40
 30                                                                          30
 20                                                                          20
 10                                                                          10
  0                                                                           0
      0           2            4               6              8        10         0    2         4          6             8            10
                                   Year                                                              Year

                                   Figure 7: Debt and Leverage with Differing Maturities.
           Left panel shows TEV, debt face value, and market leverage with 5-year average debt maturity. Right panel shows
            1-yr average debt maturity. In either case, initial firm value is unchanged, but leverage is higher and adjusts more
          quickly with shorter-term debt. Parameters are   2% ,   40% ,   30% , c (1   )  r  5% ,   0.2 (5-year
                                                           debt) or 1 (1-year debt).

          Optimal Debt Maturity with Fixed Borrowing

          Suppose the firm must raise some amount of funds initially through debt. Issuing a discrete
          amount of debt in our model is not optimal – shareholders would be better off issuing debt
          gradually – but suppose the firm must raise funds quickly and equity capital is not available in
          the short run. In that case we can show that short-term debt maximizes not only the firm value,
          but also the debt capacity, i.e., the maximum amount of debt that the firm can raise.

                  Our model highlights one advantage of short-term debt which allows firms to adjust their
          leverage burden in response to fundamental shocks in a more flexible way. This point has been
          neglected in the Leland-style literature which often assumes the firm is committing to a future
          leverage policy with fixed debt face value. For instance, He and Xiong (2012) show that the
          longest possible debt maturity structure minimizes the rollover risk. As we will explain, the
          difference is driven by different assumptions on leverage policies.
                  Given initial cash-flow Y0 , the firm sets the initial debt face value F0 to raise D0 from

          debt holders. From (30) we know that the firm value is (recall y0  Y0 / F0 )


                                                                          1    y  
                                                                                        1
                                               v  y0   p  y0                               1 
                                          Y0                          Y0       1      Y0                                 (55)
                                                         y0               r     yb        r 
                                                                                            

                                                                                                                              1 
          Hence, both the firm value TEV0 and the debt value D0 cannot exceed the upper bound Y0                                   .
                                                                                                                              r 

                                                                            39
       PROPOSITION 12. Suppose the firm starts with initial cash flows Y0 .

                                                               1 
       i)      For any target debt value D0  Y0                    , the optimal debt maturity structure that
                                                               r 

               maximizes the levered firm value (and hence the equity value) is *   .

       ii)     The debt capacity sup D0 , which is the highest debt value that the firm is able to

                                  1                 Y
               raise, equals Y0        by setting F0  0 and *   .
                                  r                  yb

PROOF: The first claim follows by showing that    always achieves the upper bound of
   1 
Y0      . Because
   r 

                                      0.5              22  r   
                                                           2
                      0.52               2

                                                                               as   
                                              2

So given y  yb we have  y / yb 
                                      1
                                             to vanish in (55) as    , which proves the claim. For the
second claim, from (27) we have

                                 Y        c 1                 y   
                       D0  F0 p  0   F0                         1   0  
                                  F0          r                           
                                                                      b 
                                                                          y

                                                                                  Y0
By setting    the term in the parentheses vanishes, while F0                     delivers the upper bound
                                                                                  yb
                     1 
debt value D0  Y0        .
                     r 


       Figure 8 illustrates Proposition 12 by plotting the firm value TEV0                 (left panel) and debt

value D0 (right panel), both as a function of initial face value F0 . We consider three debt

maturities: long-term debt with a 100-year maturity (   0.01 , dash-dotted); medium-term debt
with a 10-year maturity (   0.1 , dashed), and short-term debt with 3-day maturity (   100 ,
solid). The left panel shows that the firm value is maximized by using 3-day maturity debt. This
is simply because    implies that    , and hence for any y  yb the firm value achieves

                     1 
its upper bound Y0        in (55). Of course, a too high F0 pushes the scaled cash-flow y0 below
                     r 

                                                           40
     Figure 8. Firm value and debt value as a function of initial debt face value F0 , for three levels of debt
     retiring rate  ’s. Blue solid line is for shortest debt maturity 1/   0.01 , red dash-dotted line is for medium
     debt maturity 1 /   10 , and black dashed line is for longest debt maturity 1/   100 Both firm and debt values
     hit zero when F0  Y0 / yb . Parameters are r  5% , c  8% ,   0.1 ,   2% ,   25% ,   35% .

yb , triggering default---and the firm value drops to zero. Although firms with the shortest-term

debt---with the highest default threshold yb ---face the tightest constraint in setting a high F0 ,25
the right panel of Figure 8 shows that they achieve the highest market value of debt, thanks to the
“Laffer” curve effect: Because long-term debt makes it difficult for the firm to reduce leverage in
response to shocks, at some point an increase in the face value is more than offset by the increase
                                                                      1 
in credit risk. As shown, the upper bound of D0 , Y0                       , is achieved by setting F0 at (slightly
                                                                      r 
below) the default boundary for firms using “overnight” debt.

           Our model differs from Leland type models in the firm’s future leverage policy. In both
settings, the debt maturity structure  captures the speed of debt retiring. In Leland, committing
to refinance those retiring bonds (to maintain the aggregate debt face at a constant) leads equity
to bear rollover gains/losses   p   y   1 -- see Equation (50). When the debt price is low

(because leverage is already high), rollover losses lower the option value to equity holders of


25
     Under a mild sufficient condition r  c(1 ) , one can show that the firm defaults earlier with shorter-term debt,
i.e., default threshold   yb in (25) is increasing in debt maturity  . This is a general result in Leland-style models.

                                                              41
keeping the firm alive and thus they will default earlier, creating rollover risk. The higher the  ,
the stronger the rollover risk.26 To mitigate this rollover risk, a value-maximizing firm will set
  0 , corresponding to a consol bond that is free of rollover concerns.

        When the firm can change its future debt burden freely, there emerges an important
benefit of short-term debt. Given that short-term debt retires quickly, it allows the firm to swiftly
adjust its leverage in response to profitability shocks. This result follows from the firm’s mean-
reverting leverage dynamics illustrated in Section 3.3, as (29) implies that the firm issues more
(less) debt following positive (negative) performance.

        It is worth noting that, typically, the flexibility brought on by short-term debt comes with
a potential cost of lack of commitment;27 in our particular setting the former benefit dominates
the latter cost. We also caution that PROPOSITION 12 heavily relies on a strong, and perhaps
counterfactual, assumption that underlies all of these models: the firm is facing a frictionless
equity market through which equity could inject liquidity at any time in a costless way.
Following a sequence of negative shocks, to repay the mounting debts that are maturing
instantaneously, firms issue equity as needed. This assumption allows a firm with very short-
term debt to hold high leverage (as in the right panel of Figure 7) with out risking a liquidity
induced default. We expect that modelling an equity market with realistic frictions will change
many of these qualitative results, an interesting question left for future research.

Ultra-Short-term Debt and Commitment

The previous section shows that in our model it is optimal to set the debt maturity to be ultra-
short-term if the firm is forced to raise some amount of funds initially through debt. The ultra-
short-term debt matures instantaneously every dt , much like demand deposits.

        In the literature, some papers (e.g. Tserlukevich, 2008) suggest that when the firm can
adjust its leverage freely in response to the cash-flows shocks, then it is optimal to set Ft  Yt / c
always so that the firm avoids default while capturing the entire debt tax shield. In particular, it
seems that ultra-short-term debt, which at any moment matures entirely and allows the firm to

26
  See He and Xiong (2012) and Diamond and He (2014).
27
  For instance, long-term debt, because of its slow retiring speed, could potentially serve as a commitment device of
leverage policy. He and Milbradt (2016) study a firm who cannot commit to debt maturity structure, and gives an
example where the cost of lacking commitment dominates the benefit of flexibility.

                                                         42
reset its leverage to its favorable level in response to cash-flow shocks, can achieve this goal. For
instance, setting issuance policy d t as

                                    d t       Ft dt   Ft dZ t                           (56)

could potentially prevent the scaled cash flow yt from fluctuating over time. Essentially, this
captures the flexibility advantage offered by short-term debt.

        Although the flexibility benefit does apply in our model, the above argument implicitly
assumes that equity holders can commit to the first best leverage policy. In our model, the
inability to commit to certain future leverage policy matters in a significant way – equity holders
continue to raise debt until the likelihood of default impacts its price. This point is highlighted in
(56) that the firm repurchases debt following negative cash-flow shocks dZt  0 , while in our
model shareholders never find debt repurchases optimal. In the limit, even with instantaneously
maturing debt, there is always a risk of bankruptcy in our model, so that the implied bankruptcy
cost offsets the tax benefit.


5.      Endogenous Investment and Debt Overhang
        In this setting we extend our model by adding an endogenous investment decision also
under the control of shareholders. Including investment allows us to explore the interaction of
shareholder-creditor conflicts with regard to both investment and leverage choices. As expected
from Myers (1977), debt overhang leads firms to underinvest. We show that when shareholders
are unable to commit to future leverage decisions, debt overhang is more severe when
profitability is high, but less severe when profitability is low, than when the debt level is fixed as
in the Leland (1998) case. In addition, we show that when shareholders cannot commit to future
investment decisions, the leverage ratchet effect becomes more severe, and the firm will issue
debt more rapidly, than the benchmark case in which investment is fixed.




                                                   43
5.1. General Analysis

          Now we allow equity holders to choose the firm’s endogenous investment policy it ,

which affects the drift of cash-flow process by  Yt , it  at a cost of K Yt , it  . Both functions are

smooth with i Yt , it   0 , Ki Yt , it   0 and K ii Yt , it   0 .

          For illustration purposes, we carry out the general analysis with investment under the
general cash-flow diffusion process without jumps; the analysis for a cash-flow process as in (1)
with jumps is similar.

          The HJB equation for equity holders, who are choosing the firm’s debt issuance G and
investment i, can be written as

rV Y , F            1    Y   1    c    F
                                                          
    
required return   after-tax cash-flows net coupon-principal payment

                                                                                                               
                                                                           (Y ) 2                             
max G ,i  p Y , F  G  (G   F )VF Y , F    (Y , i )VY Y , F             VYY Y , F   K Y , i  
             2                                                          
                                                                                                     
                                                                                              investment
                     evolution of dF
                                                                  evolution of dY
                                                                                                           cost 
                                                                                                                

          As before we focus on the equilibrium where G takes interior solutions, which implies
that p  VF , and we can solve for the equity value function as if there is no issuance, i.e., G  0 .

Suppressing the arguments for V Y , F  , the HJB equation with G  0 becomes

                                                                                       1             
     rV  max i 1    Y   1    c    F   FVF  K Y , i    (Y , i )VY   (Y ) 2 VYY              (57)
                                                                                       2             

The first-order condition for the optimal investment policy i* is

                                                 K i Y , i*   i Y , i*  VY                                    (58)

This condition characterizes the optimal investment policy i* under the assumption that
 (Y , i )VY  K Y , i  is strictly concave in i .
          The equilibrium issuance policy can be derived as before. Plugging the optimal
investment policy i* into (57), and taking derivative with respect to F further, we have



                                                                      44
                                                                              1
                  rVF    1    c     VF   FVFF   (Y , i* )VYF   (Y ) 2 VYYF
                                                                              2

As before, we have used the Envelope theorem that we can ignore the dependence of the optimal
        *
policy i on F .28 Using p  VF , we have

 rp Y , F   ((1   )c   )   (Y , i* ) pY Y , F    p Y , F    FpF Y , F    (2Y ) pYY Y , F 
                                                                                                                 2
                                                                                                                          (59)

The valuation equation for debt price p Y , F  in (5), with the equilibrium evolution of state

variables Y , F  , is

 rp Y , F   c   1  p Y , F    (G   F ) pF Y , F    (Y , i* ) pY Y , F    (2Y ) pYY Y , F 
                                                                                                                 2
                                                                                                                          (60)
                                                                        
required return   coupon and principal payment        evolution of dF                          evolution of dY

Combining (59) and (60) gives rise to the exact same equilibrium debt issuance policy as in
PROPOSITION 3:

                                                         c                    c
                                   G Y , F                                          0.
                                                   pF  Y , F         VFF Y , F 

Again, the equilibrium requires the condition in PROPOSITION 1, i.e.  pF Y , F   VFF Y , F   0

holds always.

5.2. Log-normal Cash Flows and Quadratic Adjustment Costs

          Consider the setting with a log-normal cash-flow process studied in Section 3, with
 (Y , i)     i  Y and K Y , i   0.5 i 2Y , where   0 is a positive constant.                             Here, the

investment i increases the cash-flow growth rate linearly, and the cost is proportional to cash-
flow size Y but quadratic in investment i . Without debt, our model is similar to Hayashi (1982),
and the optimal investment policy for unlevered firm, denoted by iunlever , is given by:


                                                            r            2 1     .
                                                                        2
                                    iunlever  r                                                                       (61)




                                                  *
28
   The envelope theorem readily applies if i takes interior solutions always. However, even if the optimal investment
policy takes a binding solution, our logic goes through as long as the constraint does not depend on F (hence there
is no first-order gain by changing the firm’s debt).

                                                                   45
        Now we derive the solution to our model with leverage without commitment. Denote the
optimal investment rate by it* so that the evolution of scaled cash-flow yt  Yt Ft is


                                            it *    g t  dt   dZ t .
                                    dyt
                                     yt

Equity holders default when yt hits the endogenous default boundary yb . The scaled equity

value v  y  without debt issuance satisfies

                                                            i2                              1
      r    v  y   max i 1    y  c             y     i    yv '  y    2 y 2 v ''  y  .          (62)
                                                             2                               2

Given the optimal investment i*  y   v  y   , the above equation becomes

                                                                        2
                                                     y v '  y                                 1
        r    v  y   1    y  c                                    yv '  y    2 y 2 v ''  y  ,   (63)
                                                           2                                       2


with two boundary conditions: v  y    iunlever y 
                                                                            1    c     for y   , and v  yb   0 . The
                                                                                r 

default boundary yb is determined by the smooth-pasting condition v '  yb   0 .

        The equity value function v  y  and default boundary yb are readily solvable by standard

Matlab built-in ODE solver. The debt price is then given by p  y   yv '  y   v  y  , and the debt

                                  c
issuance policy is g  y                    0.
                                yp '  y 

        Finally, we need to verify the key condition v ''  y   0 (or equivalently p '  y   0 ) in

Proposition 1. Although we no longer have closed-form solution in the model with investment, in
the next proposition we show that v ''  y   0 holds by analyzing the ODE (63) satisfied by the

equity value.

        PROPOSITION 13. In the log-normal cash-flow model with quadratic investment costs,
        equity value is strictly convex, i.e., v ''  y   0 , so that the debt price is decreasing in debt

        face value. This guarantees the optimality of smooth issuance policy and hence the


                                                                  46
                                                                                                                     c
         investment policy i*  y   v  y   and issuance policy g  y                                                    0,   together
                                                                                                                   yp '  y 

         with the debt price p  y   yv '  y   v  y  , constitute an equilibrium.

                                                                                                  1    c  
PROOF: Define a constant B   iunlever and w  y   v  y   By                                                 ; then w   is concave
                                                                                                        r 

if and only if v   is concave. Using (63) and v '  y   w '  y   B , we have:

 r    w  y    r    v  y    r    By  1    c  
                                    y  w ' y   B
                                                      2
                                                                                         2 y2
                   1    y                               y  w ' y   B         w ''  y    r    By
                                                2                                                        2
                             B       2
                                                           
                  y 1             B  r    B
                             2                           
                   
                                                                 2
                         0, because B   r      2  r     2 1 


                         2 Bw '  y    w '  y  
                                                             2
                                                                                             2 y2
                    y                                                 yw '  y              w ''  y 
                                          2                                                  2
                                               w '  y     2 y 2 w '' y .
                                                                             2
                              B        
                  yw '  y         y                              
                                               2            2

Hence w  y  satisfies the following ODE:


                                                                    w '  y     2 y 2 w '' y
                                                                                             2

                   r    w  y   yw '  y         y
                                                   B
                                                                                                                                       (64)
                                                                    2            2

We need two steps to show that w ''  y   0 for all y  yb .

        Step 1. w  y   0 for all y  yb . We know that at default w '  yb   v '  yb   B   B  0 , and

w     0 . This implies that if w  y   0 ever occurs, then the global minimum must be

nonpositive and interior. Pick that global minimum point y1 ; we must have w '  y1   0 and

w ''  y1   0 . Suppose that w  y1   0 ; evaluating (64) at y1 , we find that the LHS is strictly

negative while the RHS is positive, contradiction. Suppose that w  y1   0 ; then there must exist




                                                                                 47
some local maximum point y2  y1 , so that w  y2   0 , w '  y2   0 and w ''  y2   0 . But the

same argument of evaluating (64) at y2 leads to a contradiction.

       Step 2. Because w  y  approaches 0 from above when y   , we know that for y to be

sufficiently large w  y  is convex. Suppose counterfactually that w  y  is not convex globally; we

can take the largest inflection point y2 with w ''  y3   0 . We must have w '  y3   0 and

w '''  y3   0 (it is because for y  y3 the function w  y  is convex and decreasing to zero from

above). At this point, differentiate (64) and ignore the term with w ''  y3   0 , and we have


                                                 w '  y3  
                                                               2
                               B                                2 y32
                        r     w '  y3                           w '''  y  .                   (65)
                                                   2           2

Recall B    r      2  r     2 which implies
                                       2




                             B
                      r     w '  y3     r     2  w '  y3   0
                                               2         2

                             
As a result, the LHS of (65) is negative while the RHS of (65) is positive, contradiction. This
implies that w  y  is convex globally.

       Combining all the results above, we have shown that v ''  y   0 for y  yb . 


5.3. Optimal Investment and Leverage

        The extension considered above with endogenous investment i*  y  and debt issuance

g *  y  allows us to study implications on the endogenous firm growth and its interaction with

the firm’s leverage policies. To facilitate discussion, we consider the following three benchmark
cases which features either a constant investment policy i (i.e., independent of the state yt ), or a

constant debt issuance policy g . In each case, we isolate either endogenous investment or
endogenous debt issuance separately, allowing us to study the interactions between these two
policies.

        In the first case, the firm commits to the socially optimal investment policy which is a
constant:

                                                          48
                                                    r
                                                            2
                              isocial  r                    2  .                          (66)

In the second case, the committed constant investment policy is optimal to an unlevered firm
who pays taxes, as in equation (61). Both cases are relevant because equity holders in our model
are maximizing the levered firm value, which includes debt tax shields.

       Importantly, in each benchmark case, equity holders---given the respective constant
investment policy---are making endogenous debt issuance decisions as in our base model. In
contrast, in the third Leland (1998) benchmark, the firm commits to fully rollover always its debt
so that g    , but the investment decision is taken by equity holders endogenously. Appendix

XX gives the details of solving these three benchmark cases.

       Figure 9 plots the investment policies (left panel) and debt issuance polices (right panel)
for our extension with both endogenous investment and debt issuance polices (which is indicated
by “ i* , no commitment g * ,” solid lines), together with three benchmark cases. Start with the left
panel. The general take-away there is that the well-known debt overhang effect (Myers 1977;
Hennessey, 2004) causes the firm to underinvest; to the extreme, equity holders stop investing
when the firm is close to default. Because all debt tax shields get dissipated in our no-
commitment model, the relevant benchmark is “ iunlever , no commitment g * ” plotted in dashed
line; and as expected, the firm in our model underinvests.

       Similarly, the Leland (1998) firm, red dash-dotted line “ i* , Leland ’98 g   ”,
underinvests compared to the socially optimal level (black solid line with circle). Interestingly,
relative to the Leland benchmark, the solid line of our model sits below (above) the dash-dotted
line of Leland (1998) for low (high) y . In words, no commitment leverage policy leads to more
severe debt overhang when profitability is high, but the overhang effect is less severe when
profitability is low. This is a result of history dependent leverage policy discussed in Section 3.3-
--equity holders allow leverage to decline following negative shocks.




                                                    49
Figure 9: Endogenous investment and debt issuance policies, and comparison to three
benchmarks. Our model extension with endogenous investment is denoted by “i*, no commitment g*,” with solid
lines. “isocial, no commitment g*” with solid-circle lines and “iunlever, no commitment g*” with dashed lines refer to the
cases of constant investment               and              , but shareholders has no commitment on the debt issuance
policy. The third benchmark is Leland (1998) with constant debt issuance policy              but equity chooses
investment endogenously. Parameters are


          The differences in net debt issuance polices g  y    in the right panel of Figure 9 reveal

an additional economic insight. By assumption, the net debt issuance is identically zero in the
benchmark Leland (1998) case (dash-dotted line). For other cases, we observe that the solid line
of “ i* , no commitment g * ” sits above both constant investment benchmarks (solid-circle line
and dashed line). In words, equity holders are more aggressive in issuing new debt when they are
also in charge of the endogenous investment policies of the firm. For intuition, recall that in
deciding how much new debt to issue, equity holders are trading off the tax benefit against the
losses caused by higher leverage that are borne by themselves. Compared to the case in which
equity holders are forced to implement an (ex ante) optimal investment policy, the losses are
mitigated when equity holders are also in charge of future investment policies that maximize
equity value ex post, which explains the more aggressive leverage policy in this case.


6.        Conclusions
          When the firm cannot commit ex ante to future leverage choices, shareholders will adjust
the level of debt to maximize the firm’s current share price. As shown by Admati et al. (2015),


                                                            50
capital structure decisions are then distorted and a leverage ratchet effect emerges: shareholders
will choose to issue new debt gradually over time even if leverage is already excessive relative to
the standard tradeoff theory optimum. This endogenous rate of debt issuance decreases as the
firm approaches default, and is offset by the rate of asset growth and debt maturity, so that the
firm’s equilibrium leverage is ultimately mean-reverting.

       We develop a general methodology to solve for equilibrium debt dynamics in this setting,
and apply it to several standard models. When earnings evolve as geometric Brownian motion
(including possible upward jumps), we explicitly solve for the firm’s debt as a weighted average
of past earnings, with the speed of adjustment decreasing with debt maturity and volatility. When
shareholders also control investment decisions, we show that debt overhang exacerbates the
leverage ratchet effect, leading the firm to take on leverage more aggressively.

       Because creditors expect the firm to issue new debt in the future, credit spreads are wider
in our model than in standard models with fixed debt, and remain wide even when firms are
arbitrarily far from default. Lower debt prices dissipate the tax shield benefits of leverage, so that
the share price of the firm is identical to its value if debt were fixed. Finally, while shortening
the maturity of future debt issues raises the average level of leverage as well as its speed of
adjustment, it has no impact on the share price. As a result, even “instantaneous” debt does not
resolve the agency problem, and equity holders have no incentive what-so-ever to adjust the
firm’s debt maturity structure.

       Firms may try to reduce the agency costs resulting from future debt issuance by agreeing
to covenants that restrict future debt issuance. Equity and debt issuance may also incur
transactions costs or expose the firm to other market imperfections. We leave for future work an
exploration of the leverage dynamics that arise from the interaction of these additional forces
with the leverage ratchet effects explored here.




                                                   51
7.        Appendix.

7.1. Appendix for Leland (1998)
Following Leland (1998), we can first solve for the scaled levered firm value                        TEV as
                                                                                                           v
                                   TEV 1    y  c   c 1    yb   y 
                                                                      
                                                                                                                                  (67)
                                    F    r       r  r       r     yb 

                                                  0.5            2 2 r
                                                                   2
                               0.5 2                   2
                                                                                                                               TEV
where the constant  v 
                                                                                 . Then, the equity value v
                                                                                                                  
                                                                                                                       y         p  y 
                                                      2
                                                                                                                                F
equals:


                                                                                                  c     y  
                                                                                         v                     p   


          v  y    
                       1    y   c    c  1    yb                y 
                                                                                                         1                            (68)
                                                                             
                         r            r      r               r           yb               r     yb  
                                                                                                                     




7.2. Appendix for Section 4.2
      With slight abuse of notation, consider a constant investment policy i , which could take either the constant

value of   iunlever in equation (61) or isocial in equation (66). The flow payoff to equity holders is

                   i 2
1    y  c   y , and the method in our base model allows us to derive the equity holders’ value to be
                    2

                                              i 2
                                    y (1        )                             
                                                                                     
                        v( y )                2  c 1       1  1  y   ,
                                         r           r         1    yb  
                                                                                    
with endogenous default boundary

                                                    r    c 1      
                                         yb                                  .
                                                 1   r    1    0.5i 2 

                                                                             *
Then we can solve for the endogenous debt issuance policy g as in (29).
          The solution to the Leland (1998) model with endogenous investment is characterized by a pair of ODE,

one for the equity value v
                             
                                  y  and the other for the debt price p  y  . For equity value, we have



                                                                       52
                                                                                      i 2
       rv  y   max i 1    y  c     p  y   1     i  yv   y  
                                                                              
                                                                                           y  12 2 y 2 v    y 
                                                                                       2
                                             v '  y 
With optimal investment         i*  y                  , the above ODE becomes
                                                
                                                                          v   y 
                                                                                             2

          rv  y   1    y  c     p  y   1  yv   y  
                                                                        
                                                                                     y  12 2 y 2v    y           (69)
                                                                             2
With boundary conditions

v  yb   0, v '  yb   0, v '  y    iFB   r                r
                                                                                    2
                                                                                                     
                                                                                         2 1     for sufficient large y,

For debt price       p   y  , we have

                                                         v   y   
                        r    p  y   c      
                                   
                                                                      yp   y   2  y p   y 
                                                                                     1  2 2 
                                                                                                                        (70)
                                                                   
with boundary conditions         p  yb   0, p '  y   0 for sufficiently large y. One can easily solve for
v  y  , p  y  by solving the ODE system (69)-(70), with respective boundary conditions.
                




                                                                     53
8.     References
Abel, Andy, 2016, Investment with Leverage, Working paper, Wharton.
Admati, Anat R., Peter M. DeMarzo, Martin F. Hellwig, and Paul Pfleiderer, 2016, The
       Leverage Ratchet Effect. Working Paper, Stanford GSB.
Brunnermeier, Markus K. and Martin Oehmke, 2013, The Maturity Rat Race. Journal of
       Finance, 68(2): 483–521.
Brunnermeier, Markus K. and Motohiro Yogo, 2009, A Note on Liquidity Risk Management,
       American Economic Review: Papers and Proceedings 99, 578–583.
Chen, Nan, and S. G. Kou, 2009, Credit Spreads, Optimal Capital Structure, and Implied
       Volatility with Endogenous Default and Jump Risk, Mathematical Finance 19, 343-378.
Dangl, Thomas and Josef Zechner. 2016, Debt Maturity and The Dynamics of Leverage.
       Working Paper, Vienna School of Finance.
Diamond, Douglas W. and Zhiguo He, 2014, A Theory of Debt Maturity: The Long and Short of
       Debt Overhang. Journal of Finance, 69(2):719–762.
DeMarzo, Peter M. and Branko Uroševic. 2006, Optimal Trading and Asset Pricing with a Large
       Shareholder, Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 114, Issue 4, Pages 774-815
Fischer, Edwin, Robert Heinkel, and Josef Zechner, 1989, Dynamic Capital Structure Choice:
       Theory and Tests, Journal of Finance 44, 19–40,
Goldstein, R., N. Ju, and H. Leland, 2001, An EBIT-Based Model of Dynamic Capital Structure,
       Journal of Business 74, 483-512.
He, Zhiguo and Wei Xiong, 2012, Rollover Risk and Credit Risk. Journal of Finance,
       67(2):391–429.
He, Zhiguo and Konstantin Milbradt, 2016, Dynamic Debt Maturity, Review of Financial
       Studies, 29, 2677-2736.
Leland, Hayne, 1994, Corporate Debt Value, Bond Covenants, and Optimal Capital Structure.
       Journal of Finance, 49(4):1213–1252
Hennessy, Chris, 2004. Tobin’s Q, Debt Overhang, and Investment. Journal of Finance 59,
       1717–1742.
Leland, Hayne. 1998, Agency costs, risk management, and capital structure. Journal of Finance,
       53(4): 1213–1243.



                                              54
Merton, Robert, 1974, On the pricing of corporate debt: the risk structure of interest rates,
       Journal of Finance 29, 449–470.
Myers, Stewart, 1977, The determinants of corporate borrowing, Journal of Financial
       Economics 5, 147–175.
Strebulaev, Ilya A., 2006, Do Tests of Capital Structure Theory Mean What They Say? Journal
       of Finance.
Titman, Sheridan, and Sergey Tsyplakov, 2007, A dynamic model of optimal capital structure,
       Review of Finance 11, 401–451.
Tserlukevich, Y. 2008, Can Real Options Explain Financing Behavior? Journal of Financial
       Economics 89, 232-252




                                                 55
