                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                         PUBLIC DEBT AS PRIVATE LIQUIDITY:
                                  OPTIMAL POLICY

                                   George-Marios Angeletos
                                       Fabrice Collard
                                        Harris Dellas

                                      Working Paper 22794
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w22794


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                  November 2016




This paper supersedes an earlier draft, entitled “Optimal Public Debt Management and Liquidity
Provision”, which was concerned with the same topic but did not contain the present paper’s
theoretical contribution. We are grateful to Behzad Diba for his collaboration on the earlier
project; to Pedro Teles and Per Krusell for illuminating discussions; and to various seminar
participants for their feedback. Angeletos also thanks the University of Bern, Study Center
Gerzensee, and the Swiss Finance Institute for their hospitality. The views expressed herein are
those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2016 by George-Marios Angeletos, Fabrice Collard, and Harris Dellas. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Public Debt as Private Liquidity: Optimal Policy
George-Marios Angeletos, Fabrice Collard, and Harris Dellas
NBER Working Paper No. 22794
November 2016
JEL No. D52,D53,E13,E32,E51,E60,H21,H63

                                         ABSTRACT

We study the Ramsey policy problem in an economy in which public debt contributes to the
supply of assets that private agents can use as buffer stock and collateral, or as a vehicle of
liquidity. Issuing more debt eases the underlying financial friction. This raises welfare by
improving the allocation of resources; but it also tightens the government budget by raising the
interest rate on public debt. In contrast to the literature on the Friedman rule, the government’s
supply of liquidity becomes intertwined with its debt policy. In contrast to the standard Ramsey
paradigm, a departure from tax smoothing becomes desirable. Novel insights emerge about the
optimal long-run quantity of public debt; the optimal policy response to shocks; and the sense in
which a financial crisis presents the government with an opportunity for cheap borrowing.


George-Marios Angeletos                         Harris Dellas
Department of Economics, E52-530                Department of Economics
MIT                                             University of Bern
77 Massachusetts Avenue                         VWI, Schanzeneckstrasse 1
Cambridge, MA 02139                             CH 3012 Bern
and NBER                                        Switzerland
angelet@mit.edu                                 harris.dellas@vwi.unibe.ch

Fabrice Collard
University of Bern
Departement Volkswirtschaftslehre
Schanzeneckstrasse 1
CH-3001 Bern, Switzerland
fabrice.collard@vwi.unibe.ch
1        Introduction
In the presence of financial frictions, public debt can influence economic activity and asset prices
by contributing to the supply of assets that can be used as buffer stock or collateral. This insight,
formulated in various related forms by Woodford (1990), Aiyagari and McGrattan (1998), and
Holmström and Tirole (1998), seems particularly relevant in the aftermath of the Great Recession.
For instance, this insight suggests that a form of “quantitative easing” can be achieved by changing,
not only the composition of the government’s balance sheet,1 but also its net indebtedness. Fur-
thermore, by easing the underlying financial friction and raising the “natural rate of interest”, the
issuance of public debt might help relax the zero-lower-bound constraint on monetary policy.2
        In spite of these considerations, the literature has yet to study how optimal fiscal policy is
determined in a Ramsey setting in which public debt is non-neutral, because it influences the
virulence of financial frictions, but does not generate a free lunch for the government, because
taxation is distortionary. The contribution of this paper is to fill this gap.
        We accomplish this in three steps. First, we develop a stylized micro-founded model that helps
accommodate the aforementioned mechanism within the Ramsey policy paradigm of Barro (1979),
Lucas and Stokey (1983), and Aiyagari, Marcet, Sargent and Seppälä (2002). Second, we obtain a
useful reduced-form representation of the planner’s problem. Finally, we characterize analytically
the solution to a class of reduced-form problems that nests the one obtained from our model.
        This three-step approach illuminates the key policy trade offs. It also helps build a bridge
between the environments of interest, where public debt is non-neutral because of borrowing con-
straints, and the environments studied in the literature on the Friedman rule (Chari, Christiano and
Kehoe, 1996, Correia and Teles, 1999). Last but not least, it reveals a formal link to the literature
on non-convex optimal-control problems (Skiba, 1978, Brock and Dechert, 1983, Buera, 2008), a
link that is instrumental for the characterization of the optimal policy.
        Easing the underlying financial friction improves the allocation of resources; but it also increases
in the interest rate on public debt by reducing the demand for liquidity, or collateral. This creates
a tension in the eyes of the planner. In our preferred scenario, the economy converges to a steady
state in which the planner preserves, or even exacerbates, the friction in order to depress the interest
rate on public debt. The optimal dynamics around such a steady state feature mean-reversion, and
a departure from tax-smoothing, contrasting the properties exhibited in Barro (1979) and Aiyagari
et al. (2002). Finally, the optimal response to a financial crisis may be driven primarily by fiscal
considerations rather than by the need to alleviate the financial friction.
    1
        As argued, e.g., by Cúrdia and Woodford (2011), Gertler and Karadi (2011) and Gertler and Kiyotaki (2010).
    2
        Although we will not pursue this particular implication in this paper (because we restrict attention to environ-
ments with flexible prices), the mechanism we have in mind is simply the flip-side of Eggertsson and Krugman (2012)
and Guerrieri and Lorenzoni (2011).



                                                             1
       Microfoundations. Our framework shares the same neoclassical backbone as the models in
Barro and AMSS (henceforth shortcuts for Barro (1979) and Aiyagari et al. (2002), respectively).
Agents are infinitely lived; markets are competitive; prices are flexible; and the government can
collect taxes only by distorting the supply of labor. Unlike these models, however, ours includes a
certain friction in how markets allocate resources for any given fiscal policy.
       This friction is similar—in its essence although not in its exact form—to those found in Kiy-
otaki and Moore (1997) and Holmström and Tirole (1998). Private agents are subject to uninsurable
idiosyncratic shocks, which are interpreted as liquidity shocks. These shocks can be met by reallo-
cating a certain good from one agent to another. Reallocation requires borrowing and borrowing
requires collateral. The risk-free debt issued by one private agent can serve as collateral, or buffer
stock, for another agent. Nonetheless, collateral is in short supply at the aggregate level, because
private agents can pledge only a fraction of their future income. Finally, public debt eases this short-
age, in effect, by letting the government’s commitment to raise more taxes in the future substitute
for the private agents’ inability to pledge part of their future income in private markets.3

       Reduced Form. In the presence of uninsurable idiosyncratic risk, tractability becomes an issue,
especially if one wishes to maximize welfare over arbitrary policy paths, as we do here. We cut the
Gordian knot in a similar manner as Lagos and Wright (2005) and Guerrieri and Lorenzoni (2009):
we make assumptions that prevent the cross-sectional distribution of net worth from becoming a
relevant state variable in the planner’s problem. Although this carries costs, it leads to a convenient,
and insightful, reduced-form representation of the planner’s problem as an optimal-control problem
over the stock of public debt and the level of taxation.
       Inspection of this reduced form reveals three key properties, which are likely to be present
in richer frameworks as well. First, public debt emerges as a key policy instrument that can be
employed to regulate the severity of the financial distortion. Second, this regulation involves two
conflicting objectives: issuing more public debt helps attain a more efficient allocation of resources,
but it also lowers the premium the market is willing to pay for collateral, or liquidity, thereby
raising the government’s cost of borrowing relative to the planner’s discount rate. Third, the
planner’s problem is generally non-convex due to the dependence of the aforementioned premium
on the problem’s state variable, namely the stock of public debt. The results obtained in this paper
depend on these three elementary properties, not on the details of the underlying micro-foundations.

       Public Debt as Money. The function of public debt in economies with borrowing constraints
resembles that of “money” in the literature on the Friedman rule.4 The micro-foundations we
consider in this paper offer a sharp example of this resemblance: the reduced-form policy problem
   3
       Essentially the same mechanism underlies Woodford (1990) and Aiyagari and McGrattan (1998) as well.
   4
       This point goes back at least to Bewley (1980), who interprets “money” as the unique asset in an economy with
idiosyncratic risks and borrowing constraints.



                                                          2
of our heterogeneous-agent model is equivalent to that of a representative-agent model in which the
stock of public debt enters the agent’s utility function. By the same token, the welfare gain from
easing the financial distortion is akin to the utility of money, while the fiscal gain from paying a
lower interest rate on public debt is akin to seigniorage.
       There is, however, a fundamental difference. In the Friedman-rule literature, the government
trades two types of assets: one, called “money”, conveys utility, while the other, called “bonds”, does
not. By reshuffling its portfolio of money and bonds, the government can therefore regulate private
liquidity without changing its net debt position. This feature helps disentangle the government’s
supply of liquidity from the dynamics of debt and taxes. A similar disentangling is also present in
the recent literature on quantitative easing (Cúrdia and Woodford, 2011, Gertler and Karadi, 2011,
Gertler and Kiyotaki, 2010), even though the form of liquidity provision is different.
       By contrast, our framework lets the optimal provision of liquidity to be intertwined with optimal
fiscal policy: at least at the margin, the government can enhance private liquidity only by raising
debt burden. This property is key for understanding the nature of our results, their novelty vis-a-vis
the pertinent literature, and their likely robustness.

       Optimal policy. When the financial friction is shut down, our baseline model reduces to
a deterministic version of Barro and AMSS. The planner’s problem is convex; tax smoothing is
optimal; and the long-run level of public debt is indeterminate, in the sense that any sustainable
level is consistent with steady state.
       All the aforementioned properties are upset once the financial friction is active. The planner’s
problem is non-convex due to the dependence of interest rates on the stock of public debt. As a
result, the “first-order approach” to solving the problem fails: there generally exist multiple paths
that satisfy the relevant first-order and transversality conditions. We nevertheless obtain a sharp
characterization of the optimal policy by adapting the optimal-control methods of Skiba (1978) and
Brock and Dechert (1983) to a continuous-time formulation of our problem.
       Depending on primitives, either the economy converges to the same steady state from all initial
conditions; or there exist multiple steady states, each one associated with a separate basin of
attraction.5 Either way, the steady state can be understood as a long-run target for the government’s
supply of liquidity and the associated financial distortion in the economy. Reaching the desired
long-run target necessitates a departure from tax smoothing, the welfare cost of which acts as an
adjustment cost. This in turn helps explain, not only why the transition to steady state takes time,
but also why the steady state may depend on initial conditions.
       Two scenarios are possible in the long run. In the one, the financial distortion vanishes as the
economy converges to steady state; in this sense, the analogue of the Friedman rule applies in the
   5
       The description of our results in this Introduction presumes that the financial friction is binding in the initial
position of the economy, an assumption that is relaxed in the main text.



                                                             3
long run (asymptotically), although not in the short run (at any finite time). In the other scenario,
the analogue of the Friedman rule does not apply in either the short or the long run: the financial
distortion remains binding in steady state.
   The first scenario reinforces an important lesson from the Friedman-rule literature: satiating the
economy with liquidity may be optimal even if this requires a grave increase in the debt burden. We
nevertheless find the second scenario of greater interest because it allows us to analyze the optimal
policy response to shocks around a non-trivial steady state, that is, a steady state in which the two
distortions coexist and the relevant trade offs remain active.

   Wars, Recessions, and Crises. Consider a “war”, that is, a transitory positive shock to
government spending. In Barro/AMSS, the optimal policy response involves running a deficit during
the life of the shock in order to spread the additional tax burden over time. In comparison to
this benchmark, we find that the government should run a smaller deficit, because doing so helps
attenuate the increase in its cost of borrowing relative to the underlying social discount rate. The
optimal tax and debt responses therefore exhibit, not only mean reversion, but also smaller volatility.
   A similar result applies to a “traditional recession,” by which we mean a recession that does
not affect either the social or the private value of liquidity. Things are different for a “financial
recession”, which we identify with a shock that aggravates the underlying financial friction.
   Such a shock is shown to have an ambiguous effect on the planner’s incentives to supply liquidity:
while the increase in the social value of liquidity encourages the issuance of public debt, the increase
in the private value of liquidity pulls in the opposite direction, because it raises the “seigniorage” that
the planner can extract by squeezing liquidity. In a benchmark scenario in which these two effects
are of the same size, perhaps because of the absence of fire-sale or other pecuniary externalities,
the planner’s optimal supply of liquidity is invariant to the severity of the financial shock for given
shadow cost of taxation. It follows that the optimal policy response is driven by fiscal considerations
and not, as one may have expected, by the apparent need to ease the aggravated friction.
   What are these considerations? By reducing aggregate income and the tax base, the shock causes
an increase in the tax burden. To the extent that the shock is transitory, it also makes it desirable
to run a deficit for tax-smoothing reasons. These effects are present in financial and traditional
recessions alike. What is different, though, in a financial recessions is that the interest rate on
public debt falls relative to the planner’s discount rate. This effect, which is akin to an exogenous
increase in seigniorage, counters the aforementioned increase in the tax burden and justifies a higher
deficit during a financial than during a traditional recession of comparable magnitude.
   This result provides a formal basis for the argument, made by commentators such as Paul
Krugman and Brad DeLong, that the recent recession called for high deficits, not only because of
the need to stimulate aggregate demand, but also because the financial crisis made it “cheap” for
the US government to borrow. This argument appears plausible; but it is important to note that


                                                    4
it has no place in the standard Ramsey framework because of the absence of a wedge between the
interest rate and the planner’s discount rate in that framework.

        Robustness. The micro-foundations considered in this paper are quite stylized, yet they are
rich enough to illustrate the likely robustness of our insights to a variety of channels via which the
financial friction may operate. In our baseline model, the financial friction impedes the allocation of
a good across consumers; public debt influences welfare and interest rates without affecting aggregate
quantities; and private liquidity is tightly connected to public debt because there is no capital or
other physical assets. In the variant model studied in Appendix A, we allow the friction to impede
the allocation of capital across “entrepreneurs” and thereby to influence aggregate productivity and
income.6 We also relax the tight relation between public debt and private liquidity by allowing for
capital accumulation. It then becomes possible that public debt crowds out capital (Aiyagari and
McGrattan, 1998) and, in this sense, that “outside money” crowds out “inside money” (Stein, 2012,
Brunnermeier and Sannikov, 2016). The opposite, however, can also be true: more public debt can
stimulate investment by raising the collateral that is available to entrepreneurs (Holmström and
Tirole, 1998, Saint-Paul, 2005). Last but not least, both models allow for a wedge between the
private and the social value of liquidity, as in models with fire-sale or other externalities operating
through collateral constraints (Shleifer and Vishny, 1992, Lorenzoni, 2008, Dávila, 2015).

        Layout. Section 2 introduces the baseline model. Section 3 characterizes its equilibrium for
given policy. Section 4 obtains the desired reduced-form representation of the planner’s problem.
Section 5 contains the core results. Section 6 provides additional insights and elaborates on certain
connections to the literature. Section 7 studies the optimal response to shocks. Section 8 concludes
with suggestions for future research. Appendix A presents the variant model, which helps capture
financial frictions on the production side. Appendices B and C contain auxiliary results and proofs.


2        The baseline model
Our baseline model is designed with three goals in mind: to accommodate the function of public
debt that we are interested in; to keep the analysis tractable; and to build a bridge between the
literature on financial frictions and the literature on the Friedman rule.
        There is a unit-mass of ex-ante identical households, indexed by i ∈ [0, 1], and a representative
firm. Time is discrete, indexed by t = 0, 1, 2, . . ., and each period is split into a “morning” and an
“afternoon”. There are two edible goods. The one is the (exogenous) fruit of a tree, which becomes
ripe in the morning of each period. The other is the (endogenous) output of the representative
    6
        This brings the context of the analysis closer, not only to Kiyotaki and Moore (1997) and Holmström and Tirole
(1998), but also to the strand of the development literature that attributes low TFP to financial frictions development
(e.g., Buera, Kaboski and Shin, 2011, Midrigan and Xu, 2014).



                                                            5
firm, which is produced in the afternoon with the labor of the households. Each good has to be
consumed in the sub-period in which it is produced, or else it perishes. We refer to the first good
as the “morning good” and to the second one, which is also our numeraire, as “the afternoon good”.
Utility is assumed to be linear in the afternoon good, helping prevent the wealth distribution from
becoming a relevant state variable in the planner’s problem. Finally, liquidity risk takes the form
of taste shocks and a financial friction impedes the efficient allocation of the morning good.

   The representative firm. The representative firm is competitive and produces the afternoon
good using labor. Aggregate output is given by yt = Aht , where ht denotes the labor input and A
denotes the exogenous aggregate productivity (assumed to be time-invariant for the time being). It
follows that, in equilibrium, the pre-tax wage is given by wt = A and all income goes to labor.

   The government. The government’s objective is to maximize social welfare (ex-ante utility).
Its budget constraint is given by
                                          bt + g = qt bt+1 + τt wt ht                             (1)

where bt is the stock of public debt inherited from period t−1, g is the exogenous level of government
spending, wt ht is labor income, and τt is the tax rate.

   The households. Preferences are given by
                                  "∞                                 #
                                   X
                               E0      β t U (cit , xit , hit ; θit )                             (2)
                                            t=0

where β ∈ (0, 1) is the subjective discount factor, xit ∈ R+ and cit ∈ R denote period t consumption
in the morning and in the afternoon respectively, hit ∈ R+ denotes labor supply, and θit is an
idiosyncratic taste shock.
                                     U (c, x, h; θ) ≡ c + θu(x) − ν(h),                           (3)

u(·) is strictly increasing and strictly concave, and ν(·) is strictly increasing and strictly convex.
The modeling role of the taste shock is to introduce a benefit from reallocating the endowment of
the morning good. It is i.i.d. across households and follows a continuous Markov process, with
transition density ϕ(θ0 |θ) and unconditional density ϕ(θ).

   Markets and frictions. In the afternoon, households can buy and sell a risk-free asset, which
delivers one unit of the numeraire good in the afternoon of the following period. This asset, whose
price is denoted by qt , may be issued either by the government or by other private agents: government
bonds and private (or “corporate”) bonds are perfect substitutes. In addition, households can trade
short-term IOUs in each morning. These IOUs facilitate the transfer of resources within the period.
   Let ait denote household i’s holdings of the risk-free asset—also, its net financial worth—in the
beginning of period t. The period-t budget constraint can then be expressed as follows:

                             cit + pt xit + qt ait+1 = ait + (1 − τt )wt hit + pt ē              (4)

                                                       6
where pt is the price of the morning good and ē is the fixed endowment of it.
       Let zit = pt (xit − ē) denote the value, in terms of the numeraire, of the household’s net trade
of the morning good. We interpret zit as intra-period borrowing and lending. Whenever zit > 0,
the household is a “borrower” in the sense that it finances its net purchase of the morning good by
issuing an IOU against its afternoon labor income; and whenever zit < 0, the household is a “lender”
in the sense that it has a net positive position in the market for such IOUs.
       Once the afternoon arrives, a borrower may be tempted to renege on her promise to pay back.
The only action available to a lender in the case of such an event is to confiscate a fraction ξ ∈ (0, 1)
of the borrower’s afternoon labor income as well as all of his assets. For default to be averted in
equilibrium, the following constraint must therefore hold:

                                                 zit ≤ ξwt hdef
                                                            it + ait                                              (5)

where hdef
       it denotes labor supply in the (off-equilibrium) event of default.
       Finally, applying the same logic to inter-period borrowing, we have the following bound on the
amount of debt the household can issue at the end of each period:

                                                −ait+1 ≤ ξwt+1 hdef
                                                                it+1 .                                            (6)

       Remark 1. The intra-day IOUs can be interpreted as short-term credit lines that help cover
“liquidity needs” and that are collateralized by the holdings of the risk-free asset. Ruling out trades
of this asset in the morning may appear to impose that this asset is less liquid than the IOUs. This
is not true. Because we have allowed the entire market value of an agent’s asset holdings to be
posted as collateral, the equilibrium allocations remain unaffected if we let the risk-free asset be
traded in the morning alongside, or in place of, the IOUs. Accordingly, we can think of the risk-free
asset either as collateral or, more simply, as buffer stock. One way or another, the key and only
friction is that constraints (5) and (6) restrict the consumption bundle that household i can attain
within any given period as function of its pledgeable income and its net financial worth.

       Remark 2. The Lagos-Wright specification of our model complicates the mapping between the
theory and the data. Nonetheless, as it will become clear in the sequel, the essence of the friction
in our model is the same as in much of the existing literature in the following two critical aspects.
First, insofar as pledgeable income is sufficiently limited at the aggregate level, the economy is
prevented from attaining an efficient allocation of resources in equilibrium.7 Second, because an
agent can ease her own constraints by accumulating more assets, a precautionary motive is present,
and a related premium emerges in equilibrium asset prices.
   7
       In the present model, the relevant allocation is that of the morning good across consumers with different taste
shocks. In the variant of Appendix A, it is that of capital across entrepreneurs with different productivity shocks.




                                                           7
        Remark 3. In line with Holmström and Tirole (1998), our analysis allow for both “outside
liquidity” in the form of public debt and “inside liquidity” in the form of, say, corporate bonds.
Notwithstanding this fact, the assumption that these assets are perfect substitutes to one another
is only for simplicity. As discussed further in Section 6, what is key is only the absence of a
hypothetical asset that serves no liquidity function within the private sector but can be used as an
investment vehicle by the government.


3        Equilibrium
We start the characterization of the equilibrium by studying the collateral constraint. Default does
not take place in equilibrium. However, to determine the pledgeable income of the household, we
need to determine its labor supply in any off-equilibrium path following default.
        This raises the question of what tax rate the household would face in the event of bankruptcy.
Since this is an off -equilibrium object, it can differ from the on-equilibrium tax rate τt . Without
serious loss of generality, we assume that it is zero.8 The labor supply in the event of bankruptcy
then solves ν 0 (hdef
                  it ) = (1 − ξ)wt . Using wt = A, we conclude that the financial constraints (5) and
(6) can be restated as, respectively,

                                          zit ≤ φ + ait       and       ait ≥ −φ,

where φ = φ(A, ξ) ≡ ξA(ν 0 )−1 ((1 − ξ)A). In Section 7, we discuss how the the dependence of φ on
A and ξ shapes the optimal policy response to shocks. For the time being, however, we treat A, ξ,
and φ as constants and omit the dependence of all the endogenous objects on them.9
        We now proceed to study how the financial friction impedes the equilibrium trades of the two
goods. Because of the assumed preferences, the optimal consumption of the morning good maximizes
θu(x) − px subject to the collateral constraint. Let

                                         u(a, θ, p) ≡ max {θu(x) − p(x − ē)}
                                                          x

                                             subject to p(x − ē) ≤ φ + a

denote the resulting utility net of the cost of any purchases of the good, and let
                                                ˆ
                                 U(a, θ, p) ≡ β u(a, θ0 , p)ϕ(θ0 |θ)dθ0

be the discounted, previous-period expectation of the aforementioned object. If it were not for the
collateral constraint, the optimal consumption of the morning good would have been invariant to a.
    8
        This abstracts from the possibility that taxation can “destroy” some of the collateral in the economy and isolates
public debt as the only instrument through which the planner can regulate the bite of the financial friction.
   9
     Note that φ is strictly increasing in A, whereas it is strictly concave in ξ with a maximum obtained at an interior
¯
ξ ∈ (0, 1). Section 7 presumes that ξ < ξ, ¯ so that the friction is aggravated with either a lower A or a lower ξ.


                                                              8
The dependence of U(a, θ, p) on a therefore reflects exclusively the role of assets in relaxing future
collateral constraints. In this sense, U(a, θ, p) captures the private value of liquidity for type θ.
       Letting c̃it ≡ cit + zit denote the household’s total expenditure on the two goods, we arrive at
the following characterization of its intertemporal consumption-and-saving problem.

Proposition 1. For any given sequence {pt , qt }∞                                               ∞
                                                t=0 , the optimal plan for {c̃it , hit , ait+1 }t=0 maxi-
mizes the following objective:
                                          ∞
                                      "                                                         #
                                          X
                                 E0             βt       c̃it − ν(hit ) + U (ait+1 , θit , pt+1 )
                                          t=0

subject to the following constraints:

                              c̃it + qt ait+1 = ait + (1 − τt )wt hit            and     ait+1 ≥ −φ

       In a nutshell, it is as if individual assets entered the utility function. The only caveat to such
a reinterpretation of our model is that the (indirect) utility of assets depends on the expected
price of the morning good, an issue that we address in the following section. Notwithstanding this
qualification, Proposition 1 has two key implications. First, all households choose the same supply
of labor. Second, optimal saving depends on a household’s current shock and the anticipated price
of the morning good, because these two determine the probability that the collateral constraint will
bind in the next period; but it is invariant to the history of earlier shocks or asset holdings.10
       To simplify the exposition, we henceforth assume differentiability of U. Optimal asset holdings
then satisfy the following Euler condition:

                                            Ua (ait+1 , θit , pt+1 ) ≤ πt ≡ qt − β,                               (7)

with equality whenever ait+1 > −φ. That is, either the marginal value of liquidity, as measured by
Ua , is equated with the premium πt at which the asset is priced over the discount factor; or, the
value of liquidity is so low that the corner solution ait+1 = −φ obtains.11
       Note that condition (7) pins down the optimal savings in period t as a function of θi,t , the current
idiosyncratic shock, and pt+1 , the anticipated next-period price of the morning good. Importantly,
the optimal ai,t+1 does not depend on ai,t , the agent’s wealth at the beggining of the period. This
property—which is due to the assumed quasi-linearity in preferences—plays an important role in
the next section, when we study the planner’s problem.
       We close this section with the following observations. If the idiosyncratic shock is persistent,
higher types will demand more liquidity (i.e., will save more) than lower types for any given premium.
  10
       Clearly, these properties hinge on the assumed preference specification.
  11
       Throughout, we presume that qt ≥ β (πt ≥ 0) for all t. The alternative scenario is ruled out in equilibrium: if
the interest rate were higher than the discount rate, the demand for assets would have been infinite.


                                                                      9
Sufficiently high types can thus be on the demand side of the market for the risk-free asset (ait > 0),
whereas sufficiently low types can be on the supply side (ait < 0). In this sense, our model allows for
a non-trivial private supply of collateral. However, this supply is bounded, because the pledgeable
income of all types is bounded. Furthermore, insofar as the risk is sufficiently large, the demand by
the high types exceeds the supply by the low types when the interest rate is equal to the discount
rate, implying that the equilibrium premium must be positive. Conversely, when the equilibrium
premium is zero, it must be that all agents are unconstrained. In this sense, qt > β signals that
aggregate collateral is in short supply, whereas qt = β signals that the economy’s demand for
liquidity has been “satiated”.


4    The reduced-form Ramsey problem
We bypass the explicit characterization of the equilibrium and study directly the problem of a
planner who chooses all the endogenous objects in the economy—including the cross-sectional dis-
tribution of assets in any period other than then very first one—subject to the appropriate im-
plementability constraints. As we show next, this problem can be solved in two steps. The first
step fixes the policy sequence {τt , bt+1 }∞
                                           t=0 and focuses on identifying, in each period t, the best
implementable combination of the following objects: the cross-section distribution of assets at t + 1,
the allocation of the morning good at t + 1, and the prices qt and pt+1 . The second step optimizes
over the policy sequence {τt , bt+1 }∞
                                     t=0 along with the associated sequence for labor supply.
    Consider the first step, fix a period t, and let Ψt+1 denote the combination of the aforementioned
objects (that is, the next-period wealth distribution, the next-period allocation of the morning good,
and the prices qt and pt+1 ). Because the optimal savings of every agent in that period is independent
of her initial asset position, the set of the implementable Ψt+1 is independent of the period-t wealth
distribution. We can thus represent the period-t subproblem as follows:
                                              ˆ
                             max                 θu(x(θ))ϕ(θ)dθ                                    (8)
                 (p,q)∈R2+ &(x,a):[θ,θ̄]→R+ ×[−φ,+∞)
                                                                ˆ
                       subject to                                   x(θ)ϕ(θ)dθ = ē                (9)
                                                       ˆ
                                                           a(θ− )ϕ(θ− )dθ− = b                    (10)
                                              φ + a(θ− ) − p(x(θ) − ē) ≥ 0 ∀(θ, θ− )             (11)
                                                                     θu0 (x(θ)) ≥ p ∀θ            (12)
                             θu0 (x(θ)) − p [φ + a(θ− ) − p(x(θ) − ē)] = 0 ∀(θ, θ− )
                                         
                                                                                                  (13)
                                                                     a(θ− ) + φ ≥ 0 ∀θ−           (14)
                                                  β + Ua (a(θ− ), θ− , p) ≤ q         ∀θ−         (15)
                                   [Ua (a(θ− ), θ− , p) − π] [a(θ− ) + φ] = 0 ∀θ−                 (16)

                                                           10
       To interpret this problem, note that x(θ) stands for xi,t+1 = x(θi,t+1 ), a(θ− ) stands for ai,t+1 =
a(θi,t ), p stands for pt+1 , q stands for qt , and b stands for bt+1 . Letting the planner choose the
functions (x, a) means that we let her choose the cross-sectional allocation of the risk-free asset and
the morning good during period t + 1. This choice, however, is not free. The planner must respect
the feasibility and implementability constraints stated in conditions (9) through (16): conditions (9)
and (10) are the resource constraint for the morning good and the clearing condition for the asset
market; conditions (11)-(16) are the household’s optimality conditions for morning consumption
and asset holdings, together with the associated collateral constraints and complementary slackness
conditions. Finally, note that (8) is simply the ex-ante utility of the morning good. It follows that
the solution to (8)-(16) identifies the best cross-sectional allocation of asset holdings and morning-
good consumption among those that can be implemented as an equilibrium whenever bt+1 = b,
along with the corresponding prices.
       For any b, let V (b) be the maximal value attained by the solution of the problem (9)-(16);
let Q(b) be the resulting value for q; and let π(b) ≡ Q(b) − β. Next, note that welfare (ex-ante
                            P t                               
utility) is given by W ≡ E      β (cit + θit u(xit ) − ν(hit )) . By the preceding argument we have
that E[θit u(xit )] equals V (bt ) along the best implementable allocation.12 In addition, we know that
E[cit ] equals aggregate consumption, ct , and all agents supply the same amount of labor, hit = ht ,
due to the quasi-linearity in preferences. We infer that, once we have solved the aforementioned
subproblem, we can express welfare as follows:
                                                  ∞
                                                  X
                                           W=           β t [ct − ν(ht ) + V (bt )]                                  (17)
                                                  t=0

Turning to the government’s budget constraint, we now have that qt = Q(bt+1 ) and therefore the
budget reduces to the following:

                                            Q(bt+1 )bt+1 = bt + g − τt Aht                                           (18)

Finally, note that the only implementability constraint that has not already been incorporated in
V and Q is the one for the supply of labor:

                                                   ν 0 (ht ) = (1 − τt )A                                            (19)

We conclude that the planner’s problem reduces to finding the sequence {ct , ht , τt , bt+1 }∞
                                                                                             t=0 that
maximizes (17) subject to (18), (19), and the resource constraint.
  12
       Strictly speaking, the last statement is valid for t ≥ 1 but not for t = 0. This is because the wealth distribution
in period 0 is exogenous and does not have to coincide with the one obtained by the solution to (8)-(16) when b = b0 .
That is, if we let V0 denote the value of E[θi0 u(xi0 )] attained at the period-0 equilibrium allocation of the morning
good, whatever this is, we have that, in general, V0 6= V (b0 ). To simplify the notation, we impose V0 = V (b0 ). This
is completely innocuous for our results, because b0 is fixed and the restriction V0 = V (b0 ) does not affect the optimal
choice of {τt , bt+1 }∞
                      t=0 .



                                                              11
       This problem is equivalent to that of a representative-agent economy in which public debt
generates a welfare flow of V (b) and is priced at Q(b) = β + π(b). In a model in which “assets enter
the utility function”, we would further have the restriction π(b) = V 0 (b), reflecting a coincidence
of the private and social value of assets. Here, instead, it turns out that π(b) > V 0 (b) because
of a pecuniary externality that operates through the collateral constraint.13 Nonetheless, what is
essential for our subsequent results is only the dependence of V and Q on b, not the aforementioned
wedge. This dependence epitomizes the dual role of public debt: by regulating the bite of the
financial friction, public debt can both ease the allocation of resources (the effect captured by V )
and manipulate interest rates (the effect captured by Q).
       How this dual role shapes the optimal policy will be explored in Section 5. For now, we opt to
further simplify the planner’s problem by solving (19) and the resource constraint for consumption
and labor supply as functions of the tax rate. More specifically, let H(τ ) ≡ (ν 0 )−1 1−τ
                                                                                             
                                                                                           A   and
S(τ ) ≡ τ AH(τ ) denote the equilibrium values of, respectively, labor supply and tax revenue, as
functions of the tax rate. It is straightforward to check that S is single-peaked—i.e., there is a Laffer
curve—and attains its maximum value, s̄, at τ = τ̄ for some τ̄ ∈ (0, 1). For any s ≤ s̄, we thus have
that, whenever the planner wishes to collect tax revenue equal to s, the tax rate that implements
this goal is given by τ = T (s) ≡ min{τ : S(τ ) = s}. Next, let U (s) ≡ AH(T (s)) − ν(H(T (s)))
measure the resulting utility from consumption and leisure, as a function of tax revenue, and note
that U (s) is decreasing in s, reflecting the welfare cost of taxation.

Proposition 2. Let the functions V, Q, and U be defined as above. The optimal policy path for
taxes and public debt solves the following problem:
                                                          ∞
                                                          X
                                             max                β t [U (st ) + V (bt )]                         (20)
                                         {st ,bt+1 }∞
                                                    t=0   t=0

                                        subject to        Q(bt+1 )bt+1 = bt + g − st                            (21)

       This result represents the planner’s problem as a discrete-time optimal-control problem in which
the state variable is the level of public debt and the control variable is the tax revenue (or, equiv-
alently, the tax rate). The fact that only these variables show up in this problem hinges on the
Lagos-Wright specification of our model; without it, the entire cross-sectional distribution of private
wealth would have emerged as a state variable in place of bt . Nevertheless, the policy trade offs that
are encapsulated in the above representation are not driven by this feature of our model.
       Recall that the economy exhibits two distortions relative to the first best: a financial friction
and a tax distortion. The above representation reveals that, while both distortions are necessarily
bad for efficiency and welfare, they can both help the government budget.
  13
       See Appendix B for a proof. The intuition is that, when an agent decides how much collateral to hold, she does
not internalize the effect that her enhanced ability to buy the morning good will have on the price of that good and
thereby on the tightness of the collateral constraint of other agents.


                                                                 12
    These insights seem quite general. As an example, in Appendix A we show that a similar
reduced-form representation of the planner’s problem obtain from alternative micro-foundations.
The financial friction then impedes the efficient allocation of capital across firms and thereby also
distorts investment decisions, resembling the effects found, inter alia, in Kiyotaki and Moore (1997),
Holmström and Tirole (1998), and Saint-Paul (2005). As in the last two papers, the issuance
of public debt may raise aggregate TFP; but it may also crowd out capital, as in Aiyagari and
McGrattan (1998). These effects represent new channels through which the financial friction can
affect, not only welfare, but also the tax basis and thereby the government budget. Despite the
potential richness of these new channels, the essence of the policy problem remains the same:
regulating the financial distortion has a dual effect on welfare and the government budget, similarly
to the present model.As it will become clear in the sequel, the key lessons of our analysis depend
on this dual role of the financial distortion, not on the particulars of the micro-foundations.
    With these points in mind, the analysis in the next section sidesteps the micro-foundations
and studies directly a class of reduced-form policy problems like the one obtained in Proposition 2
above. To facilitate this transition, we close this section by identifying a certain threshold for the
level public debt, above which the financial friction ceases to bind. This threshold is analogous to
a satiation level of real-money balances in monetary models.
    Let Vbliss denote the value of E[θu(x)] obtained at the first-best allocation of the morning good.
Clearly, V (b) ≤ Vbliss for all b. Insofar as θ is bounded from above, Vbliss is attained for sufficiently
high b; and insofar as φ is sufficiently small, Vbliss is not attained when b is zero. There is then a
threshold bbliss > 0 such that V (b) < Vbliss if b < bbliss , and V (b) = Vbliss if b > bbliss . Finally, the
agents are willing to pay a positive premium if and only if they expect their collateral constraints to
bind, which in turn happens if and only if the first-best allocation is not attained. That is, π(b) > 0
if and only if V (b) < Vbliss . We conclude that bbliss identifies the minimal level of public debt above
which the friction ceases to bind and the private demand for collateral is “satiated”.
    Depending on parameters, bbliss may exceed the maximal sustainable level of public debt. In
the subsequent analysis, we assume that the opposite is true. Although this is not strictly needed,
it makes the analysis more interesting by permitting us to show that the planner may opt not to
preserve the financial distortion even when it is feasible to eliminate it.


5    Optimal Policy: Meet Skiba
We now sidestep the micro-foundations and characterize the solution to a class of reduced-form
policy problems like the one of Proposition 2. As mentioned in the Introduction, this cannot be
accomplished by the usual first-order approach: because these problems are non-convex, there can
exist multiple paths that satisfy the relevant first-order and transversality conditions. This is where



                                                     13
Skiba (1978) and Brock and Dechert (1983) come to the rescue.14
       To facilitate the application of the relevant methods to our setting, as well as to develop a useful
phase-diagram representation of the solution, we switch the analysis from discrete to continuous
time. In particular, we henceforth consider the following class of problems, indexed by different
configurations of the functions (U, V, R).

Planner’s Problem. The planner chooses a path for (s, b) in A ≡ [0, s̄] × [b, b̄] so as to solve
                               ˆ +∞
                           max       e−ρt [U (s) + V (b)]dt                                      (22)
                                              0

                                     subject to ḃ = R(b)b + g − s ∀t                                               (23)
                                                       b(0) = b0                                                    (24)

       This is the continuous-time analogue of the problem described in Proposition 2. U (s) and V (b)
capture the welfare effects of, respectively, the tax and the financial distortion; R(b) is the interest
rate on public debt; ρ > 0 is the underlying discount rate; s̄ is the upper bound on tax revenue;
       s̄−g
b̄ ≡     ρ    > 0 is the maximal sustainable level of debt; and b ≤ 0 is a lower bound.15 Finally, we let
π(b) ≡ ρ − R(b); we put aside the details of the underlying micro-foundations; and we impose only
the following minimal requirements on the objects that appear in the planner’s problem.

Main Assumptions. We consider economies in which the following properties hold:
A1. U, V, and π are continuously differentiable.16
A2. U is concave in s, with maximum attained at s = 0.
A3. There exists a threshold bbliss ∈ (0, b̄) such that V 0 (b) > 0 and π(b) > 0 for all b < bbliss , and
V 0 (b) = 0 and π(b) = 0 for all b > bbliss .
A4. π(b) ≤ ρ for all b.

       A1 is technical. A2 means that the welfare cost of taxation is convex, a property that helps
guarantee the monotonicity of the optimal debt dynamics. A3 captures the dual role of the financial
friction on welfare and interest rates; it also imposes that the level of public debt that satiates the
economy’s demand for collateral is sustainable, a property that, as mentioned before, is not strictly
needed but makes the analysis more interesting. Finally, A4 restricts the interest rate to be non-
negative, an assumption that is not strictly needed but simplifies the exposition.
  14
       Skiba (1978) led the way of studying non-convex optimal-control problems in economics by allowing for a non-
convex technology in the Neoclassical growth model. Brock and Dechert (1983) extended some of Skiba’s results,
including a variant of Arrow’s maximum principle, to a richer class of settings. See also Buera (2008) for an application
within the context of entrepreneurship.
  15
     The negative of b can not exceed the aggregate pledgeable income of the private sector as a whole; we also assume
that b no less the highest value of b that solves b = −g/R(b), which identifies the value of assets that suffices for the
government to finance its spending with zero taxation.
  16
     To be precise, we allow V and π to be non-differentiable at b = bbliss .


                                                           14
       Beyond these restrictions, we do not need to make any further assumptions such as that the
wedge between the private and the social value of liquidity has a particular sign: π can be either
higher or lower than V 0 . In this regard, the lessons derived below appear to be robust to the kind
of pecuniary externalities and the related inefficiencies that have been emphasized by, inter alia,
Shleifer and Vishny (1992), Lorenzoni (2008), and Dávila (2015). We also do not restrict V to be
concave. But even if we were to do so, this would not eliminate the non-convexity of the planner’s
problem: the non-convexity emerges naturally from the property that the liquidity premium depends
on the problem’s state variable (the level of public debt), regardless of the curvature of V .

       The Hamiltonian and the Euler condition. Denote the costate variable with λ and define
the Hamiltonian as follows:

                              H(s, b, λ) ≡ U (s) + V (b) + λ [s − (ρ − π(b)) b − g] .

The economic interpretation of λ is familiar: it measures the shadow value of tax revenue. By the
same token, λ also measures the welfare cost of the interest payments on public debt.
       For given values of the state and the costate, the optimal control maximizes the Hamiltonian.
In our setting, the control is the tax revenue s (or, equivalently, the tax rate τ that attains s).
Whenever λ > 0, the optimal tax equates the welfare cost of taxation with the shadow value of tax
revenue: U 0 (s) + λ = 0. When instead λ < 0, taxes are set to zero.17 For future reference, and with
some abuse of notation, we let s(λ) denote the optimal tax as a function of the costate.
       For any pair of values of the state, b, and the costate, λ, let

                                              H(b, λ) ≡ max H(s, b, λ)                                           (25)
                                                            s

be the value of the Hamiltonian attained at the optimal value for the control. A path for (b, λ)
is optimal only if it satisfies the planner’s Euler condition at all t along with the transversality
condition at infinity, namely:

                           λ̇ = ρλ + Hb (b, λ) ∀t         and        lim e−ρt λ(t)b(t) = 0.
                                                                    t→∞

       If the problem were convex, the above conditions together with the budget constraint and the
initial condition b(0) = b0 would not only be necessary but also sufficient for optimality. However,
as already explained, the problem under consideration is not convex. As a result, it is possible that
there exist multiple paths that satisfy all these conditions. The challenge is then to find which of
the many candidate paths is the optimal one. Before addressing this issue, however, let us first
elaborate on the policy trade offs encapsulated in the planner’s Euler condition.
  17
       If we had allowed the tax rate to be negative, the condition U 0 (s) + λ = 0 would apply even when λ < 0. This,
however, would not affect the rest of the analysis.



                                                           15
   The Key Trade Offs. Using the definition of H in (25), the planner’s Euler condition can be
restated as follows:

                                   λ̇ = v(b) − λπ(b) (σ(b) − 1) .                                  (26)

where v(b) ≡ V 0 (b) measures the marginal social value of collateral, π(b) measures the corresponding
private value (also the liquidity premium), and

                                                     π 0 (b)b
                                          σ(b) ≡ −            ≥0
                                                      π(b)
is the elasticity of the premium with respect to the quantity of public debt. Consider, as a reference
point, the case in which public debt has no liquidity value, so that v(b) = π(b) = 0 for all b.
Condition (26) then reduces to λ̇ = 0, which represents Barro’s celebrated tax-smoothing result:
when debt is priced at the social discount rate, λ is constant over time, and hence the optimal tax
is also constant. Relative to this reference point, we see that whenever the right-hand-side of (26)
is non-zero, optimality requires a non-zero drift in λ, that is, a deviation from tax smoothing.
   To interpret this deviation and develop intuition, we momentarily consider an analogy between
our dynamic economy and a certain static problem. In Section 6, variants of this analogy will also
help relate our work to the literature.
   Consider a one-period economy, in which consumers value a good that can be produced and
supplied only by the government. Let the consumption of this good be denoted by b and its social
value by V (b), for some increasing function V . Suppose further that the private valuation of this
good at the margin is π(b), which means that the government can charge the market a price π(b)
for its provision. Finally, let λ be the government’s shadow value of the profit earned from selling
this good to the consumers. We can then express the optimal supply of this good as

                                          b? = arg max Ω(b, λ),                                    (27)
                                                     b

where Ω(b, λ) ≡ V (b) + λπ(b)b is the sum of the social value of the good and the shadow value of
the profit that the government makes from selling this good.
   In our setting, the relevant good is the government’s supply of the risk-free asset, or equivalently
the quantity of public debt, and V (b) measures its social value. As for the profit that the government
can make from selling public debt, this is tied to the wedge between the market interest rate, R(b),
and the social discount rate, ρ. In the standard Ramsey paradigm, this wedge is zero, implying
that the planner sees neither a profit nor a cost to issuing an extra unit of debt. In our setting,
by contrast, the financial friction depresses the interest rate below the social discount rate. This in
turn explains the precise sense in which the government can profit from the provision of liquidity to
the private sector. This profit is given by π(b)b. It is akin to seigniorage in monetary models and
can be thought of as a fee that the planner charges the market for the service provided.

                                                   16
    Next, suppose that π(b)b is single-peaked, attaining a global maximum at b = bseig . Clearly,
bseig ∈ (0, bbliss ), since π(b)b is zero at the boundaries of this interval, strictly positive in its interior,
and non-positive outside of it. By contrast, V (b) is increasing in b and maximized at b = bbliss . It
follows that raising b increases both V (b) and π(b)b as along as b < bseig ; once b > bseig , however,
raising b increases V (b) only at the expense of reducing π(b)b. This captures the trade off between
collateral creation, or “liquidity provision”, and interest-rate manipulation, or “seigniorage”, that
was mentioned in the introduction.
    By construction of Ω, the net value of raising b at the margin is given by Ωb . Clearly, an interior
solution to (27) requires Ωb = 0: the solution of the static problem requires that the marginal loss
in terms of seigniorage just offsets the marginal gain in terms of extra welfare.
    What about the solution to our dynamic problem? Its Euler condition can be restated as λ̇ = Ωb .
In a steady state, this reduces to Ωb = 0, which is the same as the FOC of the static problem
mentioned above. At first glance, this suggests that the steady state of our problem is analogous
to the solution of the aforementioned static problem. We will later show that this is true only if we
impose additional restrictions on V and π. Even then, the analogy has to be qualified by the fact
that the steady-state value of λ is endogenous to the steady-state value of b in our setting, whereas
the aforementioned analogy treated λ as exogenous. Last but not least, our dynamic problem may
(generically) admit multiple steady states, whereas the static problem (generically) admits a unique
solution. These observations clarify the limitations of the proposed analogy.
    That said, the analogy helps understand how optimal policy in our setting balances the afore-
mentioned two objectives, that of enhancing liquidity and that of manipulating the interest rate,
with a third objective, that of smoothing the tax distortion. To see this more clearly, note that the
Euler condition equates λ̇, the drift in the shadow value of the government budget, with Ωb , the
marginal effect of b on Ω. The former captures the welfare cost of departing from tax smoothing;
the latter captures the dual effect of the financial friction on welfare and the government budget.
It follows that the steady state can be interpreted as a long-run target for the level of public debt
and for the associated level of the financial distortions, while the desire to smooth the tax distortion
acts as an adjustment cost that slows down the convergence to the aforementioned long-run target.

    The phase diagram. In order to provide a complete characterization of the optimal policy, we
study the phase diagram of the ODE system for b and λ implied by the budget constraint and the
planner’s Euler condition. Consider first the budget constraint. This can be expressed as follows:

                                  ḃ = Ψ(b, λ) ≡ g + (ρ − π(b)) b − s(λ),                                  (28)

where s(λ) denotes the optimal tax revenue. It is straightforward to check that s(λ) is increasing in
λ and therefore that Ψ(b, λ) is decreasing in λ: a higher λ means higher taxes today, which in turn



                                                      17
means lower debt tomorrow.18 By the Implicit Function Theorem, we then have that there exists a
function ψ : [b, b̄) → R+ such that Ψ(b, ψ(b)) = 0 for all b; equivalently,

                                            ḃ = 0 if and only if λ = ψ(b).

The interpretation of ψ(b) is simple: it identifies the value of λ, or equivalently the tax rate, that
balances the budget when the level of debt is b. Note that ḃ < 0 when λ > ψ(b), that is, debt falls
if taxes exceed the aforementioned level, and symmetrically ḃ > 0 if λ < ψ(b). Finally, note that
the function ψ satisfies the following properties.

Lemma 1. ψ is continuous and strictly increasing, with ψ(b) = 0 and limb→b̄ ψ(b) = +∞.

       The proof as well as the interpretation of this lemma is straightforward: ψ(b) is strictly increasing
in b because higher debt requires higher taxes to balance the budget; ψ(b) starts at zero when b = b
because taxes are zero when the government has a large enough asset position to fully finance its
spending using interest income received on its assets; and ψ(b) diverges to +∞ as b approaches b̄
because the shadow cost of taxation explodes as debt approaches the maximal sustainable level and,
equivalently, the tax rate approaches the peak of the Laffer curve.
       Consider next the planner’s Euler condition. Let ∆ ≡ {b ∈ [b, bbliss ) : σ(b) 6= 1} and define the
function γ : ∆ → R as follows:
                                                               v(b)
                                                γ(b) ≡
                                                          π(b)(σ(b) − 1)
where, recall, v(b) ≡ V 0 (b) and σ(b) ≡ −π 0 (b)b/π(b). We can then restate the planner’s Euler
condition, namely condition (26), as follows:
                                                h                         i
                                            v(b) 1 −                λ
                                                                    γ(b)       if b ∈ ∆
                           λ̇ = Γ(b, λ) ≡                                                                          (29)
                                            0                                 if b ∈
                                                                                    /∆

By implication,                                       (
                                                          either b ∈ ∆ and λ = γ(b)
                              λ̇ = 0 if and only if
                                                          or       b∈
                                                                    / ∆ and λ ∈ R

It follows that the graph of γ identifies the λ̇ = 0 locus over the region to the left of the satiation
point (that is, for b < bbliss ). To the right of this point λ̇ = 0 regardless of (λ, b).
       The graph of γ can be quite complicated, in part because there may exist multiple “holes” in
the domain ∆, that is, multiple points at which σ(b) = 1. To interpret these points, note that

                                   d[π(b)b]
                                            = π 0 (b)b + π(b) = −(σ(b) − 1)π(b).                                   (30)
                                      db
  18
       Note also that Ψ(b, λ) has a kink at λ = 0, because the corner solution τ = 0 binds as λ crosses zero from below.
Relaxing the lower bound on τ and/or introducing lump sum transfers would help speed up the accumulation of debt
in situations in which λ < 0, but would not otherwise affect the results.


                                                            18
It follows that the points at which σ(b) = 1 correspond to the critical points of the function π(b)b,
which, as explained before, can be interpreted as seigniorage. Next, note that π(b)b is continuous
over the closed interval [0, bbliss ], it is zero at the boundaries of the interval, and is strictly positive
in the interior of the interval. It follows that seigniorage attains a global maximum in the interior
of that interval. In general, π(b)b may admit an arbitrary number of local maxima and minima in
addition to its global maximum. By the same token, σ may cross 1 multiple times. Note, however,
that the derivative of π(b)b crosses zero from above at any point that attains the global maximum,
which in turn means that σ(b) is necessarily increasing in an area around such a point.


A Useful Benchmark

To develop a better understanding of the general case, we find it useful to start with a certain
benchmark. This benchmark is not meant to be empirically plausible; we don’t even have much
insight to offer on what micro-foundations may justify it. Its function is purely pedagogical.

Benchmark. (i) the ratio v/π is constant; (ii) the elasticity σ is monotone.

   The first assumption imposes that the wedge between the social and the private value of collateral
is invariant to b; this nests as a special case the case in which the wedge is absent and π = v ≡ V 0 ,
similarly to monetary models. The second assumption guarantees that π(b)b is single-peaked and
also extends the aforementioned local monotonicity of σ to its entire domain. Together, these
assumptions lead to following sharp characterization of the optimal debt dynamics.

Theorem 1. Consider the benchmark defined above. There exists a unique b∗ ∈ (b, bbliss ] such
that, for any initial point b0 < bbliss , the optimal level of public debt converges monotonically to b∗ .
Furthermore, b∗ < bbliss if g > ĝ and b∗ = bbliss if g < ĝ, for some ĝ.

   This result identifies b∗ as the unique steady-state level of public debt, to which the economy
converges from any initial point b0 < bbliss ; it also relates b∗ to bbliss , the satiation point. We there-
fore reach the following lessons about the optimal supply of liquidity and the associated financial
distortions. As long as the financial friction is binding to start with (namely b0 < bbliss ), the friction
remains binding at any finite time (bt < bbliss for all t). In this sense, the analogue of the Friedman
rule does not apply in the short run. Whether it applies in the long run depends on the relation
between b∗ and bbliss , which in turn depends on the tightness of the government’s budget constraint:
if the constraint is sufficiently tight, as captured above by the restriction g > ĝ, then the planner
finds it optimal to preserve the financial distortion, not only along the transition to steady state,
but also in steady state. In fact, when g > ĝ and b0 ∈ (b∗ , bbliss ), the planner opts to aggravate the
friction over time, squeezing liquidity out of the economy.




                                                     19
       In the sequel, we prove the above result in multiple steps, developing additional insights on the
way. We start by noting that the assumptions of our benchmark imply the following structure for
the function γ, which is instrumental for the subsequent analysis.

Lemma 2. Consider the benchmark defined above. The domain of γ is ∆ = [b, bseig ) ∪ (bseig , bbliss ),
where bseign ≡ arg max π(b)b. For b ∈ [b, bseign ), γ is negatively valued and decreasing. For b ∈
(bseign , bbliss ), γ is positively valued and decreasing. Finally, γ(b) → −∞ as b → bseign from below
and γ(b) → +∞ as b → bseign from above.

       Recall that the graph of γ identifies the λ̇ = 0 locus in the region to the left of the satiation
point, whereas the ḃ = 0 locus is given by the graph of ψ. By Lemma 1, ψ is positively valued and
strictly increasing. Together with Lemma 2, this means that γ and ψ can intersect at most once.
In particular, letting γbliss ≡ limb↑bbliss γ(b) and ψbliss ≡ ψ(bbliss ),19 we have the following property.

Lemma 3. In the benchmark defined above, the following are true. If γbliss > ψbliss , then γ and ψ
never intersect. If instead γbliss < ψbliss , then γ and ψ intersect exactly once, and this intersection
occurs at b = b# , for some b# ∈ (bseign , bbliss ).

       The two scenarios are illustrated in Figures 1 and 2. Let us first consider Figure 1. The phase
diagram is split in three regions: the region L, for b < bseign ; the region M, for b ∈ (bseign , bbliss );
and the region H, for b > bbliss . The dynamics of b are qualitatively similar across all three regions:
ḃ > 0 below the graph of ψ and ḃ < 0 above it. By contrast, the dynamics of λ differ qualitatively
across the three regions. In region L, γ is negatively valued; λ̇ > 0 above the graph of γ; and λ̇ < 0
below it. In region M, the reverse is true: γ is positively valued; λ̇ < 0 above the graph of γ; and
λ̇ > 0 below it. Finally, in region H, γ is undefined and λ̇ = 0 throughout.
       The above properties also hold true in Figure 2. What distinguishes the two figures is whether
γ and ψ admit an intersection within region M. In Figure 1, they do not. This is because we have
imposed γbliss > ψbliss , which together with the monotonicity of γ and ψ guarantees that γ lies
above ψ throughout region M.
       What do these properties imply for the solution to the planner’s problem? Since γ and ψ never
intersect, the ODE system (28)-(29) admits no steady state to the left of the satiation point (regions
L and M). By contrast, there is a continuum of such steady-state points to the right of the satiation
point (region H): any point along the segment of ψ that lies to the right of bbliss trivially satisfies
both λ̇ = 0 and ḃ = 0. Whether the planner finds it optimal to rest at such a point or move away
from it—i.e., whether these points correspond to a steady state of the optimal dynamics as opposed
  19
       Recall that γ is defined to the left of the satiation point, but not at it, which explains why we write γbliss ≡
limb↑bbliss γ(b) rather than γbliss ≡ γ(bbliss ). Also, the existence of the limit follows from the property that, in the
neighborhood of bbliss , γ is decreasing and bounded from below by 0. Finally, note that this last property is true in
general, not just in the special case under consideration.


                                                             20
                                     Figure 1: Benchmark, with ψbliss < γbliss .

                                        λ̇ = 0                                       ḃ = 0
                           λ




                                 L                        M                      H



                                        bseig                           bbliss          b      b

                                   λ̇ = 0


to merely a fixed point of the ODE system—remains to be seen. For now, we note that the lowest
of these fixed points is associated with b = bbliss and λ = ψbliss ≡ ψ(bbliss ); the latter corresponds
to the level of taxes that balances the budget when the economy rests at the satiation point.
       For any b0 < bbliss , there exists a unique value of the costate, λ0 < ψ(b0 ), such as the following is
true: if the economy starts from (b0 , λ0 ) and thereafter follows the dynamics dictated by (28)-(29),
then, and only then, the economy converges asymptotically to (bbliss , λbliss ). In other words, there
is a unique path that satisfies the planner’s Euler condition and the budget constraint at all dates,
and that eventually leads to satiation. This path is indicated with blue color in the figure.20
       The aforementioned path trivially satisfies the transversality condition, and is therefore a can-
didate for optimality. By contrast, any path that starts with λ(0) > λ0 (higher taxes) and that
follows the ODEs causes the level of debt to reach the lower bound b in finite time; at this point,
λ would have to jump down, violating the Euler condition, which means that this path cannot be
optimal. Similarly, any path that starts with λ(0) < λ0 (lower taxes) causes the level of debt to
increase past the satiation point bbliss and to reach the upper limit b̄ in finite time; at this point,
λ would diverge to infinity and the transversality condition would be violated, which means that
neither this path can be optimal.
       Consequently, for any b0 < bbliss , the path that leads to satiation is the optimal path, and
  20
       One cannot rule out λ0 < 0 for sufficiently low b0 . When this is the case, the negative λ signals the high value
that the planner attaches to issuing public debt. In fact, if it were feasible for b to jump, the planner would let b jump
to the point where λ turns non-negative, and only thereafter we she follow the blue path in the figure. By the same
token, if we allow the planner to make non-negative lump-sum transfers, these transfers will not affect the solution
in the region where λ > 0, but would help speed up the accumulation of debt in the region where λ < 0.


                                                            21
Theorem 1 applies with b∗ = bbliss . For any b0 ≥ bbliss , the only candidate for optimality is the
steady-state point associated with smoothing taxes and “staying put” at the initial level of debt:
(b, λ) = (b0 , λ0 ) for all t, with λ0 = ψ(b0 ).
Proposition 3. Consider the benchmark defined above and suppose ψbliss < γbliss . If b0 < bbliss ,
debt converges monotonically to bbliss and taxes exhibit a positive drift along the transition. If instead
b0 ≥ bbliss , debt stays constant at b0 for ever, and tax smoothing applies.
    Let us now consider Figure 2. In this case, γ and ψ intersect exactly once, at b = b# ∈
(bseig , bbliss ). Let λ# ≡ ψ(b# ) denote the shadow cost of taxation associated with balancing the
budget when b = b# . By construction, the pair (b# , λ# ) identifies the unique steady state of the
ODE system (28)-(29) to the left of the satiation point (i.e., within regions L and M). As is clear
from the figure, this steady state is saddle-path stable. In particular, for any b0 < bbliss , we can find
a continuous path that satisfies conditions (28)-(29) and that asymptotically converges to (b# , λ# ).
Exactly the same arguments as in Figure 1 guarantee that this path is the unique candidate for
optimality, and hence also the optimal path, as long as b0 < bbliss .

                                  Figure 2: Benchmark, with ψbliss > γbliss .

                                       λ̇ = 0                                   ḃ = 0
                           λ


                      λskiba

                          λ]


                                 L                  M                    H


                                       bseig                b]     bbliss bskiba    b    b

                                  λ̇ = 0


    A crucial difference from the case in Figure 1 is that the economy now converges to a steady
state characterized by a debt level that is strictly lower than the satiation level: Theorem 1 applies
with b∗ = b# < bbliss . Consequently, the sign of the drift in debt and taxes now depends on the
initial position: if b0 < b# , then debt and taxes increase monotonically over time, whereas the
converse is true if b0 ∈ (b# , bbliss ).
    Another important difference concerns the behavior of the system in the region to the right of
the satiation point. In the previous case, the Barro-like plan of keeping taxes and debt constant

                                                      22
over time was the unique candidate for optimality throughout region H, that is, for all b0 > bbliss .
This is no longer true. Instead, as it is evident in the figure, for any b0 ∈ [bbliss , bskiba ), there is an
additional candidate for optimality: the path indicated with blue color in the figure.
   This path lets b fall over time, crossing bbliss in finite time and asymptotically converging to
b# . Accordingly, the economy goes through two phases. In the first phase, which is defined by the
time interval over which b remains above bbliss , λ stays constant over time, which means that tax
smoothing applies. Although this resembles Barro (1979), there is a key difference: the constant
value of λ exceeds ψ(b) throughout this phase, which means that taxes are smoothed at a level that
is higher than what is required for balancing the budget (in turn explaining why debt falls over
time). In the second phase, which starts as soon as b has crossed bbliss from above, debt continues
to fall, but tax smoothing no longer holds, for the reasons explained earlier on.
   By construction, the path described above satisfies the ODE system (28)-(29) at all t and
asymptotically converges to (b# , λ# ), which means that it also satisfies the transversality condition.
This verifies that, as long as it exists, this path is a candidate for optimality. But so is the Barro-like
plan of “staying put” at the point of the graph of ψ that corresponds to the initial level of debt,
that is, at (b, λ) = (b0 , λ0 ) with λ0 = ψ(b0 ). How can we tell which path is better?
   To address this question, we use an elementary but powerful result from optimal-control theory.
Below, we first state the result, which holds true for any configuration of the planner’s problem.
We then use it to complete the characterization of the particular benchmark under consideration.
   For any b0 , let P(b0 ) be the set of all the paths for (b, λ) that start from b0 , satisfy the ODE
system in all t, and also satisfy the transversality condition at infinity. Since these conditions are
necessary for optimality, the optimal path is necessarily contained in P(b0 ). More generally, we can
reduce the planner’s problem to that of choosing a path P(b0 ). Next, note that any path in P(b0 ) is
associated with a different initial value for the costate and let Λ(b0 ) be the set of such initial values
for the costate. Choosing a path in P(b0 ) is therefore equivalent to choosing an initial value λ0 in
Λ(b0 ). The following result is helpful for evaluating the welfare associated with any candidate path.

Lemma 4 (Skiba, 1978, Brock and Dechert, 1983). For any b0 and any λ0 ∈ Λ(b0 ), the path
in P(b0 ) that starts from initial point (b0 , λ0 ) yields a value that is equal to H(b0 , λ0 )/ρ.

   For any given b0 , the above result allows one to rank the candidate paths in P(b0 ) by simply
inspecting how the value of the Hamiltonian, H(b0 , λ0 ), varies as λ0 varies within the set Λ(b0 ). But
now note that H(b, λ) is strictly convex in λ, as it is defined as the upper envelop of functions that
are linear in λ. It follows that, whenever P(b0 ) is not a singleton, the optimal path is necessarily the
path that starts with λ0 either at the maximal or the minimal value inside Λ(b0 ). This property is
instrumental for identifying the optimal path starting from any given initial level of debt, not only
in the benchmark under consideration, but also in the more general case studied later.


                                                     23
    Let us now go back to Figure 2. Pick any b0 ≥ bbliss and suppose there exists a continuous
path that satisfies the ODEs and asymptotically converges to b# . As already noted, this path is
a candidate for optimality. But so is the Barro-like plan that keeps b and λ constant for ever at,
respectively, b0 and ψ(b0 ). Note, next, that the first plan is associated with a higher λ0 (i.e., higher
taxes) than the second, because the first runs a surplus whereas the second balances the budget.
Finally, note that, along any candidate path, Hλ (b, λ) = ḃ. For the path that leads the economy
to b# , we have that ḃ < 0 at t = 0, and hence Hλ (b0 , λ0 ) < 0. For the Barro-like plan, instead,
ḃ = 0 and hence Hλ (b0 , λ0 ) = 0. Since H is convex, this means that the Barro-like plan attains the
minimum of H over the set of candidate paths. It follows that, whenever the path that takes the
economy to b# exists, this path strictly dominates the Barro-line, and it is the optimal one.
    The preceding argument supposes the existence of such a path. Whether such a path exists or
not depends on the initial level of debt, b0 . In the figure, it is evident that this is the case if and
only if b0 is lower than the threshold bskiba . But how is this threshold defined in the first place, and
what guarantees its own existence?
    Consider b0 = bbliss . If we initiate the ODE system with a starting value λ(0) slightly above
ψbliss = ψ(bbliss ), which means that we run a sufficiently small enough surplus, then the resulting
path for b never reaches b# . By contrast, if we start with λ(0) far above ψ(bbliss ), debt falls below b#
in finite time. Finally, note the path of b induced by the ODE system is continuous and monotonic
in λ(0). It follows that there exists a critical value λskiba ∈ (ψbliss , ∞) such that, if we start with
λ(0) = λskiba , then and only then the economy converges asymptotically to b# .
    By continuity, this kind of path also exists for b0 above but close enough to bbliss . Furthermore,
because the planner’s Euler condition dictates λ̇ = 0 (tax smoothing) throughout region H, the plan
under consideration keeps λ constant as long as b is above bbliss . It follows that the portion of this
path that is to the right of the satiation point is flat at the level λskiba .
    Define next bskiba ∈ (bbliss , b̄) as the level of debt that balances the budget when taxes are set
at the level corresponding to λskiba ; that is, bskiba ≡ ψ −1 (λskiba ). Note that ψ is continuous and
monotone, λbliss > ψ(bbliss ), and limb→b̄ ψ(b) = ∞; this verifies that bskiba exists and is necessarily
strictly between bbliss and b̄. It is then immediate that a continuous path that satisfies the ODEs
and that converges to b# exists if and only if b0 < bskiba , as illustrated in the figure.
    We thus have the following complement to Proposition 3.

Proposition 4. Consider the benchmark defined above and suppose ψbliss > γbliss . There exist
unique points b# ∈ (bseig , bbliss ) and bskiba ∈ (bbliss , b̄) such as the optimal debt level converges
monotonically to b# if b0 < bskiba , whereas it stays constant at b0 for ever if b0 ≥ bskiba . Optimal
taxes exhibit a positive drift as long as b ∈ (bseig , b# ), a negative drift as long as b ∈ (b# , bbliss ), and
are smoothed as long as b > bbliss .

    For practical purposes, we think it is appropriate to restrict b0 < bbliss , so that the financial

                                                      24
distortion is present in the initial period. Under this restriction, the combination of Propositions 3
and 4 generates the following two key lessons.
   The first lesson is that the economy can belong in one of two classes. In the one, debt converges
to bbliss , which means that the planner extinguishes the financial distortion in the long run. In the
other class, the opposite is true: the planner preserves the financial distortion in the long run. We
will study below whether and how this taxonomy extends to the general case, as well as how it
relates to the literature on the Friedman rule. For now, we wish to emphasize that both classes
feature a deviation from tax smoothing along the transition.
   The second lesson is that the condition ψbliss > γbliss is both necessary and sufficient for an
economy to belong in the second of the aforementioned two classes. In order to derive an interpre-
tation of this condition recall that ψ(b) measures the value of λ implied by balancing the budget;
that γ(b) identifies the value of λ that balances the planner’s conflicting objectives: when λ > γ(b),
then and only then the value the planner attaches to interest-rate manipulation (or seigniorage)
outweighs the value of collateral creation (or liquidity provision); and finally that ψbliss ≡ ψ(bbliss )
and γbliss ≡ limb↑bbliss γ(b). It follows that ψbliss > γbliss if and only if Ωb (b, λ) < 0 for (b, λ) close
enough to (bbliss , ψ(bbliss )), which leads to the following simple interpretation.

Fact. ψbliss > γbliss if and only if, in the neighborhood of bbliss , the benefit of relaxing the government
budget by depressing the interest rate on public debt exceeds the cost of the financial distortion.

   The proof of Theorem 1 is then completed by noting that ψbliss > γbliss if and only if g is high
enough, a property that holds even outside our benchmark and that is proved in Lemma 5 below.
   Do the lessons obtained above apply outside the benchmark under consideration? Before we ad-
dress this question, we complete the characterization of the benchmark by studying the comparative
statics of the steady-state level of debt.

Proposition 5. As long as ψbliss > γbliss , the steady-state debt level b# increases with v, decreases
with g, and can either increase or decrease with π.

   This result underscores how the steady-state level of debt resolves the trade-off between collateral
creation and interest-rate manipulation, or between liquidity and seigniorage. The steady-state level
b# is always between bseig and bbliss , the levels that maximize, respectively, the seigniorage, π(b)b,
and the social value of liquidity, V (b).
   If we shift the function v upwards holding the function π constant, we increase the marginal
social value of liquidity while keeping constant both marginal and total seigniorage. This means
that not only is the social value of easing the friction is increased but also that the tightness of the
budget constraint is maintained. The first effect is manifested in an upward shift in the graph of γ;
the latter in a constant position of ψ. Consequently, b# increases unambiguously.


                                                    25
       By contrast, if we raise g, we leave the relative value of liquidity unchanged but tighten the
budget (γ stays constant but ψ increases), which in turn explains why b# decreases with g and
indeed gets closer to bseig as g approaches its upper bound.21 A higher g means that it is more
expensive to provide liquidity (equivalently, more worthwhile to extract seigniorage).
       Next, if we keep v and σ constant but raise π, we increase both marginal and total seigniorage.
The first effect shifts γ down, reflecting the reduction in the relative value of providing liquidity;
the second effect shifts ψ down, reflecting the relaxation of the budget. In other words, the increase
in π, holding v constant, makes the provision of liquidity cheaper but also relatively less valuable
in the eyes of the planner, which explains why the overall effect on b# is ambiguous.
       These comparative statics anticipate the analysis of shocks conducted in Section 7. The also
help highlight the following elementary point: as long as pecuniary externalities like those studied in
Shleifer and Vishny (1992), Lorenzoni (2008), and Dávila (2015) drive a wedge between the private
and the social private value of collateral, this wedge naturally impacts the planner’s long-run target
for the level of public debt, but does alter the qualitative nature of the optimal policy dynamics.


Beyond the Benchmark

The benchmark studied above has two key properties: π(b)b is singled-peaked, so that the phase
diagram can be organized in the three regions described above; and γ is decreasing over the region
M, so that it can intersect at most once with ψ. If we modified the benchmark by allowing either for
a non-monotone σ or for V 0 6= π but maintained the aforementioned properties, then the preceding
arguments go through and Propositions 3 and 4 continue to hold.
       What if the aforementioned properties do not hold, as it may be the case for certain micro-
foundations? There is a plethora of possibilities. To make progress, we will continue for a moment
to assume that π(b)b is single-peaked, which preserves the tripartite structure of the phase diagram,
but will let γ(b) be non-monotone over region M .22 In this case, the graphs of γ and ψ may intersect
multiple times. Clearly, any such intersection identifies a steady-state point of the ODE system.
What are the local dynamics around each of these points? Starting from a given initial b0 , how
many paths are candidates for optimality? And what are the properties of the optimal path?
       There is a multitude of possible answers to these questions. To illustrate, consider the case in
which γ and ψ happen to intersect three times, giving rise to three steady-state points for the ODE
system within region M. Figure 3 here along with Figures 10 and 11 in Appendix B illustrate three
phase diagrams that are consistent with this case. The three diagrams feature similar configurations
  21
       The latter is given by gmax ≡ Tmax + [π(bseig ) − ρ]bseig , where Tmax is the maximal feasible tax revenue.
  22
       Recall that γ is necessarily decreasing in a neighborhood to the right of bseig , because σ(b) ↓ 1 and γ(b) ↑ ∞ as
b ↓ bbliss . Allowing for a non-monotone γ therefore means that γ is increasing over a portion of region M. This in
turn can happen when the elasticity σ and/or that the ratio π/V 0 is decreasing over a subset of (bseig , bbliss ).




                                                            26
of the γ and ψ functions and similar local dynamics around each of the three steady states, but
different global dynamics and different types of optimal policies.
   Consider Figure 3. In order to simplify the exposition, we truncate region L, where b < bseig ,
γ is negatively valued, and there can be no steady state; we thus focus on region M, where
b ∈ (bseig , bbliss ) and where γ and ψ intersect three times. Denote the level of debt at the three
intersection points by b#    #        #
                        L , bM , and bH (for, respectively, “low”, “medium”, and “high”). Because γ
goes to infinity in the neighborhood of bseig , we know that γ must intersect ψ from above at b#
                                                                                               L
and b#                      #
     H , and from below at bM . This is useful to note, because, as shown in the next proposition
(which is proved in the Appendix), the relation between the slope of γ and that of ψ dictates the
local stability properties of the ODE system around any steady state.

Proposition 6. Consider any (b] , λ] ) such that λ# = γ(b# ) = ψ(b# ), that is any steady-state point
of the ODE system in the region to the left of the satiation point. There exists a finite scalar χ > 0
such that the local dynamics around that steady-state point are
   (i) saddle-path stable if γ 0 (b# ) < ψ 0 (b# );
   (ii) explosive with real eigenvalues if ψ 0 (b# ) < γ 0 (b# ) < ψ 0 (b# ) + χ;
   (iii) explosive with imaginary eigenvalues (i.e. with cycles) if γ 0 (b# ) > ψ 0 (b# ) + χ.

   This result restricts the local dynamics of the ODE system in the neighborhood of any steady
state point, that is, around the intersections of γ and ψ. Consistent with this result, Figure 3 imposes
that the lowest and the highest steady states (b#      #
                                                L and bH ) are saddle-path stable, while letting the
middle one (b#
             M ) feature explosive cycles.
   Notwithstanding these restrictions on the local dynamics, there remain three distinct possibilities
with regard to the global dynamics. Figure 3 considers one of these possibilities; to economize on
space, the other two are delegated to Appendix 8.
   In Figure 3, we have imposed the following property on the global dynamics: both the stable
arm that leads to b#                                              #
                    L from above and the one that leads to bH from below cycle back to bM . It
                                                                                                 #

                                       ˜
follows that there exist values b̃ and b̃, as indicated in the figure, such that the following is true
within region M. Whenever b0 < b̃, Λ(b0 ) is a singleton and the unique candidate for optimality is
                                                   ˜
the saddle path that leads to b#
                               L . Whenever b > b̃, Λ(b0 ) is again a singleton, but now the unique
                                                                            ˜
candidate is the saddle path that leads to b#
                                            H . Finally, whenever b0 ∈ [b̃, b̃], there are multiple paths
that are candidates for optimality. For instance, if we take b0 = b̂ as indicated in the figure, one
candidate is obtained by setting λ0 = λ̂1 ≡ max Λ(b0 ) and letting debt decrease monotonically
towards b#
         L ; another candidate is obtained by setting λ0 = λ̂2 = min Λ(b0 ) and letting debt increase
monotonically towards b#
                       H ; and yet another candidate is obtained by setting λ0 = λ̂3 and letting
debt to cycle twice around b̂ before eventually converging to b#                        #
                                                               H . The closer b0 is to bM , the larger
the number of candidates; when b0 is exactly b#
                                              M , there is actually a countable infinity of candidates.



                                                      27
                 Figure 3: Beyond the Benchmark: Rich Dynamics and Multiple Steady States

                                                                                             ḃ = 0
                      λ




                               λ̇ = 0
                      λ
                      b1
                      λ
                      b3

                      λ
                      b2




                                   b]L      e    ]
                                              b bM
                                            b b          b
                                                         e
                                                         e         b]H     bbliss   bskiba        b   b



       At first glance, the task of comparing candidate paths seems daunting. Fortunately, Lemma 4
and the convexity of the Hamiltonian with respect λ guarantee that only the paths associated with
                                                         ˜
the extremes of Λ(b0 ) can be optimal. For any b0 ∈ [b̃, b̃], we can thus rule out cycles and restrict
attention to just two candidate paths, namely the paths that let b converge monotonically either to
b#        #
 L or to bH . To rank these two candidate paths, we proceed as follows.
       First, recall that the value of any candidate path is given by the Hamiltonian as described in
Lemma 4; that the Hamiltonian is convex in λ; and that its derivative is given by Hλ = ḃ. Next,
                                                                               ˜
consider the value of ḃ at each of the two candidate paths. For all b0 ∈ [b̃, b̃), the path that leads to
the lowest steady state starts from a point above the graph of ψ, meaning that ḃ < 0. But as b0 gets
          ˜
closer to b̃, the starting points gets closer to the graph of ψ, meaning that value of ḃ gets closer to
                                            ˜
0. In the knife-edge case in which b0 = b̃, this path is associated with ḃ = 0. Conversely, the path
                                                                                   ˜
that leads to the highest steady state is associated with ḃ > 0 for all b0 ∈ (b̃, b̃], and with ḃ = 0 in
the reverse knife-edge case in which b0 = b̃.
       Combining these observations, we obtain the following properties. When b0 = b̃, the path that
leads to b#                                                       #
          L features Hλ = ḃ < 0, whereas the path that leads to bH features Hλ = ḃ = 0. By the
                                                                     ˜
convexity of H, the latter path is dominated. Conversely, when b0 = b̃, it is the former path that
now features Hλ = ḃ = 0 and that is therefore dominated. By continuity,23 the path that leads to
b#                                                                                   #
 L is therefore optimal for b0 close enough to b̃, whereas the path that leads to bH is optimal for b0
                 ˜
close enough to b̃. Finally, the assumption that U is convex in s guarantees that the optimal path
                                                                      ˜
for b is monotone. It follows that there exists a threshold b̂ ∈ (b̃, b̃) such that the unique optimal
  23
       Here, we take for granted the continuity of the value of each candidate path with respect to b0 ; for a general
proof of this property, see Dechert and Nishimura (1981).



                                                             28
path is the path leading to the lowest steady state whenever b0 < b̂ and it is the path leading to the
higher steady state whenever b0 > b̂. See Figure 3 for an illustration: the bold segments of the two
stable arms indicate the optimal selection among the two candidate paths.24
       So far, we focused on region M. In region H (b0 ≥ bbliss ), the analysis is similar to Figure 2.
That is, there is a threshold bskiba ∈ (bbliss , b̄) such that, as long as b0 ∈ (bbliss , bskiba ), there are two
candidate paths, the one leading to bL
                                     H and the Barro-like one, and the former dominates the latter,
whereas the latter is the only candidate for b0 ≥ bskiba . Finally, in region L (b0 < bseig ), there is a
unique candidate path, one leading to b#
                                       L.
       Optimal policy in Figure 3 has the following properties: whenever b0 < b̂, debt converges
monotonically to b#                                                                 #
                  L ; whenever b0 ∈ (b̂, bskiba ), debt converges monotonically to bH ; and whenever
b0 ≥ bskiba , debt stays constant at b0 for ever. Comparing this result to our earlier benchmark, we
see that one key property survives whereas another is lost: as in our benchmark, it is true that
there exists a threshold bskiba > bbliss such that debt converges to a steady-state level below bbliss
whenever the economy starts below bskiba ; but unlike our benchmark, the steady-state level is not
the same for all initial conditions.
       In Appendix 8, we consider two variants of Figure 3 that maintain the same configuration for
the functions γ and ψ, the same steady-state points, and the same local dynamics around them, but
perturb the global dynamics. One of the stable arms is now allowed to extend throughout region
M instead of cycling back to b#
                              M . As we explain in the Appendix, this path then emerges as the
optimal path for all initial conditions: in the one variant (Figure 10), it is optimal to converge to
b#                                                                               #
 H for all b0 < bskiba ; in the other (Figure 11), it is optimal to converge to bL .
       These findings illustrate the following more general points and qualify some of the properties
of the benchmark model. To the extent that the ODE system admits multiple steady states below
bbliss , any such point represents a point of indifference between the desire to depress the interest
rate on public debt and the desire to improve liquidity and efficiency; this is our earlier observation
that Ωb = 0 at any such point. Furthermore, to the extent that such a point is locally saddle-path
stable, it is optimal to converge to it over time if the economy starts in a small enough neighborhood
of this point and if in addition the planner is precluded from moving outside that neighborhood.
In this regard, the local optimality of the steady state can be understood by inspecting the trade
off between collateral creation and interest rate manipulation, as what we did in our benchmark.
However, once the planner is free to move from one steady state to another, such local intuitions are
no longer sufficient. Moreover, as we show below, there is no guarantee that the steady state can
be rationalized as either a global or a local maximum of Ω, despite the fact that it satisfies Ωb = 0.
       The number of possible scenarios would increase if we allowed γ and ψ to intersect more that
  24
       In the optimal-control literature, any threshold level of the state variable at which the solution switches from
one to another candidate path, such as the threshold b̂ here, is often referred to as a “Skiba point”. In our paper, we
reserve the notation bskiba to refer only to the highest such threshold.


                                                           29
three times. And yet an additional layer of complexity would emerge if the assumption that π(b)b
is single-valued were relaxed, as the tripartite structure of the phase diagram would be lost. As we
illustrate in the Appendix, the phase diagram would then look like the outcome of patching together
multiple pairs of L and M regions from our earlier examples.25 Furthermore, γ and ψ may admit
an arbitrary number of intersections within each of the M regions, and the dynamics both within
and across regions. Therefore, it is simply impossible to provide a complete taxonomy of all the
possible scenarios once we departed from our benchmark.
       Notwithstanding this complexity, we can establish the following result, which offers a qualified
generalization of Proposition 4 in our benchmark.

Proposition 7. Suppose ψbliss > γbliss . There exists a threshold bskiba > bbliss such that, for every
b0 < bskiba , the optimal policy lets debt converge monotonically to a point strictly below bbliss .

       The proof is as follows. By a similar argument as in Dechert and Nishimura (1981), the optimal
path for b is monotone, for any initial condition. Because b is bounded between b and b̄, this also
means that b converges. The limit point may depend on the initial level of debt. Nevertheless, it is
necessarily contained either in the set B # or in the interval [bbliss , b̄).
       Let b‡ ∈ (0, bbliss ) be the last local maximum of π(b)b.26 By construction of b‡ , γ(b) > 0 for all
b ∈ (b‡ , bbliss ) and limb↓b‡ γ(b) = +∞ > ψ(b‡ ). By the assumption that γbliss < ψbliss along with
the continuity and differentiability of γ and ψ, there exists at least one point b# ∈ (b‡ , bbliss ) such
that γ(b# ) = ψ(b# ) and γ 0 (b# ) < ψ 0 (b# ), that is, a steady-state point in which γ intersects ψ from
above. If there are multiple such points, consider the highest one. By Proposition 6, we know that
this steady state is saddle-path stable. Similarly to Figure 2, the following is therefore true: there
exists a threshold bskiba > bbliss and a scalar  > 0 such that, whenever b0 ∈ (b# − , bskiba ), there
exists path that satisfies the ODE system at all t and that asymptotically leads to b# . Clearly, this
path is a candidate for optimality for all b0 ∈ (b# − , bskiba ). Furthermore, this path dominates the
Barro-like plan for all b0 ∈ [bbliss , bskiba ). Finally, there is no candidate path that leads to satiation
when b0 < bbliss , thanks again to the assumption that γbliss < ψbliss .
       All these facts obtain by applying the same arguments as in our benchmark. What is different is
that we no longer know (i) whether the path that leads to b# ceases to exist for b0 low enough and (ii)
whether this path is itself dominated by another candidate path in a region of b0 . Notwithstanding
these possibilities, any other candidate path must itself be a saddle path leading to one of the
  25
       As before, L designates regions in which π(b)b is locally increasing, σ(b) < 1, and γ(b) < 0, whereas M designates
regions in which the converse properties hold.
  26
     Because π(b)b is strictly positive for all b ∈ (0, bbliss ) and converges to zero as b approaches either 0 from above
or bbliss from below, we know that there exists  > 0 such that π(b)b is increasing for b ∈ (0, ) and decreasing for
b ∈ (bbliss − , bbliss ). Because the derivative of π(b)b is −(σ(b) − 1)π(b), the aforementioned property means that
σ(b) < 1 for b ∈ (0, ) and σ(b) > 1 for b ∈ (bbliss − , bbliss ). By the continuity of σ, then, the threshold b‡ exists and
is strictly between 0 and bbliss .


                                                             30
intersection points of γ and ψ. By construction of b# , any other such point is strictly below b# . It
follows that, no matter the initial level of debt and no matter which candidate path is the optimal
one, debt converges to a point that does not exceed b# , which proves the claim.27
       As already noted, Proposition 7 provides a generalization of Proposition 4 from our benchmark:
γbliss < ψbliss guarantees that it is optimal to lead the economy to a steady state in which the
financial distortion binds in order to dampen the interest rate on public debt, not only for all initial
levels of debt below bbliss , but also over a range of initial levels above it. Unlike our benchmark,
though, the optimal long-run quantity of public debt (and the associated levels of the financial
distortion and the interest rate) need not be uniquely determined: as in the example of Figure 3,
the economy may converge to different steady states starting from different initial conditions.
       In our benchmark, γbliss < ψbliss was both sufficient and necessary for the aforementioned
long-run property to hold: sufficiency was established in Proposition 4, necessity in Proposition 3.
Proposition 7 shows that sufficiency holds more generally, the same is not true for necessity. We
prove this by example in the Appendix (see Figure 13 in particular).


Complete Characterization

Building on the preceding results, we can now offer a characterization of the optimal policy that
nests all possible scenarios. To this goal, we henceforth let

                        B # ≡ b ∈ (b, bbliss ] : γ(b) = ψ(b) and γ 0 (b) ≤ ψ 0 (b)
                               


be the set of the points at which γ intersects ψ from above. As shown in Proposition 6, these points
identify the saddle-path stable steady states of the ODE system.28 Depending on primitives, B #
may be empty, or may contain an arbitrary number of elements.29 Regardless of this, we have the
following result.

Theorem 2. In every economy, there exists a threshold bskiba ∈ [b, b] and a set B ∗ ⊆ B # such that
the following are true along the optimal policy:
       (i) If either b0 ∈ B ∗ or b0 > max{bbliss , bskiba }, debt stays constant at b0 for ever.
                                  / B ∗ , then debt converges monotonically to a point inside B ∗ .
       (ii) If b0 < bskiba and b0 ∈
       (iii) If bskiba < bbliss and b0 ∈ (bskiba , bbliss ), debt converges monotonically to bbliss .
  27
       This argument mirrors Theorem 2 in Brock and Dechert (1983). Applied to our setting, this theorem states that,
whenever the policy rule of the costate features a discontinuous jump, this jump is downward. By the same token,
as we move from higher to lower levels of debt, the costate can only jump upwards, which means that lower levels of
debt are necessarily associated with convergence to weakly lower steady states.
  28
     In knife-edge cases in which a steady state of the ODE system features γ 0 (b) = ψ 0 (b), we can not be sure of
saddle-path stability. Clearly, such knife-edge cases are degenerate. In any event, they do not affect the validity of
the result stated below, because this result allows B ∗ to be a strict subset of B # .
  29
     We wish to think of the empirically relevant case as one in which B # contains either a single or a “small” finite
number of points. At the present level of abstraction, however, the best we can say is that B # is generically countable.


                                                           31
       The proof of this result follows from arguments similar to those underlying our earlier results
and is therefore delegated to the Appendix. The point bskiba is a threshold in the state space such
that it is optimal to satiate the private sector’s demand for collateral—and eliminate the financial
distortion—in the long run if and only if the initial level of public debt exceeds this threshold. The
set B ∗ , on the other hand, identifies the set of the steady-state points of the optimal policy—aka
the optimal steady states—that lie below the satiation point. When B ∗ is a singleton, then debt
converges to the unique point in B ∗ for all b0 < bskiba . When instead B ∗ contains multiple points,
then each such point is associated with a basin of attraction around it, and the union of all these
basins equals [b, bskiba ). Clearly, B ∗ has to be a subset of B # , but the two need not coincide: it is
possible that the planner never finds optimal to converge to some, or even any of the points in B # .
For instance, whereas B ∗ = B # in Figures 2 and 3, B ∗ is a strict subset of B # in Figures 10 and
11 in the Appendix. Finally, the result allows for B ∗ = ∅ and, equivalently, bskiba = b, thus nesting
cases in which satiation obtains in the long run regardless of initial conditions. This in turn can be
true either because B # is itself empty, as in Figure 1, or because B # is not empty but the path
that leads to satiation happens to dominate any other candidate path.
       Theorem 2 characterizes the optimal policy for a given economy, that is, for a given specification
of the reduced-form functions (U, V, π) or of the underlying micro-foundations. The next theorem
offers a taxonomy of all the economies under consideration.

Theorem 3. Any economy belongs to one of the following three non-empty classes:
(i) Economies in which B ∗ = ∅ and bskiba = b.
(ii) Economies in which B ∗ 6= ∅ and bskiba ∈ (b, bbliss ).
(iii) Economies in which B ∗ 6= ∅ and bskiba ≥ bbliss .
Furthermore, ψbliss > γbliss is sufficient for an economy to belong to the last class.

       To sum up, the result that the optimal path leads the economy to a steady state in which the
financial distortion is preserved in order to depress the interest-rate cost of public debt, obtains at
least as long as ψbliss > γbliss . As noted before, this condition has a simple interpretation: in the
neighborhood of bbliss , the shadow cost of taxation is sufficiently high so that the marginal value of
depressing the interest rate on public debt outweighs the marginal cost of the financial distortion.
Consistent with this interpretation, it is straightforward to show this result obtains when the level
of government spending is sufficiently high.30

Lemma 5. Suppose γbliss < ∞. There exists a threshold ĝ such that ψbliss > γbliss if and only if
g > ĝ.
  30
       In fact, the threshold ĝ in the lemma can be negative in some economies, implying that in these economies, this
result obtains for all positive levels of government spending.




                                                           32
    Local Dynamics and Local Comparative Statics. We conclude this section with two
additional results that facilitate our later analysis of the response of the economy to shocks. The
first result establishes that, in a neighborhood of any steady state below satiation, debt and taxes
co-move along the transition to it. The second result offers a generalization of the comparative
statics of Proposition 5.

Proposition 8. For any b? ∈ B ? there exists  > 0 such that the following is true: if b0 ∈ (b? −, b? ),
then both debt and taxes increase over time; and if b0 ∈ (b? , b? + ), then both debt and taxes decrease
over time.

Proposition 9. For any b? ∈ B ? , b? increases continuously with a small enough increase in V or a
small enough decrease in g, and is ambiguously affected by a small change in π.

    These two results together imply that, at least for small changes in either initial conditions or
the primitives of the economy, the relevant trade off, the nature of transitional dynamics, and the
comparative statics of the optimal long-run quantity of debt are the same as in our benchmark. This
observation forms the basis for Section 7, where we study the optimal policy response to financial
and other shocks.


6    Discussion and Additional Insights
In this section we offer some additional insights; we also link our contribution to the extant literature.

    On the Friedman Rule. Our analysis departs from that in the Friedman-rule literature
by allowing all types of government liabilities, rather than a subset of them, to facilitate private
liquidity. This assumption seems both appropriate for the issues we are addressing and realistic (see
Krishnamurthy and Vissing-Jorgensen, 2012 for corroborating evidence). To elaborate on the role
played by this assumption, we now consider a modification of our baseline model that helps nest
the case studied in the Friedman-rule literature.
    Suppose that the government enacts a law that prohibits the use of corporate bonds as collateral
in morning transactions. This restriction adds a constraint to the planner’s sub-problem defined
in (8)-(16) and results in a change in the functions V and π. By shutting the private supply of
collateral down the law may reduce V and increase π, so it has ambiguous welfare implications.
But its effect on the price of corporate bonds is unambiguous: they are now priced at the discount
factor, while government bonds command a premium over the discount factor. Our model is now
directly comparable to those in the Friedman rule literature, with government bonds playing the
role of money and corporate bonds the role of the non-money asset.
    Suppose next that the government can not only borrow in the money-like asset (here, government
bonds), but also invest freely in the non-money asset (here, corporate bonds). Then, public debt is

                                                    33
given by b = m + n, where m is the stock of government bonds and −n is the quantity of corporate
bonds held by the government. The budget constraint is given by

                                    ṁ + ṅ = [ρ − π(m)]m + ρn + g − s,

or equivalently
                                       ḃ = ρb − π(m)m + g − S(τ ),                                (31)

where π(m)m is seigniorage and S(τ ) is tax revenue. The following is evident: For any given
b, π(m)m, g, the government can vary the mixture of taxes and new debt issued that satisfies its
budget without affecting either the level of private sector liquidity or the interest rate on public
debt. Moreover, the latter is now equal to the discount rate.
   Therefore, when the government varies b, it does not face the key trade off present in our model.
By the same token, the optimal supply of liquidity is disentangled from the optimal dynamics of
debt and taxes.
   To see this more clearly, integrate (31) over time to obtain the familiar intertemporal budget
constraint:                                  ˆ   +∞
                                  b0 + G =            e−ρt [π(m)m + S(τ )]dt.                      (32)
                                             0
              ´ +∞
where G ≡     0      e−ρt gdt is the present value of government spending. The planner’s problem reduces
to finding the paths of m and τ that maximize ex ante welfare,
                                   ˆ +∞
                                        e−ρt [U (τ ) + V (m)]dt,
                                         0

subject to the single integral constraint in (32). Let λ? denote the Lagrange multiplier on the
intertemporal budget. It is then immediate that the optimal supply of liquidity is given by

                                          m? = arg max Ω(m, λ? ),                                  (33)
                                                        m

where Ω(m, λ) ≡ V (m)+λπ(m)m measures the total value of “liquidity plus seigniorage”. Depending
on primitives, m? may or may not coincide with satiation; that is, the Friedman rule may or may
not apply. Regardless of this, however, tax smoothing obtains and the optimal fiscal policy is
determined in exactly the same fashion as in the Barro/AMSS benchmark.
   The exercise conducted above captures the essence of the Friedman-rule literature: the supply of
liquidity is disentangled from fiscal policy. This is no longer the case when both assets contribute to
liquidity. Section 5 established this under the assumption that the two assets are perfect substitutes
to one another. This was a simplification: our qualitative findings are valid even when the two assets
are imperfect substitutes.
   To recap, the intertwining of fiscal policy with liquidity provision and the resulting properties
of the transitional dynamics of debt and taxes represent the key differences between our results and

                                                        34
those in the Friedman rule literature. But they are not the only ones. In the exercise conducted
above, m? attains the global maximum of Ω(m, λ). In our context, any steady state satisfies the
first-order condition Ωb (b∗ , λ∗ ) = 0. Yet, this does not necessarily mean that b∗ maximizes Ω(b, λ∗ ).
We elaborate on this point next.

   On the optimal quantity of public debt. What is the optimal long-run quantity of public
debt? The insights of the literature on the Friedman rule, as well as the static analogy we built in
the beginning of Section 5, may lead one to conjecture that the optimal steady-state level of debt
maximizes “liquidity plus seigniorage”, in the sense that b∗ = arg max Ω(b∗ , λ∗ ). We now address
the validity of this conjecture.

Proposition 10. (i) In our benchmark, whenever B ? is non-empty, it is given by a single point b?
such that b? = arg maxb Ω(b, λ? ) and λ? = ψ(b? ).
   (ii) More generally, the following is true for any economy in which B ? is non-empty. Take any
b? ∈ B ? and let λ? = ψ(b? ) . If γ 0 (b? ) < 0, b? attains a local maximum of Ω(b, λ? ). If instead
γ 0 (b? ) > 0, b? attains a local minimum of Ω(b, λ? ).
   (iii) There exist economies in which B ? is a singleton and, nevertheless, b? attains a local min-
imum of Ω(b, λ? ).

   To prove this result, note first that

                                   Ωb (b, λ? ) = (σ(b) − 1) π(b) [γ(b) − λ? ]                          (34)

Next, recall that in our benchmark a steady-state level b? below bbliss exists if and only if ψbliss >
γbliss , and it is then unique. Furthermore, the single-peakedness of π(b)b guarantees that σ(b) < 1
and γ(b) < 0 for all b < bseig , whereas σ(b) > 1 and γ(b) > 0 for all b > bseig . Finally, the
monotonicity of γ guarantees that γ(b) > γ(b? ) for b ∈ (bseig , b? ), whereas γ(b) < γ(b? ) = λ? .
Together with the fact that γ(b? ) = ψ(b? ) = λ? > 0, this implies that Ωb (b, λ? ) > 0 for all b ∈ [b, b? )
and Ωb (b, λ? ) < 0 for all b ∈ [b, b? ), which proves part (i). π(b)b need not be single-peaked and,
most importantly, γ(b) need not be monotone outside our benchmark. The argument above therefore
breaks down: there can exist multiple steady states below bbliss and, regardless of how many they
are, there is no guarantee that any of them maximizes “liquidity plus seigniorage”. The only thing
we know is that at any such point σ(b? ) > 1 and γ(b? ) = λ? , which in turn proves part (ii): in
a neighborhood of b? , Ωb (b, λ? ) crosses zero from above (meaning that b? is a local maximum) if
γ 0 (b? ) < 0, whereas it crosses zero from below (meaning that b? is a local minimum) if γ 0 (b? ) > 0.
   Figure 3 offers an example of the first case: there are two steady states, both satisfying γ 0 (b? ) < 0
and therefore both representing local maxima. The proof of part (iii) is completed by Figure 4, which
offers an example of the second case.
   Let us elaborate. In the example of Figure 4, γ and ψ intersect only once, at the point (b? , λ? ).
As in our benchmark, the economy converges to this point from any initial point b0 < bskiba , for some

                                                      35
                                      Figure 4: Converging to a Local Minimum

                                                                                         ḃ = 0
                               λ            λ̇ = 0




                              λ?



                            ψ(b
                              b)



                                    bseig    b
                                             b                   b?           bbliss bskiba   b    b



threshold bskiba > bbliss . Unlike our benchmark, however, γ is not globally decreasing. Instead,γ
is “moderately” increasing after some point, so that 0 < γ 0 (b? ) < ψ 0 (b? ). Letting γ 0 (b? ) < ψ 0 (b? )
guarantees that the dynamics are characterized by saddle-path stability, which is necessary for
optimality. Letting γ 0 (b? ) > 0 guarantees that b? attains a local minimum of Ω(b, λ? ). The global
maximum of Ω(b, λ? ) is instead attained at b̂.31
       How could it be optimal to stay at b? instead of trying to reach b̂? The latter would indeed
be optimal if λ were to stay constant at λ? . Intuitively, when λ = λ? = ψ(b? ), the shadow cost
of taxation is high enough that the value of the extra seigniorage obtained by lowering b from b?
towards b̂ outweighs the reduction in liquidity. A “myopic” planner that treats λ as constant would
thus do exactly this. However, if the economy were to transit to the lower debt level b̂, then the
shadow cost of taxation would also be lower. In fact, once λ = λ̂ ≡ ψ(b̂), the same myopic planner
would now find it optimal to raise b above b̂, possibly up to bbliss . This suggests that the myopic
planner could engage in pointless cycles and underscores the limits of either the static analogy we
built earlier or any attempt to extrapolate from the literature on the Friedman rule.
       The bottom line is that, in general, the optimal long-run target for the level of public debt can not
be understood in isolation of the transitional dynamics: even though tax-smoothing considerations
may appear to be dormant once the economy has reached its steady state, they can play a key role
in determining what the steady state is in the first place.
  31
       In the figure, b̂ is defined by the lowest intersection of the graph of γ with the horizontal line at λ? . By
construction, γ(b) > λ? for b ∈ (bseig , b̂), γ(b) < λ? for b ∈ (b̂, b? ), and γ(b) > λ? for b ∈ (b? , bbliss ). Using (34) along
with the fact that σ(b) < 1 and γ(b) < 0 for b < bseign , we infer that Ωb is positive for all b up to b̂, negative for b
between b̂ and b? , positive for b between b? and bbliss , and zero thereafter. It follows that the maximum of Ω(b, λ? )
is necessarily attained either at b̂ or at bbliss . Finally, we can guarantee that the maximum is attained at b̂, rather
than at bbliss , by picking the locus of γ and the product (σ(b) − 1) π(b) is such that the integral of Ωb over (b? , bbliss )
is lower, in absolute value, than the integral of Ωb over (b̂, b? ).



                                                               36
       More on the optimal quantity of public debt. We now relate our results to the results of
Aiyagari and McGrattan (1998) on the optimal long-run quantity of public debt. This paper relies
on a short-cut to escape the computational challenges of studying optimal policy in incomplete-
market settings: instead of solving the problem of a Ramsey planner who chooses the dynamic path
of taxes and debt levels so as to maximize ex-ante utility, it restricts taxes and debt to be constant
over time, abstracts from transitional dynamics, and maximizes welfare in steady state.
       In order to understand how this approach may fail to provide the right guidance to policy, we
proceed to embed the Aiyagari and McGrattan exercise into our framework. Consider a planner
who maximizes U (s) + V (b) subject to r(b)b = s. Let b̂ denote the level of debt that solves this
problem and let λ̂ be the relevant Lagrange multiplier.32 Clearly,
                               n                    o           n             o
                  b̂ = arg max V (b) − λ̂[ρ − π(b)]b = arg max Ω(b, λ̂) − λ̂ρb ,                                 (35)
                                  b                                        b

whose first-order condition gives Ωb = λ̂ρ > 0. By contrast, the steady state solution in our planning
problem satisfies Ωb = 0. This discrepancy reveals a simple fact: the Aiyagari and McGrattan
exercise incorrectly treats the entire interest payments on public debt, r(b)b, as a cost while in
reality the social planner should view debt issuance as a profit (seignorage) generating exercise to
the tune of π(b)b.
       In our benchmark, if we assume that ψbliss > γbliss so that there is a unique steady state below
satiation, then we also get b̂ < b∗ . The Aiyagari-McGrattan exercise underestimates the optimal
long-run quantity of public debt and also gives a b̂ that is necessarily below bbliss in spite of the fact
that in this case satiation is optimal in the long run when ψbliss < γbliss . Outside our benchmark,
there can exist multiple steady states below bbliss , some of which may be higher than bgold and
others lower than it. Furthermore, as shown in Proposition 10, even when the steady state below
bbliss is unique, this steady state may correspond to a local minimum of Ω. It follows that ignoring
transitional dynamics may fail to give the right answer to the question of the optimal long term
level of debt even when one modified the steady-state objective to take into account the fact that
debt carries a seigniorage-like benefit rather than a cost.33
       The following analogy may help here. The original exercise conducted by Aiyagari and McGrat-
tan is akin to studying the golden rule in the Neoclassical Growth Model. The point made here is
that even the modified golden rule can be misleading.

       Crowding out, or crowding in, capital. A central aspect of Aiyagari and McGrattan (1998)
that our analysis has so far abstracted from is the possibility that the issuance of public debt
crowds out capital accumulation. This happens because, in that model, public debt is a substitute
for physical capital (or for financial claims on such capital) as a buffer stock.
  32
       To simplify, we assume that the solution is unique, which is true for generic (U, V, π).
  33
       The fact that public debt in Aiyagari and McGrattan also serves as an instrument for redistribution in addition
to its role as private collateral does not matter for the essence of our criticism.


                                                           37
   This channel is accommodated in the variant model we study in Appendix A. In that model,
private agents can relax future financial constraints by saving, not only in government bonds,
but also in physical capital. It follows than the issuance of public debt can crowd out capital
accumulation by reducing the need to use physical capital as a form of collateral.
   We emphasize “can” because our model also contains an additional channel, which pulls in the
opposite direction. By relaxing the borrowing constraint of firms, or of entrepreneurs, the issuance
of public debt can help improve the allocation of capital across different productive opportunities,
thereby also leading to an increase in the ex ante return to capital. This effect, which helps crowd
in capital, is absent in Aiyagari and McGrattan (1998), because the production side of their model
is first-best efficient; but it is at the core of of large literature that emphasizes how financial frictions
reduce aggregate TFP, depress investment, and discourage entrepreneurial activity.
   Notwithstanding these observations, the policy problem can still be understood in terms of the
dual role that the financial friction has on welfare and the government budget. The various effects
on the cross-sectional allocation of resources, on capital accumulation, and on aggregate TFP and
income are all different symptoms of the same distortion. This changes the “details” of how the
distortion enters the planner’s objective (welfare) and her constraint (the government budget). For
instance, a lower distortion can now relax the planner’s constraint by increasing aggregate TFP
and thereby also raising the tax basis. Clearly, this effect goes in the opposite direction than the
interest-rate effect we have emphasized so far. But note that our analysis has already allowed for
two conflicting effects: the one through welfare and the one through interest rates. Adding the new
effect tilts the balance, but does not change the qualitative properties of our analysis.

   When is it cheap for the government to borrow? In recent policy debates, low interest
rates have been often interpreted as a signal that it is “cheap” for the government to borrow. Among
others, Krugman and DeLong have argued that the US government should have run an expansionary
fiscal policy during the Great Recession, not only for Keynesian-stimulus reasons, but also because
interest rates were extraordinarily low.
   This claim is in general misleading. Suppose we added deterministic variation in discount rates
in the Barro-AMSS version of our model, or preference and technology shocks in the stochastic
model of Lucas and Stokey (1983). We could then obtain arbitrary movements in interest rates,
either across time or across states, without any change in the optimal mixture of taxes and debt.
In such cases, low interest rates do not justify more borrowing. The reason is that the equilibrium
interest rate captures not only the cost of borrowing but also what a society desires.
   Nonetheless, our analysis helps identify situations in which the aforementioned claim may con-
tain the right policy recommendation. More borrowing may be optimal during a crisis, not simply
because the interest rate on public debt is low, but rather because the low interest rate is a manifes-
tation of the aggravated financial friction and of the associated increase in the liquidity premium that


                                                     38
the government can extract from the market. We elaborate further on this point in the discussion
of the optimal policy response to financial shocks in the next section.

         On Ricardian Equivalence. In our paper, as in Woodford (1990), Aiyagari and McGrattan
(1998), and Holmström and Tirole (1998), the financial friction comes together with a departure
from Ricardian Equivalence. It is possible, however, to restore the neutrality of public debt without
eliminating the financial friction altogether.
         Consider a modification of our model that lets the private sector’s pledgeable income move one-
to-one with future tax obligations. This modification preserves the financial friction but eliminates
the effect of public debt on allocations, interest rates, and welfare: the solution to the sub-problem
defined in (8)-(16) becomes invariant to the level of public debt, so that the functions V and π no
longer depend on b. The same point applies to Woodford (1990), Aiyagari and McGrattan (1998),
and Holmström and Tirole (1998): if borrowing constraints adjusted to future tax obligations, public
debt would be neutral in these papers as well.
         This, however, does not mean that the economy reduces to the Barro-AMSS benchmark: the
interest rate is still depressed relative to the planner’s discount rate. Accordingly, the Euler condition
gives λ̇ = πλ > 0, where π > 0 is the—now fixed—wedge between the interest rate and the planner’s
discount rate. The following result then obtains.

Proposition 11. Suppose that the friction is present but public debt is neutral. Then, optimal taxes
and debt exhibit a positive drift. In the long run, debt converges to b̄, the highest sustainable level.

         Insofar as π remains invariant to b, the above result continues to apply even if we let V increase
with b (for some unmodeled reason). This clarifies how the lessons obtained in this paper depend
on the causal effect of public debt on interest rates—a causal effect that is corroborated by the
evidence in Krishnamurthy and Vissing-Jorgensen (2012). If it were not for this effect, the optimal
quantity of public debt would increase without bound.


7         Wars, Recessions, and Financial Crises
We now turn to the characterization of the optimal policy response to various shocks.34 As in
AMSS, the stochastic policy problem can only be solved numerically. Unlike AMSS, however, the
local stability of any steady-state point below satiation guarantees that, as long as we limit ourselves
to the study of small shocks in the neighborhood of such a steady state, we can analyze the optimal
policy response by studying the transitional dynamics of the deterministic model. What is more,
the analysis of Section 5 guarantees that, at least as long as we restrict attention to small shocks,
    34
         To this goal, we continue to assume that the only asset traded between the government and the private sector is
the risk-free bond. This keeps the analysis directly comparable to Barro and AMSS. At the end of the section, we
discuss an alternative that allows for state-contingent debt and builds a bridge to Lucas and Stokey (1983).


                                                             39
it makes no difference whether we conduct the analysis under the benchmark case in which there is
a unique steady state below satiation or in the more general case in which there may exist multiple
such steady states. In what follows, we therefore alternate between two complementary approaches:
we build intuition using the phase diagram of the deterministic model; we numerically illustrate the
impulse responses of the stochastic economy.

   Fiscal shocks. Consider the comparative dynamics of an unexpected, once and for all, increase
in g. This is illustrated in Figure 5. Prior to the change, the economy is assumed to be resting at
the steady-state point b∗old . The increase in g causes the ḃ = 0 locus to shift upwards, reflecting the
increase in the taxes required for balanced budget. By contrast, the λ̇ = 0 locus does not move,
because g does not enter the planner’s Euler condition. It follows that the steady-state level of debt
drops from b∗old to b∗new . The optimal dynamic response is therefore as follows: on impact, λ and the
associated tax rate jump up from their old steady-state values to values that set the economy on a
new saddle path; thereafter, debt and tax monotonically decrease towards the new steady state, so
that the government runs a surplus along the transition.
   To understand the logic of this policy response, compare it with that obtained in the Barro/AMSS
benchmark, that is, in the absence of the financial friction. In that benchmark, the optimal response
to an unexpected, once and for all, change in government spending is to restore budget balance and
keep the level of debt constant for ever. Relative to this response, the optimal response in our model
is to raise taxes even more in the short run, but to lower them in the long run. In effect, the policy
maker deviates from tax smoothing in order to reduce liquidity, raise the premium, and thereby
partially offset the higher tax burden.

                        Figure 5: Permanent Increase in Government Spending

                         λ


                                                                     ḃ = 0



                                                                         ḃ = 0
                                       ∆g > 0
                                                                         λ̇ = 0




                                                b∗new        b∗old                b



   The same logic underlies the optimal response to transitory fiscal shocks, what is often referred
to in the literature as “wars”. We illustrate this in Figure 6, using the impulse response functions
of a stochastic example (instead of the deterministic phase diagram). In this example, government


                                                        40
spending is assumed to follow a two-state Markov process, with values gp in the “peace” state and
gw in the “war” state (gw > gp ), and with transition matrix given by
                                                   "                        #
                                                         qp        1 − qp
                                                       1 − qw       qw

where qp and qw are the probabilities of staying in the same state.
       Figure 6 shows the impulse response of the debt level and the tax rate to the realization of a
war, both in a numerical version of our baseline model (black lines) and, for comparison, in its
Barro/AMSS counterpart (red lines). In the top panel, the war is assumed to last only one period
(qp = 1 − qw = 0.9, implying that a 1 period war occurs every 10 periods on average); in the bottom
panel, the war is moderately persistent (qp = qw = 0.9). In both cases, Barro/AMSS predict that the
war leaves a permanent mark on the level of debt and the rate of taxation, reflecting the unit-root
property of that benchmark. Furthermore, the size of the tax response is simply the change in the
annuity value of government spending. In our setting, by contrast, the debt level eventually reverts
to its initial position, reflecting the determinacy of the long-run target level of debt. Furthermore,
the accumulation of debt during the war is less pronounced than that in Barro/AMSS, because
doing so permits the planner to moderate the reduction in the liquidity premium, which would
have further tightened the budget.35 By the same token, the planner raises taxes and runs smaller
deficits during the war, but also enjoys lower taxes in the aftermath of the war.

       Productivity Shocks and Traditional Recessions. Consider an adverse productivity shock.
In the Barro/AMSS benchmark, the optimal policy response to such a shock is analogous to that
of a “war”, because both shocks boil down to tightening the government budget. In our context,
this analogy is preserved only as long as the productivity shock does not affect the severity of the
financial friction, a situation that we interpret as a “traditional recession”. However, as long as
pledgeable income covaries with productivity, which is indeed the case in our baseline model as long
as ξ > 0, the collateral constraint hardens during a recession. How this new effect reshapes the
optimal policy response is discussed next.

       Financial Recessions. Consider an exogenous shock that causes income to fall, the tax basis
to shrink, and both the private and the social value of liquidity to increase. As noted above, such a
shock could be a negative productivity shock in our baseline model as long as ξ > 0. Alternatively, it
could be a negative shock to ξ itself, that is, an exogenous tightening of the collateral constraint.36
  35
       If the war is sufficiently persistent, this mechanism becomes so strong that the level of debt actually falls, as in
the example with the permanent change discussed earlier.
  36
     To be precise, in our baseline model, a shock to ξ affects the private and social value of liquidity, but does not
affect income and the tax basis; this is because the financial friction affects only the distribution of consumption. In
the variant of Appendix A, on the other hand, a negative shock to ξ affects, not only the value of liquidity, but also
income and tax revenue; this is because the friction distorts the allocation of capital and reduces aggregate TFP.


                                                              41
                      Figure 6: Reponse to a War Shock (AMSS)

                                             (a) i.i.d. Case
0.020
                     Public Debt                       0.020
                                                                            Optimal Tax Rate


0.015                                                  0.015


0.010                                                  0.010


                                                       0.005
0.005

                                                       0.000
0.000
        0   5   10   15     20     25   30   35   40           0   5   10    15     20     25   30   35   40
                          Period                                                  Period

                                        (b) Persistent Case
0.080
                     Public Debt                       0.020
                                                                            Optimal Tax Rate
0.070
0.060                                                  0.015
0.050
0.040                                                  0.010

0.030
                                                       0.005
0.020
0.010
                                                       0.000
0.000
        0   5   10   15     20     25   30   35   40           0   5   10    15     20     25   30   35   40
                          Period                                                  Period
Debt and Taxes in our Model;                   Debt and Taxes in AMSS;                     Government Spending.




                                                   42
More generally, we use the aforementioned shock to proxy for “financial recessions”, that is, for
recessions featuring an aggravated financial friction and a higher-than-usual demand for collateral.37
       By raising both the private and the social value of liquidity, the shock can have an ambiguous
effect on the ratio v/π. It may also have an ambiguous effect on σ. In the absence of any strong
priors on the relative size of these effects, we focus on the scenario in which both the wedge between
v and π and the elasticity σ remain constant. This scenario has two advantages: it keeps the analysis
close to the literature on the Friedman rule, where v/π is a fortiori fixed at 1; and it leads to a
sharp characterization of the optimal response.38
       Under this scenario, the λ̇ = 0 locus does not shift in response to the shock. This reflects the
offsetting effects that the shock has on the social value of liquidity and on the planner’s opportunity
cost of supplying liquidity: the aggravated friction presents the planner with an opportunity to
extract more seigniorage at the margin, which in turn negates the apparent increase in the social
value of easing the friction. It follows that the optimal policy response is dictated by the shift in
the ḃ locus, that is, by the impact of the shock on the budget constraint.
       By shrinking the tax basis, the shock causes the ḃ = 0 locus to shift upwards, reflecting an
increase in the tax burden. If that were the only effect on the budget constraint, the optimal policy
response would be analogous to the case of an adverse fiscal shock, which has already been analyzed.
There is, however, an important offsetting effect. By raising the liquidity premium π, the shock
also raises the implicit seigniorage that the government enjoys in terms of a lower cost of borrowing.
This increase helps mitigate, and may even overturn, the reduction in tax revenue.
       Depending on which effect dominates, the ḃ = 0 locus could therefore shift either way. If
the interest-rate effect dominates, a financial recession looks, paradoxically, more like a traditional
boom: the ḃ = 0 locus shifts down, meaning that the tax burden falls. But even if the tax-revenue
effect dominates, as long as the interest rate falls, the tax burden increases less than otherwise.
It follows that the optimal policy response to a financial recession features necessarily a smaller
increase in the tax rate, and hence also a larger increase in the primary deficit, than a comparable
traditional recession, by which we mean a recession that involves the same reduction in tax revenue
but no exogenous movement in the liquidity premium and the interest rate.
       Figure 7 uses a numerical example to illustrate how the above logic, which is based on the phase
diagram of the deterministic model, shapes also the IRFs of the stochastic model. The orange lines
  37
       To map this to our reduced-form policy problem, let z denote the shock; let S(τ, z), π(b, z), and v(b, z) denote the
tax revenue, the liquidity premium, and the marginal social value of liquidity as functions of the shock; and finally
let S increase with z, and π and v decrease with it, so that a “financial recession” corresponds to a low realization for
z. As in our analysis of “wars”, we first develop intuition by treating z as a parameter in the phase diagram of the
deterministic model, and then use a numerical example to illustrate the stochastic extension.
  38
     This scenario, however, abstracts from the possibility that fire-sale externalities are exacerbated during a financial
crisis; see footnote 40 for a discussion of how this possibility influences the optimal policy response.




                                                             43
correspond to the case in which the shock does not have a direct effect on the interest rate.39 The
black lines, instead, correspond to the knife-edge case in which the interest-rate effect negates the
tax-revenue effect exactly. More specifically, our example imposes that the increase in π(b)b equals
the reduction in S(τ ) when b and τ equal to their steady-state values, as well as that v increases in
proportion to π. These assumptions guarantee that, following the shock, the planner experiences
no change in either the budget constraint or the Euler condition, and therefore she finds it optimal
to keep both τ and b constant at these values. It follows that the entire drop in tax revenue during
the recession is debt-financed. And yet, the higher deficits do not translate to a higher debt burden
over time, because the government is now able to “refinance” its original debt at lower interest rates.

                                               Figure 7: IRF to a Financial Shock


 0.005
            Interest Rate           0.020
                                               Primary Deficit           0.025
                                                                                     Public Debt             0.016
                                                                                                                      Optimal Tax Rate
 0.000                                                                   0.020                               0.014
-0.005                              0.015                                                                    0.012
-0.010                                                                   0.015                               0.010
                                    0.010                                                                    0.008
-0.015                                                                   0.010                               0.006
-0.020                              0.005
                                                                         0.005                               0.004
-0.025                              0.000                                                                    0.002
-0.030                                                                   0.000                               0.000
-0.035                              -0.005                              -0.005                              -0.002
         0 5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40            0 5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40            0 5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40            0 5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40
                Period                              Period                              Period                              Period
                                                      ∆π(b)b = 0;           ∆π(b)b = −∆T


       What if the interest-rate effect is present but weaker than the tax-revenue effect? Not surpris-
ingly, the optimal policy response is simply in-between the two case in the figure. The optimal deficit
is lower than in the knife-edge scenario studied above, but higher than in a comparable traditional
recession. By the same token, both the tax rate and the debt burden increase during the recession,
but less so than in the absence of the interest-rate effect.40 These findings provide a formal basis
for the argument that the reduction in the government’s cost of borrowing during a financial crisis
is a signal of the optimality of running larger deficits. But it is important to emphasize the part
of the statement that says “during a financial crisis”: as emphasized in the previous section, what
is key is not the variation in the observed interest rate per se, but rather the extent to which this
represents variation in the wedge between that rate and the shadow discount rate of the planner.
  39
       The shock is nevertheless allowed to have an indirect effect, insofar as the endogenous increase in the stock of
public debt is accompanied by an endogenous increase in the interest rate.
  40
     As noted before, these findings presume that v/π is invariant to the shock. We now discuss a plausible relaxation
of this assumption. Suppose π increases more than v during a financial recession. This could reflect the exaggeration
of fire-sale or other externalities that drive a wedge between the private and the social value of liquidity. Other things
equal, this raises the planner’s incentive to extract seigniorage, which tends to discourage liquidity provision. But it
also relaxes the budget more than in the benchmark in which v/π had stayed constant, helping justify a larger deficit.


                                                                    44
   Allowing for state-contingent debt. We conclude this section by discussing how our analysis
qualifies the insights of Lucas and Stokey (1983). Relative to Barro and AMSS, the key difference
in Lucas and Stokey (1983) is the availability of state-contingent debt. This makes it feasible for
the government to completely insulate its budget against any shock. But is it desirable to do so?
   The answer to this question is unambiguously “yes” in Lucas and Stokey (1983). This is because
the transfers implemented by state-contingent debt are non-distortionary, so that the planner nec-
essarily prefers them to any variation in the distortionary tax. This also explains why Lucas and
Stokey (1983) find that the tax distortion is smoothed, not only across dates, but also across states;
or, by the same token, why the optimal allocation is history-independent, in sharp contrast to the
unit-root persistence predicted by Barro and AMSS.
   The answer differs in our setting. When state-contingent debt is available, our planner maintains
the option to equate the shadow cost of taxation across different histories of shocks, exactly as in
Lucas and Stokey (1983). But unlike that environment, the planner no longer finds it optimal to
do so. Instead, he finds it optimal to deviate from tax smoothing across states, in a manner that
resembles the departure from smoothing taxes across dates in the deterministic model.
   The rationale is simple. In order to eliminate variation in the shadow cost of taxation, the planner
would have to endure a non-trivial variation in the aggregate collateral, or liquidity, of the private
sector. Starting from this reference point, a small mean-preserving reduction in the variation of the
value of government liabilities leads to a second-order welfare loss in terms of increased variation
in the cost of taxation but to a first-order welfare gain in terms of reduced variation in the social
value of liquidity and/or seigniorage collected. It follows that the optimal policy accommodates
some variation in the tax distortion in order to smooth the supply of liquidity to the private sector.
But this also means that the economy behaves as if the planner did not have access to a complete
set of state contingent debt instruments: the optimal tax and the optimal allocation depend on the
history of fiscal shocks as if those were (partially) uninsurable.
   We illustrate this property in Figure 8 using a persistent war. This is exactly the same as in
the bottom of Figure 6, except that now debt is allowed to be state-contingent. The black lines
give the impulse responses of the market value of debt and the tax rate in our model; the orange
lines give their Lucas-Stokey counterparts, i.e., those that obtain in the absence of the financial
friction. In both cases, the market value of debt jumps down in response to the war, reflecting the
state-contingency of the debt burden. But the drop is more modest in the presence of the financial
friction (black line), reflecting the planner’s desire to limit the reduction in aggregate collateral. By
the same token, the planner in our setting opts to raise more taxes during the war, while in the
Lucas-Stokey benchmark the tax rate does not change at all.
   To sum up, once public debt is non-neutral for the reasons we have accommodated in this paper,
the difference between Barro/AMSS and Lucas-Stokey is attenuated: the qualitative response of


                                                   45
                                Figure 8: Response to a war shock, with state-contingent debt

                    0.020
                                         Public Debt                       0.020
                                                                                                Optimal Tax Rate

                    0.000
                                                                           0.015

                   -0.020
                                                                           0.010
                   -0.040
                                                                           0.005
                   -0.060

                                                                           0.000
                   -0.080
                            0   5   10   15     20     25   30   35   40           0   5   10    15     20     25   30   35   40
                                              Period                                                  Period
                                    Our Model;              Lucas-Stokey;              Government Spending Shock


the optimal tax and the optimal allocation is the same whether the government has access to
state-contingent debt or not.


8         Concluding remarks
The Great Recession has rekindled interest on the macroeconomic effects and the policy implications
of financial frictions. In the presence of such frictions, debt instruments issued by the government
can serve, not only as store of value, but also as collateral or vehicles of private liquidity: they
help private agents relax the bite of certain trading frictions, a function that gets reflected in their
price. This indicates a formal connection between this new literature and the earlier literature on
the Friedman rule: public debt in the former is similar to “outside money” in the latter literature.
         This connection has not gone unnoticed.41 Yet, the literature has lacked a theoretical analysis
of how optimal fiscal policy is determined when the net indebtedness of the government influences
the severity of financial frictions. The present paper makes a contribution towards filling this gap.
         In the environment we study, the government can ease the underlying financial friction only
by raising the net debt position of the government. This leads to the intertwining of fiscal policy
with the government’s role in facilitating private liquidity—an intertwining that is absent in the
Friedman-rule literature and that is the key to understanding, not only the novelty of our results,
but also their likely robustness.
         Optimal policy balances three objectives: smoothing taxes; easing financial frictions; and man-
aging the government’s cost of borrowing. In our preferred scenario, the analogue of the Friedman
rule does not apply either in the short or in the long run: the financial distortion is preserved
in steady state in order to depress the interest rate on public debt. In contrast to the standard
    41
         See, for instance, the recent contributions of Stein (2012), Krishnamurthy and Vissing-Jorgensen (2012), and
Brunnermeier and Sannikov (2016).



                                                                       46
Ramsey framework, the optimal dynamics around such a steady state features mean reversion and
a departure from tax smoothing. Finally, new insights emerge about the optimal policy response to
shocks and about the sense in which a financial crisis makes it cheap for the government to borrow.
   Similarly to the growing literature on “quantitative easing”, our paper touches on how the balance
sheet of the government can influence the level of risk-sharing within the private sector. In contrast
to that literature, we shift the focus on the role played by the net debt position of the government,
as opposed to the composition of its portfolio. The insights obtained, however, are relevant also
for understanding the optimal portfolio choice. For instance, whereas the aforementioned literature
emphasizes the benefits of reducing certain risk and liquidity premia in asset markets, our analysis
indicates that lower premia can backfire by raising the cost of servicing the existing stock of public
debt. An interesting direction for future research could therefore be to embed the trade offs identified
in the present paper to models that allow for the relevant compositional effects, such as Cúrdia and
Woodford (2011) and Brunnermeier and Sannikov (2014, 2016).
   Another interesting direction for future research is to extend our analysis to settings that con-
tain nominal rigidity. As noted in the Introduction, financial frictions have been suggested as an
explanation for why the zero-lower bound on monetary policy became binding during the recent
recession (Eggertsson and Krugman, 2012 and Guerrieri and Lorenzoni, 2011). But if public debt
management can ease these frictions and raise the natural rate of interest, perhaps it can also relax
the ZLB constraint on monetary policy. This kind of interaction between fiscal and monetary policy
remains to be explored.




                                                  47
Appendix A: Variant Model and Reinterpretation
In this appendix we present a variant model in which the financial friction impedes the allocation of capital across
“entrepreneurs”, as opposed to the allocation of a good across “consumers”. This variant offers, not only an illustration
of the broader applicability of the policy insights we developed in the main text, but also a bridge to the literature
that emphasizes the role of collateral in the production side of the economy, as in Kiyotaki and Moore (1997) and
Holmström and Tirole (1998).
       There is only one good, which can be either consumed or converted into capital. There are no taste shocks
and per-period utility is given by cit − ν(hit ), where cit denotes consumption and hit denotes labor supply. Each
household comprises a “worker”, who supplies hit in a competitive labor market, and an “entrepreneur”, who runs a
private firm. The latter’s output is given by yit = θit f (kit , nit ), where kit is the firm’s capital input, nit is the firm’s
employment, and θit is an idiosyncratic productivity shock. f (·, ·) is strictly increasing and strictly concave.
       Let κit denote the amount of capital owned by household i in the morning of period t. It is given by κit =
(1 − δ)κit−1 + ιit−1 , where δ denotes depreciation and ιit−1 denotes last period’s saving. The firm’s input kit can
differ from κit insofar as entrepreneurs can rent capital from one another. Such trades are beneficial because κit is
fixed prior to the realization of the current shocks, whereas kit and nit adjust ex post. In short, there are gains from
reallocating capital.
       Importantly, this reallocation is impeded by a financial friction. Let pt denote the rental rate of capital. To use
kit > κit , the entrepreneur must borrow zit = pt (kit − κit ) in a short-term IOU market. As in the baseline model, he
can do so by pledging φ and/or by posting his financial assets, ait , as collateral. Moreover, he can use a fraction of
the invested capital and/or the firm’s output as additional collateral. That is, the relevant constraint is

                                                zit ≤ φ + ait + ξk kit + ξy yit

where ξk , ξy ∈ (0, 1) are the fractions of invested capital and of anticipated income that can serve as collateral. Finally,
the agent can also borrow in the afternoon, if he wishes so, but only subject to the constraint ait+1 ≤ φ + κit+1 ; that
is, his net worth cannot fall below φ.
       Relative to the baseline model, the model described above facilitates a different interpretation of the financial
friction. It also features distinct positive implications. First, the financial friction can manifest itself as cross-sectional
heterogeneity in the marginal product of capital. Second, by easing the reallocation of capital, higher public debt
can lead to higher aggregate productivity, as in Holmström and Tirole (1998). Last but not least, by satisfying part
of the economy’s demand for collateral, public debt can crowd out capital accumulation, an effect similar to that in
Aiyagari and McGrattan (1998).
       Notwithstanding these differences, the nature of the policy problem remains essentially the same. In particular,
it can be shown that the following variant of Proposition 2 holds.

Proposition 12. There exist functions W, Q, and S such that the optimal policy path {τt , bt+1 }∞
                                                                                                t=0 solves the following
problem:
                                                           ∞
                                                           X
                                                     max         β t W (τt , bt )                                          (36)
                                                           t=0

                                      subject to   Q(τt+1 , bt+1 )bt+1 = bt + g − S(τt , bt )                              (37)

       To relate this proposition to Proposition 2, note that W , Q, and S capture, respectively, the per-period welfare
flow, the market price of public debt and the tax revenue.42 As we move from the baseline model to the new model,
  42
       In the baseline model, because the tax revenue, s, was merely a function of the tax rate only, we found it
convenient to express the problem directly in terms of s. In the current model, this mapping is not as direct and,
accordingly, we keep the tax rate as a control variable.


                                                                 48
the micro-foundations that underlie these objects change, and so do their functional forms. For instance, the two
distortions now have non-separable effects on welfare, interest rates, and the tax base. Yet, the strategy for obtaining
the desired representation remains the same: the key step is to define W as the welfare flow that obtains when the
planner takes as given (τt , bt ) and optimizes over the set of the cross-sectional allocations of labor, capital, and asset
holdings and the aggregate supplies of capital and labor; Q and S are then defined by, respectively, the interest rate
that supports the best implementable allocation and the primary surplus induced by it. Importantly, the only reason
why W , Q and S depend on b is that the latter controls the financial friction. The representation obtained therefore
encapsulates, once again, the dual role of the financial distortion on welfare and the government budget. What is
new relative to the baseline model is that the financial friction affects the budget, not only via interest rates, but also
via the tax base: by interfering with the allocation of capital, it affects wages, income, and tax revenue for any given
tax rate. However, neither this feature nor the details of the underlying micro-foundations need alter the properties
of optimal policy.
    In particular, consider the following continuous-time policy problem which is motivated by the preceding micro-
foundations and which also nests the policy problem we studied before:
                                               ˆ +∞
                                           max       e−ρt W (τ, b)dt                                                   (38)
                                                        0

                                    subject to   ḃ = [ρ − π(τ, b)]b + g − S(τ, b) ∀t                                  (39)
                                                             b(0) = b0                                                 (40)

Suppose that the functions W, S, π are continuously differentiable in both τ and b. Suppose further that there exists
a function bbliss such that ρ > π(τ, b) > 0 and Wb (b, τ ) > 0 if b < bbliss (τ ), whereas π(τ, b) = Wb (b, τ ) = 0 if
b ≥ bbliss (τ ); this allows for the possibility that the “satiation point” beyond which the friction ceases to bind may
depend on the tax rate. Similarly, let bseig (τ ) ≡ arg max {π(τ, b)b + S(τ, b)} ; this is the analogue to the level of
debt that maximized seigniorage in our baseline model, except that now we accommodate the possibility that the
quantity of aggregate collateral affects the government budget, not only via the interest rate on public debt, but also
via aggregate output and tax revenue. Adjusting the notion of “liquidity plus seigniorage” accordingly gives

                                     Ω(b, λ) ≡ max {W (τ, b) + λ[π(τ, b)b + S(τ, b)]} .
                                                  τ

We can express the planner’s Euler condition as

                                                      λ̇ = Γ(b, λ) ≡ Ωb (b, λ),

which has exactly the same interpretation as its counterpart in our baseline model. Similarly, we can express the
budget constraint as
                                                            ḃ = Ψ(b, λ),
where Ψ(b, λ) ≡ [ρ − π(T (λ), b)]b − S(T (λ), b) and T (λ) = arg maxτ {W (τ, b) + λ[π(τ, b)b + S(τ, b)]} . We therefore
obtain –essentially– the same ODE system as in our baseline model; the underlying micro-foundations and some
details are different but the essence remains the same.
    We illustrate this in Figure 9. For this example, we assume that [π(τ, b)b + S(τ, b)], is single-peaked in b. This
guarantees that the phase diagram can be split in three regions. The boundaries of the regions are now curved,
rather than vertical, reflecting the fact that bseig and bbliss are allowed to vary with the rate of taxation and thereby
with λ. Other than this difference, however, the analysis of the phase diagram remains intact. In the example
under consideration, there happens to be a unique steady state in which the financial friction does not bind, and the
economy converges to it for all initial b0 < bskiba , for some bskiba .
    Although we will not provide a complete characterization of the more general class of policy problems using
this model, we hope to have conveyed the message that our insights are robust to different micro-foundations of the
financial friction and of the liqudity-enhancing role of public debt.


                                                                49
                                         Figure 9: Entrepreneurial Model

                                      λ̇ = 0                                                      ḃ = 0
                       λ



                  λskiba


                      λ]



                              L                                 M                          H


                                                 bseig                    b]          bbliss bskiba    b   b



                                       λ̇ = 0


Appendix B: Additional Results
B.1     Private versus social value of liquidity
Consider the micro-founded model of Section 2. Let a(θ, b) and P (b) denote the allocation of the bond and the price
of the afternoon good that obtains from solving the planning sub-problem (8)-(16) of Section 4 and, to simplify, let
a(θ, b) > −φ for all θ. From the definition of V (·) together with the fact that the aggregate net trade of the morning
good is zero in equilibrium, we have that
                                                         ˆ
                                           V (b) =           U(a(θ, b), θ, P (b))ϕ(θ)dθ

and therefore                                    ˆ
                                     V 0 (b) =       [Ua (·)ab (θ, b) + Up (·)Pb (b)] ϕ(θ)dθ.

From the household’s Euler condition (15), we have that Q(b) = β + Ua (.) for all θ. From the bond market clearing
                                ´
condition (Equation 10), we have   ab (θ, b)ϕ(θ)dθ = 1. Using these last two relations, we infer that

                                                         V 0 (b) = π(b) + e(b),
                                                          ´
where π(b) ≡ Q(b) − β is the market premium and e(b) ≡ Up (.)ϕ(θ)dθPb (b) is the relevant externality. Finally, it
                  ´
can be shown that Up (.)ϕ(θ)dθ and Pb (b) are strictly negative and strictly positive when the collateral constraint
binds with positive probability, and zero otherwise. The intuition is simple: as long as the constraint binds, a higher b
means a higher P because it facilitates a more efficient allocation of the morning good. A higher price has a negative
aggregate welfare effect because it tightens the constraint and distorts the allocation. As long as the constrain binds,
we therefore have e(b) < 0, or equivalently π(b) > V 0 (b).




                                                                  50
B.2      Additional Examples and Figures for Section 5
In Figure 3 in the main text, γ and ψ intersect three times. As noted there, this case imposes a certain structure, not
only for the local dynamics around the three steady states, but also about the global dynamics. We now consider two
alternative possibilities for the global dynamics, while maintaining the same configuration for the functions γ and ψ,
the same steady states, and the same local dynamics around them.

                              Figure 10: Optimal to Converge to b]H for all b0 < bskiba


                                                                                                  ḃ = 0
                   λ




                          λ̇ = 0




                                   b]L               b]M                b]H        bbliss   bskiba      b      b



    Consider Figure 10. Unlike Figure 3, the stable arm corresponding to the highest steady state no longer cycles
back to b#                             #                                                                      #
         M ; instead, it extends past bL . This has the following important implication. If we consider b0 = bL , then
there are two candidate optimal plans, namely the plan of staying put at b#                             #
                                                                          L and the plan that leads to bH . The
former plan is dominated because it features Hλ = ḃ = 0, whereas the latter features Hλ = ḃ > 0. By continuity, the
saddle path that leads to b#                                                          #
                           L is dominated also for any b0 in an open neighborhood of bL . But then the path leading
to b#
    L can never be optimal: if the economy were to follow this path starting from any initial point b0 , the economy
would enter the aforementioned neighborhood in finite time; at that point, switching paths would increase welfare,
which contradicts the optimality of the original path. We conclude that, contrary to what happens in Figure 3, the
path that leads to b#
                    H is now the optimal path for all b0 < bskiba .
    Figure 11 illustrates a diametrically opposite scenario from that shown in Figure 10: it is now the stable arm that
leads to b#                              #                 #
          L that fails to cycle back to bM , extends past bH , and dominates throughout. What the two scenarios share
in common that distinguishes from the scenario depicted in Figure 3 is the following: even though the ODE system
continues to admit multiple saddle-path stable steady states, the optimal policy now features a unique and globally
stable steady state in the region to the left of the satiation point, that is, optimal debt converges monotonically to
the same long run value b? for all initial values b0 ≤ bbliss .
    Let us now allow for the possibility that π(b)b is not single-peaked. Suppose that π(b)b has N local extrema,
denoted by {b1 , b2 , b3 , . . . , bN }, with b < b1 < b2 < . . . < bN < bbliss , where N is an arbitrary finite number. First, note
that σ(b) crosses 1 whenever b crosses any of these points. Next, note that the last point, namely bN , is necessarily a
local maximum, because after that point π(b)b falls to zero as b approaches bbliss . It follows that σ(b) is higher than
1 when b ∈ (bN , bbliss ), lower than 1 when b ∈ (bN −1 , bN ), higher than 1 when b ∈ (bN −2 , bN −1 ), and so on. By the


                                                                51
                             Figure 11: Optimal to Converge to b]L for all b0 < bskiba


                                                                                                 ḃ = 0
                  λ




                          λ̇ = 0




                                   b]L            b]M                 b]H      bbliss   bskiba        b   b



same token, γ is positively valued b ∈ (bN , bbliss ), negatively valued than 1 when b ∈ (bN −1 , bN ), positively valued
when b ∈ (bN −2 , bN −1 ), and so on. We illustrate this in Figure 12. The phase diagram now looks like the product
of patching together multiple pairs of L and M regions from our earlier examples: within any of the regions in which
σ(b) > 1, we can have have an arbitrary number of intersections between γ and ψ, and a plethora of possibilities for
dynamics.
    We finally revisit the role of the condition γbliss < ψbliss . As shown in the main text, this condition is sufficient
for satiation not to obtain in the long run, not only in our benchmark, but also in general. We now show, by example,
that this condition is not necessary away from our benchmark.
    Consider Figure 13. As in our benchmark (see Figure 1 in particular), letting γbliss > ψbliss guarantees the local
existence of a candidate path that leads to satiation: for some  > 0 and all b0 ∈ (b0 − , bbliss ), there exists a path
that satisfies the ODEs at all dates and that asymptotically converges to bbliss . But unlike what was true in our
benchmark, this type of path does not exist for sufficiently low b0 . What is more, for all b0 < bbliss , there happens
to exist another candidate optimal path, namely the one that leads to a steady state below bbliss . Finally, note that
the path leading to bbliss features an initial value for ḃ that is arbitrarily close to 0 when b0 is close enough to bbliss ,
whereas the path leading to b#
                             L features a ḃ bounded way from zero. Using once again Lemma 4, the convexity of H
in λ, and the fact that Hλ = ḃ, we infer that the latter path dominates the former for b0 in a neighborhood of bbliss .
But this also means that the path leading to satiation can not be optimal for any initial b0 . Instead, there again exists
a bskiba > bbliss such that for all b0 < bskiba it is optimal to converge either to b#
                                                                                     L or to some point further below.




                                                             52
                                       Figure 12: Multiple Regions


                                                                                          ḃ = 0
λ
                                                          λ̇ = 0
        λ̇ = 0




                           b]L     b]M                         b]H      bbliss   bskiba         b       b
                                                λ̇ = 0




                          Figure 13: No Satiation Despite ψbliss < γbliss


                                                                                    ḃ = 0
    λ




                 λ̇ = 0




                                 b]L                     b]H         bbliss                 b       b




                                                   53
Appendix C: Proofs
Proof of Proposition 1.        Let us start from the initial problem
                                       "∞                                #
                                         X t
                                    E0       β (cit + θu(xit ) − ν(hit ))
                                          t=0

                                   s.t. cit + pt xit + qt ait+1 = ait + (1 − τt )wt hit + pt e
                                       pt (xit − e) ≤ ξwt hdef
                                                           it + ait

                                        − ait+1 ≤ ξwt+1 hdef
                                                         it+1

Assuming a zero tax rate when there is default, the labor supply in the event of default solves

                                                    ν 0 (hdef
                                                          it ) = (1 − ξ)wt

because the marginal utility of the afternoon consumption good, and hence the Lagrange multiplier associated to
the budget constraint, is 1. Using the fact that the equilibrium wage rate is A, the two financial constraints can be
written as

                                                         zit ≤φ + ait
                                                         ait ≥ − φ

where φ ≡ ξA(ν 0 )−1 ((1 − ξ)A) and zit = pt (xit − e). Let us define e
                                                                      cit = cit + zit . We then have
                                      "∞                                                #
                                        X t
                                   E0      β (cit + θu(xit ) − pt (xit − e) − ν(hit ))
                                          t=0

                                         cit + qt ait+1 = ait + (1 − τt )wt hit
                                    s.t. e
                                        pt (xit − e) ≤ φ + ait
                                        ait+1 ≥ −φ

Consider now the sub problem of determining the demand for the morning good. This problem is purely static and
is given by

                                                   max [θu(x) − p (x − e)]
                                                     x

                                                   s.t. p (x − e) ≤ φ + a

which gives x = X (a, θ, p) and an indirect utility net of the cost of purchasing u(a, θ, p) = θu (X (a, θ, p)) − pX (a, θ, p).
Defining the discounted expected indirect utility of the morning good as
                                                       ˆ
                                        U(a, θ, p) ≡ β u(a, θ0 , p)ϕ(θ0 |θ)dθ0

and using it in the optimization program allows us to write it as
                                        "∞                                           #
                                         X t
                                     E0        cit − ν(hit ) + U(ait+1 , θt , pt+1 ))
                                            β (e
                                            t=0

                                           cit + qt ait+1 = ait + (1 − τt )wt hit
                                      s.t. e
                                          ait+1 ≥ −φ

q.e.d.                                                                                                                       

Proof of Proposition 2.        The proposition is a direct consequence of the discussion that precedes it and from the
definitions of the functions V (b), Q, U and S.
q.e.d.                                                                                                                       


                                                               54
Proof of Lemma 1.         Proved in the main text.

Proof of Theorem 1.         Proved in the main text (Section 5).

Proof of Lemma 2.         Recall that bseig = arg maxb π(b)b, so that bseig solves π(b)(1 − σ(b)) = 0. Note that, for
bseig to be a maximum, the following has to hold: π(b)(1 − σ(b)) ≷ 0 for b ≶ bseig . From the definition of γ and the
assumption V 0 (b) ∝ π(b), we have
                                                                1
                                           γ(b) ∝                        ≶ 0 for b ≶ bseig
                                                          π(b)(σ(b) − 1)
The latter result together with the definition of bseig implies that limb↑bseig γ(b) = −∞ and limb↓bseig γ(b) = ∞.
Finally, as b increases above bseig , π(b)(1 − σ(b)) < 0 and γ(b) < ∞. Together with the monotonicity of σ(b), this
implies that γ(b) is decreasing over the domain [b, bbliss ).
q.e.d.                                                                                                                      

Proof of Lemma 3.        From Lemma 2, we know that ψ(b) and γ(b) can only intersect in (bseig , bbliss ). Given (i) the
monotonicity of σ(b) and hence γ(b), (ii) the fact that ψ(b) is increasing and (iii) limb↓bseig γ(b) = ∞, γ(b) and ψ(b)
can intersect at most once. If γbliss > ψbliss , (i) and (iii) imply that γ(b) lies above ψ(b) everywhere in (bseig , bbliss ]
and therefore they never intersect. In γbliss < ψbliss , (i)–(iii) imply that they intersect only once.
q.e.d.                                                                                                                      

Proof of Proposition 3.        Let us first consider b0 ≥ bbliss . In this case, V 0 (b) = π(b) = 0 and the ODE system
reduces to

                                                                ḃ = ρb − S(λ)
                                                                λ̇ = 0

implying that λ and hence the tax rate is perfectly smoothed, so that b stays put at b0 . This is the celebrated Barro
tax smoothing result.
     Let us now consider b0 < bbliss . Let us first assume that γ(bbliss ) > ψ(bbliss ) and define λbliss = ψ(bbliss ). Using
the fact that with satiation π(b) = 0, the approximate local dynamics around the satiation point are given by
                                                                                                             !
                                                                                                     ρ
                                                                      ρ                       − ψ0 (bbliss )
                    Ẋ(t) = JX(t) with J =
                                              V 00 (b) − λbliss π 0 (bbliss )(σ(bbliss ) − 1)       0

Note that Tr(J)=ρ > 0 so that the two eigenvalues of J sum up to a positive number. The determinant of J is given
by
                                            ρ
                                                          V 00 (bbliss ) − ψ(bbliss )π 0 (bbliss )(σ(bbliss ) − 1)
                                                                                                                     
                            det(J) =
                                       ψ 0 (b   bliss )

By assumption, γ(bbliss ) > ψ(bbliss ), we have
                                             ρ
                                                     V 00 (bbliss ) − γ(bbliss )π 0 (bbliss )(σ(bbliss ) − 1)
                                                                                                              
                            det(J) <
                                       ψ 0 (bbliss )

At bbliss , both V 0 (b) and π(b) are zero, therefore γ(bbliss ) obtains from L’Hôpital’s rule as

                                                                                V 00 (bbliss )
                                                  lim     γ(b) =
                                            b→bbliss                π 0 (b   bliss )(σ(bbliss ) − 1)

implying that det(J) < 0. Furthermore, the discriminant of the polynomial associated with the eigenvalue problem is
strictly positive, ∆ = ρ2 − 4 det(J) > 0. Taken together, these results imply that the two eigenvalues are real, add up




                                                                         55
to a positive number and are of opposite sign. The local dynamics around the point (bbliss , λbliss ) therefore satisfy a
saddle path property. It is also easy to show that the eigenvector associated to the stable eigenvalue is given by
                                                                      √ 
                                                          ρ         ρ+ ∆
                                             v=                   ,
                                                    ψ 0 (bbliss )     2
and is not degenerate as ψ 0 (b) > 0. In other words, starting from b(0) ∈ {bbliss − ε; ε > 0}, there exists a unique path
taking the economy to satiation. This establishes the first part of the proposition.
    Let us now consider a situation where γ(bbliss ) < ψ(bbliss ). In this case, the inequality established for the
determinant of J is reversed and det(J) > 0. The two eigenvalues have the same sign and sum up to a positive
number, and are therefore positive. (bbliss , λbliss ) is not locally stable and starting from b < bbliss , there exists no
path leading the economy towards it.
q.e.d.                                                                                                                            

Proof of Lemma 4.          See Brock and Dechert (1983).

Proof of Proposition 4.           The discussion preceding the proposition in the main text establishes the existence of
bskiba by using a continuity argument. Here we analyze the stability of the steady state (b] , λ] ).
    The linear approximation of the system of the ODEs around a stationary point (b] , λ] ) is given by
                                                                                                           !
                                   ρ + $V 0 (b] )(σ(b] ) − 1)                            −S 0 (λ] )
        Ẋ(t) =                                                                                              X(t) = JX(t)
                  V 00 (b] ) − λ] $V 00 (b] )(σ(b] ) − 1) − λ] $V 0 (b] )σ 0 (b] ) −$V 0 (b] )(σ(b] ) − 1)

where $ ≡ π(b)/V 0 (b) and X(t) ≡ (b(t) − b] , λ(t) − λ] )0 . Using the definitions of the functions ψ(b), γ(b) and their
respective derivatives, the matrix J, evaluated at (b] , λ] ), is
                                                     0 ]
                                                                                    0 ]
                                                                                           
                                             ρ + Vγ(b(b] ))           1
                                                                 − ψ0 (b])  ρ + Vγ(b(b] ))
                                     J=                0 ]                  0 ]
                                                                                            
                                            γ 0 (b] ) Vγ(b(b] ))         − Vγ(b(b] ))

First note that the trace of matrix J is given by ρ > 0, implying that the two eigenvalues of J sum up to a positive
number. The determinant of the J matrix, evaluated at (b] , λ] ), is

                                           V 0 (b] )       V 0 (b] )
                                                                     0 ]         
                                                                       γ (b )
                                 det(J) =              ρ +                       − 1
                                           γ(b] )          γ(b] )      ψ 0 (b] )

Given that b] < bbliss , σ(b] ) < 1, γ(b] ) > 0 and V 0 (b] ) > 0. Finally, from Lemma 2, we know that γ 0 (b) < 0 for
b ∈ (bseig , bbliss ]. Therefore, given that ψ 0 (b) > 0, det(J) < 0 and hence the two eigenvalues are distributed around
0. Therefore, (b] , λ] ) a saddle path stable.
    Note that, the stable root of the system is given by
                                                                             √
                                                                          ρ− ∆
                                                                     µ=
                                                                            2
                   0 ]
                                  V 0 (b] )        γ 0 (b] )
                                                               
where ∆ = ρ2 − 4 Vγ(b(b] )) ρ +   γ(b] )           ψ 0 (b] )
                                                               − 1 > 0 is the discriminant of the polynomial. Hence the eigenvector,
(v1 , v2 ), associated to this eigenvalue satisfies
                                                                 √ 
                                                     V 0 (b] )
                                           
                                             ρ                     ∆
                                                +              +     v1 − S 0 (λ)v2 = 0
                                             2       γ(b] )       2
                                            0 ]         √ 
Consider the eigenvector is S 0 (λ), ρ2 + Vγ(b(b] )) + 2∆ . Given that V 0 (b] ) > 0, γ(b] ) > 0 (since σ(b) > 1) and S 0 (λ) > 0
in the upward sloping part of the Laffer curve, both components of the vector are positive. The co-movement result
follows: For any ε > 0, starting from b0 = b] − ε (resp. b0 = b] + ε) , the economy will converge to (b] , λ] ) increasing
(resp. decreasing) both debt and taxes along the transition path.
q.e.d.                                                                                                                            


                                                                          56
Proof of Proposition 5.        Proved in the main text.

Proof of Proposition 6.        The linear approximation of the system of the ODEs around a stationary point (b] , λ] )
is given by
                                                                                                                 !
                                       ρ + π(b] )(σ(b] ) − 1)                                   −S 0 (λ] )
              Ẋ(t) =                                                                                                 X(t) = JX(t)
                        V 00 (b] ) − λ] π 0 (b] )(σ(b] ) − 1) − λ] π(b] )σ 0 (b] )       −π(b] )(σ(b] ) − 1)

with X(t) = (b(t) − b] , λ(t) − λ] )0 . Using the definitions of the functions ψ(b), γ(b), ψ 0 (b) and γ 0 (b), we can rewrite
the matrix J, evaluated at (b] , λ] ) as
                                                      0 ]
                                                                                                       
                                                                                           V 0 (b] )
                                                                              
                                              ρ + Vγ(b(b] ))              1
                                                                     − ψ0 (b])  ρ+          γ(b] )
                                         J=             0 ]                       0 ]
                                                                                                       
                                             γ 0 (b] ) Vγ(b(b] ))              − Vγ(b(b] ))

First note that the trace of matrix J is given by ρ > 0, implying that the two eigenvalues of J sum up to a positive
number. The determinant of the J matrix, evaluated at (b] , λ] ), is

                                           V 0 (b] )       V 0 (b] )
                                                                     0 ]         
                                                                       γ (b )
                                 det(J) =              ρ +                       − 1
                                           γ(b] )          γ(b] )      ψ 0 (b] )

Given that b] < bbliss , σ(b] ) < 1, γ(b] ) > 0 and V 0 (b] ) > 0. Therefore, the position of γ 0 (b] )/ψ 0 (b] ) with respect
to 1 determines the sign of the determinant, and hence the position of the two eigenvalues around 0. Note that a
steady state only exists in regions where σ(b] ) > 1 and hence γ(b] ) > 0. When γ 0 (b] ) < ψ 0 (b] ), det(J) < 0 and hence
the two eigenvalues are distributed around 0. Therefore, a saddle path exists (recall that Tr(J) = ρ > 0), hence
proving the first statement. In the opposite situation the two eigenvalues have positive real part, hence establishing
the explosiveness part of the proposition.
    The emergence of cycles is related to the real vs complex nature of the eigenvalues. This is established by looking
at the discriminant, ∆, of the characteristic polynomial:

                                                                     V 0 (b)            V 0 (b)         γ 0 (b)
                                                                                                                  
                             ∆ = (TrJ)2 − 4 det J = ρ2 − 4                         ρ+                           −1
                                                                     γ(b)               γ(b)            ψ 0 (b)
The two roots are complex if the discriminant is negative

                                                                                             ρ2 ψ 0 (b] )
                             ∆ < 0 ⇐⇒ γ 0 (b] ) > ψ 0 (b] ) + χ with χ ≡                       0 ]
                                                                                                         0 ]
                                                                                        4 ρ + Vγ(b(b] )) Vγ(b(b] ))

Therefore establishing the condition for the emergence of complex vs real explosive eigenvalues.
q.e.d.                                                                                                                               

Proof of Proposition 7.        The proof is given in the main text.

Proof of Theorem 2.        We prove this result with the help of Theorem 2 from Brock and Dechert (1983). Consider
the optimal policy rule for the co-state variable, namely the correspondence from any given b0 to the optimal value for
λ0 . Denote this correspondence by Λopt . Note that this is is a selection from the correspondence Λ (which was defined
in the context of Lemma 4). To illustrate, consider Figure 3. In this example, the aforementioned correspondence
is given by the combination of three segments: the thick green line on the left of b̂, plus the solid blue line between
b̂ and bskiba , plus the segment of the graph of the ḃ = 0 locus that rests on the right of bskiba . As it is evident in
this example, the correspondence λ∗ is single-valued and continuous for all b0 other than b̂; the discontinuity at b̂
reflects a switch in the optimal selection among different candidate paths. Moving beyond this specific example, the
policy rule for the co-state can feature multiple such discontinuities. Any such discontinuity, however, has to involve
a jump in a specific direction: applied to our setting, Theorem 2 from Brock and Dechert (1983) states that, at any


                                                                    57
point b̂ such that limb↑b̂ Λopt (b) 6= limb↓b̂ Λopt (b), it is necessarily the case that limb↑b̂ Λopt (b) > limb↓b̂ Λopt (b),43 In
other words, as we move from higher to lower levels of debt, the co-state can only jump upwards, which means that
the rate of taxation and the level of government surpluses must also jump upwards. It then follows that lower initial
conditions are necessarily associated with convergence to lower steady states, which in turn is the key to the result.
       Thus suppose there exists an initial point b0 = b̃0 such that it is optimal to converge to a point b∗ < bbliss .
Clearly, b∗ must be inside B # . Next, consider the set of points at which the policy rule of the co-state features a
discontinuity and let b̂ be the highest such point below b∗ ; if no such point exists, just let b̂ = b. When b0 ∈ (b̂, b̃0 ),
debt converges to b∗ . When instead b0 < b̂ (which, of course, is relevant only insofar as b̂ > b), debt converges to a
point that is below b̂, and hence also below b∗ , but still inside B # . It follows that there exists a point bskiba ≥ b∗
such that, when b0 ≤ bskiba , then and only then it is optimal to converge to a point inside B # .
       The above argument presumed the existence of an initial point at which it became optimal to converge to a point
below bbliss . If no such initial point exists, we simply let bskiba = b. This completes the proof of part (ii) of our
theorem.
       To prove part (iii), recall from Proposition 7 that ψbliss > γbliss is sufficient for bskiba > bbliss . It follows that
bskiba < bbliss is possible only insofar as ψbliss < γbliss , which in turn guarantees the existence of a candidate path
that converges to bbliss for any b0 ∈ [b̂, bbliss ) and some b̂ < bbliss . Clearly, b̂ ≤ bskiba . By definition of bskiba , the
optimal path is one of the candidate paths that converge to a point inside B # if and only if b0 < bskiba . Therefore,
for any b0 ∈ [bskiba , bbliss ), either the path that leads to bbliss is the unique candidate path, or it dominates any of
the candidate paths that lead to a point inside B # .
       Turning to part (i), note that this contains two subparts: one regarding b0 ∈ B ∗ , and another regarding b0 ≥
max{bskiba , bbliss }. Once part (ii) of the theorem is established, the first of the aforementioned two subparts is trivial:
it merely identifies B ∗ as the set of the steady states of the optimal policy that happen to lie below bbliss . The
second subpart, on the other hand, is proved by the following variant of the proof of part (ii). As long as b0 ≥ bbliss ,
there necessarily exists a Barro-like candidate path that keeps the level of debt constant at its initial value and the
premium at zero for ever. Whenever another candidate path exists, it converges to a point inside B # . By definition
of bskiba , such an path is optimal if and only if b0 < bskiba . It follows that, whenever b0 ≥ max{bbliss , bskiba }, either
the aforementioned Barro-like path is the unique candidate path or it dominates any alternative path.
q.e.d.                                                                                                                          

Proof of Theorem 3.          That any economy must belong to one of these three classes follows from Theorem 2. That
the first and the third classes are not empty follows from the examples we have already considered; an example of
the second class was provided in the Appendix. Finally, the claimed sufficiency of the condition ψbliss > γbliss follows
from Proposition 7.
q.e.d.                                                                                                                          

Proof of Lemma 5.           Note that ψbliss is continuous and increasing in g as long as g < gmax and diverges to +∞
as g → gmax . This is because a higher g requires higher taxes to balance the budget, and the marginal cost of
these taxes explodes to infinity as we approach the peak of the Laffer curve. Furthermore, ψbliss = 0 if and only if
g = −ρbbliss < 0. Finally, note that γbliss : is invariant to g; is positive for the reasons offered above; and is finite by
assumption. It then follows that there exists a threshold gb, necessarily less than gmax and possibly negative, such
that ψbliss > γbliss if and only if g > gb.
q.e.d.                                                                                                                          
  43
       At first glance, the original version of Theorem 2 in Brock and Dechert (1983) appears to state the opposite; the
apparent contradiction is resolved by noting that our co-state variable is defined with the opposite sign than theirs.




                                                               58
Proof of Proposition 8.        By the definition of b? ∈ B ? and b? < bbliss , we know that the point (b? , λ? ≡ ψ(ba st))
is locally stable. Similarly to Proposition 6, the local dynamics are given by
                                                                                                        !
                                       ρ + π(b? )(σ(b? ) − 1)                              −S 0 (λ? )
             Ẋ(t) =                                                                                        X(t) = JX(t)
                       V 00 (b? ) − λ? π 0 (b? )(σ(b? ) − 1) − λ? π(b? )σ 0 (b? )   −π(b? )(σ(b? ) − 1)
                                                                                                                     √
                                                                                                                   ρ− ∆
we know from proposition 6, that the eigenvalue associated with the stable arm is given by µ =                       2
                                                                                                                           with ∆ > 0
(see proof of Proposition 6). It is then straightforward to obtain the eigenvector v = (v1 , v2) satisfying
                                                              √ 
                                                  V 0 (b? )
                                            
                                              ρ                 ∆
                                                +           +      v1 − S 0 (λ)v2 = 0
                                              2   γ(b? )       2
                                 0 ?       √ 
An eigenvector is S 0 (λ), ρ2 + Vγ(b(b? )) + 2∆ . Given that V 0 (b? ) > 0, γ(b? ) > 0 (since σ(b) > 1) and S 0 (λ) > 0 in the
upward sloping part of the Laffer curve, both components of the vector are positive. The co-movement result follows:
For any ε > 0, starting from b0 = b? − ε (resp. b0 = b? + ε) , the economy will converge to (b? , λ? ) increasing (resp.
decreasing) both debt and taxes along the transition path.
q.e.d.                                                                                                                             

Proof of Proposition 9.        Any b? ∈ B ? is such that γ(b? ) = φ(b? ). Therefore, it inherits the comparative statics
of the γ and φ functions. The comparative statics are therefore identical to those already analyzed in proposition 5.
q.e.d.                                                                                                                             

Proof of Proposition 10.         The proof is given in the main text.

Proof of Proposition 12.        Let start with the entrepreneur. He chooses his production plan by solving the problem

                                                  max [θf (k, n) + (1 − δ)k − pk − wn]
                                             k≥0,n≥0

                                           subject to     z ≤ φ + a + ξk k + ξy θf (k, n)
                                                          z = p(k − κ)

Using the second constraint in the first one, and defining x ≡ a + pκ, as the net worth in period t, we obtain that
the profit of the entrepreneur net of investment and labor costs is

                                  ω(x, p, w; θ) ≡ max [θf (k, n) + (1 − δ)k − pk − wn]
                                                       k≥0,n≥0

                                        subject to      pk ≤ φ + x + ξk k + ξy θf (k, n)

The production plan consists of the demand for labor, n(x, p, w; θ), and the demand for capital, k(x, p, w; θ). The
aggregate quantities are
                                                                 ˆ
                                                  n(x, p, w) =       n(x, p, w; θ)ϕ(θ)dθ                                         (41)
                                                                 ˆ
                                                  k(x, p, w) =       k(x, p, w; θ)ϕ(θ)dθ                                         (42)

The problem of the household is
                                           "∞                         #
                                            X      t
                             max      E0          β (cit − ν(hit ))
                                            t=0

                               s.t.   cit + κit+1 + qt ait+1 = ait + pt κit + (1 − τt )wt hit + ωit




                                                                     59
where we assumed that ait < φ + κit . ωit denotes the profit received by household i. Note that (i) due to the
linearity of the utility of consumption,all households supply the same amount of hours; and (ii) E[cit ] is aggregate
consumption, ct . Using the asset market clearing condition
                                          ˆ
                                             ait di = bt

define aggregate capital as
                                                  ˆ
                                                      κit di = κt

and define
                                                                     ˆ
                                         Ω(x0 , p0 , w0 ; θ0 ) ≡ β       ω(x0 , p0 , w0 ; θ0 )ϕ(θ0 |θ)dθ0

The problem of the representative household is then
                                   ∞
                                   X
                          max            β t (ct − ν(ht ))
                                   t=0
                                                                                                       1
                           s.t.    ct + κt+1 + qt bt+1 = bt + pt κt + (1 − τt )wt ht +                   Ω(xt , pt ; θ)
                                                                                                       β
where xt = bt + pt κt . The first order conditions are given by

                                           ν 0 (ht ) = (1 − τt )wt                                                        (43)
                                                                                           0
                                                qt = β + Ωx (xt+1 , pt+1 , wt+1 ; θ )                                     (44)
                                                                                                   0   
                                                 1 = pt+1 β + Ωx (xt+1 , pt+1 , wt+1 ; θ )                                (45)

where the last two conditions imply that pt+1 = 1/qt , reflecting arbitrage between financial assets and physical
capital. Notwithstanding this fact, the interest rate is lower than 1/β when Ωx (·) > 0.
    The labor market clearing condition (ht = nt ), and the capital market clearing condition (kt = κt ) imply

                                                ν 0 (n(bt + pt kt , pt , wt )) = (1 − τt )wt
                                                                 kt = k(bt + pt kt , pt , wt )

which can be solved for the wage w(bt , kt , τt ) and the price of capital p(bt , kt , τt ). Using them in the aggregate
decisions for labor and capital, we have

                                                  ht = H(bt , τt ) and kt = K(bt , τt )                                   (46)

so that
                                                 wt = W (bt , τt ) and pt = P (bt , τt )                                  (47)

Likewise, using the resource constraint, we get

                                  ct = θf (kt , nt ) + (1 − δ)kt − kt+1 − g = C(b
                                                                              e t , τt ) − kt+1                           (48)

Using (46) and (48) in the welfare function, we get
                                  ∞                                      
                                          e t , τt ) − kt − ν(H(bt , τt )) + K(b0 , τ0 )
                                 X
                                     β t C(b
                                 t=0
                                                       β                        β

which can be written as
                                                      ∞
                                                      X                          K(b0 , τ0 )
                                                            β t W (τt , bt ) +
                                                      t=0
                                                                                    β



                                                                         60
    Likewise, using the preceding results in (44), we get

                                             qt = Q(τt+1 , bt+1 ; θ0 )
                                   τt wt ht − g = τt W (bt , τt )H(bt , τt ) − g = S(τt , bt )

and the government budget is
                                          Q(τt+1 , bt+1 ; θ0 )bt+1 = bt − S(τt , bt )

Hence, the problem of the central planner reduces to
                                                                 ∞
                                                                 X
                                                     max∞              β t W (τt , bt )
                                                  {τt ,bt }t=0
                                                                 t=0

                                   subject to     Q(τt+1 , bt+1 ; θ0 )bt+1 = bt − S(τt , bt )

q.e.d.                                                                                                  

Proof of Proposition 11.       The proposition is a direct consequence of the fact that λ̇ = π̄λ > 0.




                                                                 61
References
Aiyagari, S. Rao, Albert Marcet, Thomas Sargent, and Jesus Seppälä. (2002) “Optimal
  Taxation without State-Contingent Debt.” Journal of Political Economy, 110(6): 1220–1254.

Aiyagari, S. Rao, and Ellen McGrattan. (1998) “The Optimum Quantity of Debt.” Journal of
  Monetary Economics, 42(3): 447–469.

Barro, Robert J. (1979) “On the Determination of the Public Debt.” Journal of Political Economy,
  87(5): 940–971.

Bewley, Truman F. (1980) “The Optimum Quantity of Money.” In Models of Monetary Economics.
  , ed. J. Kareken and N. Wallace. Minneapolis, Minnesota:Federal Reserve Bank.

Brock, William A., and W.D. Dechert. (1983) “The Generalized Maximum Principle.” Uni-
  versity of Wisconsin miméo.

Brunnermeier, Markus K., and Yuliy Sannikov. (2014) “A Macroeconomic Model with a
  Financial Sector.” American Economic Review, 104(2): 379–421.

Brunnermeier, Markus K., and Yuliy Sannikov. (2016) “The I-Theory of Money.” Princeton
  University miméo.

Buera, Francisco J. (2008) “Persistency of Poverty, Financial Frictions, and Entrepreneurship.”
  Northwestern University miméo.

Buera, Francisco, Joseph Kaboski, and Yongseok Shin. (2011) “Finance and Development:
  A Tale of Two Sectors.” American Economic Review, 101: 1964–2002.

Chari, V.V., Lawrence Christiano, and Patrick Kehoe. (1996) “Optimality of the Friedman
  Rule in Economies with Distorting Taxes.” Journal of Monetary Economics, 37(2): 203–223.

Correia, Isabel, and Pedro Teles. (1999) “The Optimal Inflation Tax.” Review of Economic
  Dynamics, 2(2): 325–346.

Cúrdia, Vasco, and Michael Woodford. (2011) “The central-bank balance sheet as an instru-
  ment of monetarypolicy.” Journal of Monetary Economics, 58(1): 54–79.

Dávila, Eduardo. (2015) “Dissecting Fire Sales Externalities.” New York University, Stern School
  of Business miméo.

Dechert, W.D., and K. Nishimura. (1981) “A Note on Optimal Growth with a Convex-Concave
  Production Function.” State University of New York at Buffalo Department of Economics Dis-
  cussion Papers.

                                              62
Eggertsson, Gauti, and Paul Krugman. (2012) “Debt, Deleveraging, and the Liquidity Trap:
  A Fisher-Minsky-Koo approach.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 127(3): 1469–1513.

Gertler, Mark, and Nobuhiro Kiyotaki. (2010) “Financial Intermediation and Credit Policy in
  Business Cycle Analysis.” In Handbook of Monetary Economics. Vol. 3 of Handbook of Monetary
  Economics, , ed. Benjamin M. Friedman and Michael Woodford, Chapter 11, 547–599. Elsevier.

Gertler, Mark, and Peter Karadi. (2011) “A model of unconventional monetary policy.” Journal
  of Monetary Economics, 58(1): 17–34.

Guerrieri, Veronica, and Guido Lorenzoni. (2009) “Liquidity and Trading Dynamics.” Econo-
  metrica, 77(6): 1751–1790.

Guerrieri, Veronica, and Guido Lorenzoni. (2011) “Credit Crises, Precautionary Savings, and
  the Liquidity Trap.” NBER Working Paper 17583.

Holmström, Bengt, and Jean Tirole. (1998) “Private and Public Supply of Liquidity.” Journal
  of Political Economy, 106(1): 1–40.

Kiyotaki, Nobuhiro, and John Moore. (1997) “Credit Cycles.” Journal of Political Economy,
  105(2): 211–248.

Krishnamurthy, Arvind, and Annette Vissing-Jorgensen. (2012) “The Aggregate Demand
  for Treasury Debt.” Journal of Political Economy, 120(2): 233–267.

Lagos, Ricardo, and Randall Wright. (2005) “A Unified Framework for Monetary Theory and
  Policy Analysis.” Journal of Political Economy, 113(3): 463–484.

Lorenzoni, Guido. (2008) “Inefficient Credit Booms.” Review of Economic Studies, 75(3): 809–833.

Lucas, Robert E., Jr., and Nancy L. Stokey. (1983) “Optimal Fiscal and Monetary Policy in
  an Economy without Capital.” Journal of Monetary Economics, 12(1): 55–93.

Midrigan, Virgiliu, and Daniel Xu. (2014) “Finance and Misallocation: Evidence from Plant-
  Level Data.” American Economic Review, 104(2): 422–458.

Saint-Paul, Gilles. (2005) “Fiscal Policy and Economic Growth: The Role of Financial Interme-
  diation.” Review of International Economics, 13(3): 612–629.

Shleifer, A., and R.W. Vishny. (1992) “Liquidation Values and Debt Capacity: A Market
  Equilibrium Approach.” Journal of Finance, 47(4): 1343–1366.

Skiba, A. K. (1978) “Optimal Growth with a Convex-Concave Production Function.” Economet-
  rica, 46(3): 527–539.

                                               63
Stein, J.C. (2012) “Monetary Policy as Financial Stability Regulation.” Quarterly Journal of Eco-
  nomics, 127(1): 57–95.

Woodford, Michael. (1990) “Public Debt as Private Liquidity.” American Economic Review,
  80(2): 382–388.




                                               64
