NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

CURRENCY MANIPULATION
Tarek A. Hassan
Thomas M. Mertens
Tony Zhang
Working Paper 22790
http://www.nber.org/papers/w22790

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2016, Revised September 2019

We thank Mark Aguiar, Fernando Alvarez, Adrien Auclert, Oleg Itskhoki, Federico Gavazzoni,
Loukas Karabarbounis, Robert Kollmann, Matteo Maggiori, Brent Neiman, Stavros Panageas,
Jesse Schreger, Batchimeg Sambalaibat, Vania Stavrakeva, and Ivan Werning for helpful
comments. We also thank seminar participants at the University of Chicago, Princeton, Toulouse,
Oslo, the Federal Reserve Banks of Chicago, New York, and San Francisco, the Board of
Governors, the annual meetings of the SED, EFA, and AEA, Chicago IFM conference, Chicago
CWIE, the CEPR and SAFE AP Workshops, the Cowles Foundation, and the NBER Summer
Institute, IFM, and Asset Pricing program meetings. Hassan is grateful to the Fama-Miller Center
at the University of Chicago for providing financial support. The views expressed here are solely
those of the authors and do not necessarily represent those of the Federal Reserve Bank of San
Francisco, the Federal Reserve System, or the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2016 by Tarek A. Hassan, Thomas M. Mertens, and Tony Zhang. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Currency Manipulation
Tarek A. Hassan, Thomas M. Mertens, and Tony Zhang
NBER Working Paper No. 22790
October 2016, Revised September 2019
JEL No. E4,E5,F3,F4,G11,G15
ABSTRACT
We develop a novel, risk-based theory of the effects of currency manipulation. In our model, the
choice of exchange rate regime allows policymakers to make their currency, and by extension,
the firms in their country, a safer investment for international investors. Policies that induce a
country's currency to appreciate when the marginal utility of inter- national investors is high
lower the required rate of return on the country's currency and increase the world-market value of
domestic firms. Applying this logic to currency stabilizations, we find a small economy
stabilizing its bilateral exchange rate relative to a larger economy can increase domestic capital
accumulation, domestic wages, and even its share in world wealth. In the absence of policy
coordination, small countries optimally choose to stabilize their exchange rates relative to the
currency of the largest economy in the world, which endogenously emerges as the world's
“anchor currency.” Larger economies instead optimally choose to float their exchange rates. The
model therefore predicts an equilibrium pattern of exchange rate arrangements that is remarkably
similar to the one in the data.
Tarek A. Hassan
Department of Economics
Boston University
270 Bay State Road
Boston, MA 02215
and NBER
thassan@bu.edu
Thomas M. Mertens
Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco
Economic Research - Finance
101 Market Street, Mail stop 1130
San Francisco, CA 94105
thomas.mertens@sf.frb.org

Tony Zhang
Boston University
Questrom School of Business
595 Commonwealth Ave
Boston, MA 02115
tzhang0@bu.edu

Two thirds of all countries in the world manipulate the stochastic properties of their exchange
rates by stabilizing their currency relative to the US dollar. Such stabilizations take on many
different forms, including pegs, moving bands, stabilized arrangements, and managed floats.
Their common feature is that they set an upper bound for the volatility of the real or nominal
exchange rate, without necessarily manipulating its mean. Why do so many countries stabilize
their exchange rates relative to the US dollar?
In this paper, we develop a novel, risk-based theory of the effects of currency manipulation
in general, and currency stabilization in particular. In this model, the choice of exchange rate
regime affects economic outcomes because it allows policymakers to make their currency, and
by extension, the firms based in their country, a safer investment from the perspective of international investors. Policies that induce a country’s currency to retain value or even appreciate
when the marginal utility of international investors is high (in “bad times”) lower the required
rate of return on the country’s currency and thus also lower domestic interest rates and increase
the world-market value of domestic firms. Policies that change the variances and covariances
of real exchange rates can thus, via their effect on interest rates and asset returns, affect the
allocation of capital across countries.
This approach, linking a country’s exchange rate regime to the value of domestic firms, yields
three main insights. First, in canonical models of exchange rate determination, a direct link
exists between the stochastic properties of a country’s exchange rate, the expected return on its
currency, and the world-market value of firms producing country-specific (or nontraded) goods.
The safer a country’s currency is from the perspective of international investors, the higher the
world-market value of its firms, and the higher domestic investment and wages. Second, the
choice of target currency is key to the effects of any exchange rate stabilization. A country that
stabilizes its exchange rate relative to a “safe” currency that appreciates when marginal utility is
high inherits some or all of the stochastic properties of that target currency. Through its effect
on risk premia, a stabilization relative to the safest currency in the world thus offers a maximal
boost to the value of domestic firms and to domestic investment and wages. Third, stabilizations
are generally cheaper to implement for smaller countries whose actions have little or no effect on
the price of traded goods in world markets.
Taken together, these insights shed new light on otherwise puzzling features of exchange
rate arrangements we see in the data today. Since the demise of the Bretton-Woods system
of fixed exchange rates in 1975, individual countries have been largely free to choose their own
exchange rate regime. Despite this lack of centralized coordination, recent research by Ilzetzki,
1

Reinhart, and Rogoff (2018) has shown surprising regularity in the choices made by individual
countries. Table 1 shows small economies tend to stabilize, whereas only the largest economies in
the world float their exchange rate. The larger the economy, the softer the stabilizations tend to
be. Moreover, there is remarkable agreement in the choice of target country: The vast majority
of stabilizations target the currency of the largest economy in the world, the US dollar, making it
the “anchor” currency of the world monetary system. Almost all exceptions to this rule instead
target the currency of the largest market in the world, the euro. We argue these patterns can be
understood as attempts to manage risk: They arise as the optimal non-cooperative equilibrium in
a parsimonious model where currency risk premia affect the allocation of capital across countries.
In other words, the US dollar may be the anchor of the world monetary system because smaller
countries are optimally trying to reduce the risk associated with their currencies.
Table 1: 2010 Exchange Rate Arrangements According to Ilzetzki, Reinhart, and Rogoff (2018)
Panel A
GDP Decile
Floating
Stabilized
soft peg
hard peg

Exchange rate arrangement
1−5
(smallest)

6−9

10
(largest)

0%
100%
41%
59%

0%
100%
60%
40%

29%
71%
65%
6%

Panel B
Number of Countries

Target currency
Dollar
124

Euro
39

Other
11

Notes: Countries are divided into deciles by GDP in 2010. Deciles 1-9 each contain 18 countries,
the tenth 17 countries. The “floating” category refers to exchange rates classified as “freely floating”
in Ilzetzki, Reinhart, and Rogoff (2018) (fine classification code 13), the “soft peg” category includes
currencies with any form of crawling peg, crawling band, or managed float. the “hard peg” category
includes currency unions, pre-announced pegs, pre-announced bands, and de facto pegs (codes 1 - 4).

Our work builds on a growing literature that links highly persistent differences in interest
rates, currency returns, and capital-output ratios across countries to the stochastic properties of
their currencies (Lustig and Verdelhan, 2007; Lustig, Roussanov, and Verdelhan, 2011; Hassan
and Mano, 2019; Hassan, Mertens, and Zhang, 2016). This literature has explored various potential drivers of heterogeneity in the stochastic properties of countries’ exchange rates, ranging
from differences in country size (Martin, 2012; Hassan, 2013) and financial development (Maggiori, 2017) to trade centrality (Richmond, 2019) and differential resilience to disaster risk (Farhi
2

and Gabaix, 2015; Colacito et al., 2018).1 The common theme across these “risk-based” theories
is that whatever makes countries different from each other results in differential sensitivities of
their exchange rates to various shocks, such that some currencies (typically the US dollar) tend
to appreciate systematically when marginal utility is high.
In this paper, we go one step further and argue the stochastic properties of exchange rates
are themselves subject to policy intervention. To formalize this idea, we solve for the effect
of currency manipulation on risk premia within an otherwise standard model of exchange rate
determination. In the model, households consume a freely traded good and a country-specific
nontraded good. The nontraded good is produced by domestic firms, the shares of which are the
only assets traded in an international stock market. In equilibrium, the real exchange rate may
fluctuate in response to country-specific shocks to productivity, preferences, or money supply.
As a stand-in for the various potential sources of heterogeneity in the stochastic properties
of countries’ exchange rates mentioned above, we allow countries to differ in size. That is, we
assume all shocks are common within countries, and some countries account for a larger share of
world GDP than others. In the absence of policy intervention, this heterogeneity in country size
endogenously generates differences in expected currency returns, because shocks that raise the
price of consumption in a larger country spill over more into the world-market price of traded
goods. As a result, the currencies of larger countries tend to appreciate when the marginal utility
of international investors is high. Larger countries therefore have lower risk-free interest rates,
more valuable firms, and higher capital-output ratios in equilibrium.
Within this standard economic environment, we study the effects of policies that lower the
variance of one “stabilizing” country’s real exchange rate relative to a “target” country’s currency,
while leaving the mean of the exchange rate unaffected. To this end, we assume each country has
a central bank that issues and controls the supply of domestic currency, and that the nominal
price of the traded good is sticky in that domestic currency, giving the central bank the means
to affect allocations and the real exchange rate.
Because nontraded goods cannot be shipped internationally, stabilizing the real exchange
rate requires driving a wedge between the domestic and world-market prices of traded goods.
For example, when the target country appreciates, the stabilizing country must artificially raise
the domestic relative price of traded goods to increase the price of the domestic consumption
1

Other papers in this literature have studied heterogeneity in the volatility of shocks affecting the nontraded
sector (Tran, 2013), factor endowments (Ready, Roussanov, and Ward, 2017; Powers, 2015), and risk aversion
in combination with country size (Govillot, Rey, and Gourinchas, 2010). Also see Gourinchas and Rey (2007),
Campbell, Serfaty-De Medeiros, and Viceira (2010), Menkhoff et al. (2012), David, Henriksen, and Simonovska
(2016), and Verdelhan (2017).

3

bundle and match the appreciation. We show these stabilizing wedges between the domestic and
international prices of traded goods arise naturally from a simple nominal stabilization regime
where the central bank exchanges domestic for foreign currency at a predetermined rate. In this
sense, a nominal stabilization implements a real stabilization. (More generally, a real stabilization
could also be implemented with state-contingent taxes or tariffs.)
We first consider the case in which the stabilizing country is small and thus only affects
its own price of consumption. A small country that stabilizes its exchange rate relative to a
larger country inherits the stochastic properties of the larger country’s exchange rate, so that
the stabilized exchange rate now also tends to appreciate when marginal utility is high. A safer
currency, in turn, comes with a lower risk-free interest rate, a higher world-market value of
domestic firms, and increased domestic capital accumulation.
By raising the domestic price of traded goods whenever the target country appreciates, the
stabilizing country effectively reduces domestic consumption and thus exports additional traded
goods in these states of the world. If the target country is large, these states tend to be those in
which the world-market price of traded goods is high, so that the stabilizing country effectively
sells traded goods when they are expensive and buys them when they are cheap. Stabilizing
relative to a larger target country thus generates an insurance premium in the form of additional
seigniorage. (Effectively, a stabilizing country provides more insurance to the target country than
it would under freely floating exchange rates, and thus increases the volatility of its own consumption.) If the target country is sufficiently large, this insurance premium may be so large that
the stabilization generates a positive net present value of revenues. In this sense, stabilizations
relative to a larger country increase, rather than deplete, the central bank’s resources.
However, this revenue-generating effect diminishes when the stabilizing country itself becomes
larger, because the stabilization increases the variation in the stabilizing country’s own demand
for traded goods and therefore its price impact. When the stabilizing country is large enough
to affect the equilibrium price of traded goods, the stabilization thus induces an unfavorable
change in the state-contingent prices of traded goods. The larger the stabilizing country, the
more resources are required to maintain a stable exchange rate.
Although the allocation is Pareto efficient if all central banks float their exchange rates, the
model nevertheless produces a consistent rationale for currency stabilization. The reason is our
assumption that households can transact in an international stock market, but do not have access
to a full set of state-contingent (Arrow-Debreu) securities. Because of this restriction on the asset
space, changes in the value of an asset that even a small country has pricing power over (the
4

relative value of its own firms) can translate into shifts in relative wealth across countries. In
particular, a small country that announces a stabilization relative to a larger country not only
raises the world-market value of its firms, but also increases its households’ share in world wealth.
We show this valuation effect can be large enough to compensate for all domestic distortions
caused by the stabilization.
The model therefore predicts an equilibrium pattern of exchange rate arrangements that is
remarkably similar to the one in the data: In the absence of policy coordination, it is optimal
for a small country to stabilize its exchange rate; larger countries optimally adopt “softer”
stabilizations (due to the rising costs of implementing the stabilization); and the countries with
the largest economies find it optimal to float. The optimal target currency for all stabilizations
is the currency of the largest country in the world, endogenously rendering this currency the
“anchor” currency of the world.
Because the allocation of resources under freely floating exchange rates is Pareto efficient,
any utility gain accruing to a stabilizing country must come at the expense of households in
another country. Interestingly, these costs of stabilization are typically not borne by the target
country, but instead by other economies that float their exchange rate but are not the target
of the stabilization. The reason is that all countries with floating exchange rates suffer from
the valuation effect and some distortion of their consumption plans, whereas only the target
country receives something in return: targeted consumption insurance, courtesy of the fact that
stabilizing countries export additional traded goods whenever the target country appreciates.
In this sense, the model also reflects the general intuition that being at the center of the world
monetary system provides some benefit.
In various robustness checks, we show this broad set of conclusions arises regardless of whether
variation in exchange rates are driven primarily by supply or demand shocks, regardless of
whether the stabilization regime is fully credible, and that the positive conclusions of our analysis
also extend to a model with segmented financial markets.
We make four main caveats to our interpretation. First, we focus on differences in country
size only in the interest of parsimony. Variations of the model where differences in interest
rates also result from differences in financial development or some of the other microfoundations
mentioned above should yield similar interpretations—with the US dollar and the euro emerging
as the safest currencies in the world. Second, although we solve for optimal stabilizations, we
do not attempt to answer the broader question of whether other, more complicated patterns of
currency manipulation might produce superior results. Similarly, we do not consider strategic
5

interactions or optimal retaliations. Third, as in most models with standard preferences, risk
premia are quantitatively small in our framework, so that a quantitative application would need
additional ingredients. Finally, in our model, currency manipulation manifests itself as a wedge
between the domestic and world-market prices of traded goods. In richer models, currency
manipulations could also operate by changing allocations within countries, such as the sectoral
allocation of labor or the distribution of wealth across households.
To our knowledge, our paper is the first to link exchange rate policy to currency risk premia. A
large literature studies the effects of nominal stabilizations in New Keynesian models, where they
affect the level of production by altering markups (e.g., Kollmann, 2002; Devereux and Engel,
2003; Ottonello, 2015; Fornaro, 2015).2 More closely related to our own work, Fanelli and Straub
(2019) and Gabaix and Maggiori (2015) characterize the effects of real and nominal exchange
rate interventions under segmented markets. Another, largely empirical literature investigates
the effects of currency stabilizations on the level of trade flows.3 We add to these literatures
in two ways. First, we study a novel effect of currency stabilization on risk premia that can
operate even in a frictionless economy in which money is neutral, and in parallel to the various
other effects documented in the existing literature. Second, this approach enables us to analyze
how the effects of currency stabilization vary with the choice of the target currency and may
endogenously give rise to a dominant anchor currency.
In this sense, our work also relates to a recent literature that argues for a special role of the
US dollar in world financial markets. Branches of this literature have focused on the emergence of
a dominant currency for debt issuance (Chahrour and Valchev, 2019; Farhi and Maggiori, 2017;
He, Krishnamurthy, and Milbradt, 2019; Gopinath and Stein, 2019) and on the transmission of
monetary shocks (Boz et al., 2019; Miranda-Agrippino and Rey, 2015; Zhang, 2019).
More broadly, our paper also relates to a large literature on capital controls.4 Similar to
Costinot, Lorenzoni, and Werning (2014), who argue that capital controls may be thought of as
a manipulation of intertemporal prices, we show that currency stabilizations and other policies
altering the stochastic properties of exchange rates may be thought of as a manipulation of state2

One strand of the literature analyzes optimal monetary policy in small open economies with fixed exchange
rates (Kollmann, 2002; Parrado and Velasco, 2002; Gali and Monacelli, 2005; Auclert and Rognlie, 2014), whereas
another deals with the choice of the exchange rate regime in the presence of nominal rigidities (Helpman and
Razin, 1987; Bacchetta and van Wincoop, 2000; Corsetti, Dedola, and Leduc, 2010; Schmitt-Grohé and Uribe,
2012; Bergin and Corsetti, 2015) or collateral constraints (Ottonello, 2015; Fornaro, 2015).
3
See Hooper and Kohlhagen (1978), Kenen and Rodrik (1986), and Frankel and Rose (2002).
4
See, for example, Calvo and Mendoza (2000), Jeanne and Korinek (2010), Bianchi (2011), Farhi and Werning
(2014, 2013), Schmitt-Grohé and Uribe (2012), Korinek (2013), Korinek and Simsek (2016), and Bocola and
Lorenzoni (2019).

6

contingent prices. The key difference between the two concepts is that capital controls affect
allocations through market power and rents, whereas currency manipulation affects allocations
through risk premia, even when the country manipulating its exchange rate has no effect on
world market prices.
The remainder of this paper is structured as follows: Section 1 outlines the effects of currency manipulation on risk premia in their most general form. Section 2 analyzes the effects of
stabilizations of the real exchange rate in the context of a baseline international real business
cycle model. Section 3 generalizes the results from this analysis to stabilizations of the nominal
exchange rate when prices are sticky. Section 4 discusses floating bands and partially credible
stabilizations. Section 5 considers more general economic environments where exchange rates
are driven by monetary or preference shocks.

1

Effects of Currency Manipulation in Reduced Form

We begin by deriving the main insights of our analysis in their most general form. Consider a
world economy in which international assets are priced by a unique stochastic discount factor
that depends only on the realization of a world-wide shock, λT . Households consume a countryspecific final good, the price of which (accounted for in some common unit) depends on this
world-wide shock and a country-specific shock, xn ,
pn = aλT + bxn ,

(1)

where λT ∼ N (0, σ 2λT ) and xn ∼ N (0, σ 2x ) are normally distributed, not necessarily independent,
shocks and a and b are constants greater than zero. As we show in later sections, this structure
arises naturally from a microfounded model where the country-specific shock interchangeably
may stem from a supply, demand, or monetary shock; in other words, it is a stand-in for any
factor that affects the price of consumption in one country more than in others. The higher xn ,
the higher the price of domestic consumption.
The real exchange rate between two countries is the relative price of their respective final
goods. In logs,
sf,h = pf − ph .
The risk-based view of differences in currency returns applies some elementary asset pricing to
this expression. Using the Euler equation of an international investor, one can show the log
7

expected return to borrowing in country h and to lending in country f is

rf + ∆Esf,h − rh = cov λT , ph − pf ,

(2)

where rn is the risk-free interest rate in country n and the log stochastic discount factor is equated
to λT for simplicity.5 This statement means a currency that tends to appreciate when λT is high
pays a lower expected return and, if ∆Esf,h = 0, also has a lower risk-free interest rate. That is,
a currency that appreciates in bad times (when consumption goods are expensive everywhere in
the world) provides a hedge against worldwide consumption risk and must pay lower returns in
equilibrium.
Equations (1) and (2) are the main ingredients of risk-based models of unconditional differences in interest rates across countries, where different approaches model differences in the
stochastic properties of pn as the result of heterogeneity in country size, the volatility of shocks,
trade centrality, financial development, factor endowments, etc.
We make a simple point relative to this literature: If this risk-based view of currency returns
has merit, policies that alter the covariance between a country’s exchange rate and λT can alter
interest rates, currency returns, and the allocation of capital across countries. In particular, a
country that adopts a policy that increases the price of domestic consumption in states of the
world where λT is high can lower its risk-free interest rate relative to all other countries in the
world.
As an example, consider a “manipulating” country (indexed by m) that levies a tax on
domestic consumption of traded goods that is proportional to the realization of λT , such that
pm = aλT + bxm + πλT ,
where π is some positive constant. The taxation scheme increases the tendency of pm to appreciate when λT is high and thus, according to (2), lowers its interest rate relative to all other
countries in the world by πσ 2λT .
If interest rates play a role in allocating capital across countries (as is the case in our fully
specified model), manipulations of the stochastic properties of exchange rates can thus divert
capital investment to the country that conducts the manipulation, and, more broadly, alter the
equilibrium allocation of capital across countries.
5

∆Esf,h is defined as the logarithm of the ratio of the countries’ expected real price changes. See Appendix
A for a formal derivation.

8

The remainder of this paper fleshes out this argument in the context of a general equilibrium
model of exchange rate determination and applies it to one of the most pervasive policies in
international financial markets: currency stabilization.

2

Stabilizing the Real Exchange Rate

We begin by studying the effect of stabilizing the real exchange rate in the most parsimonious
environment, where money is neutral and the allocation of capital across countries, as well as
the stochastic properties of real exchange rates, is determined solely as a function of productivity shocks (Backus and Smith, 1993). Within this canonical international real business cycle
model, one country, labeled the stabilizing country, deviates from the competitive equilibrium
by stabilizing its real exchange rate relative to a target country.
Our purpose in beginning our analysis in this parsimonious environment is to lay bare the
main mechanisms as clearly and concisely as possible and to contrast them with the existing
literature. We emphasize that none of our main insights depend on monetary neutrality, and
that they continue to hold when we add more realistic frictions to the model that also address
some of the well-known empirical shortcomings of the international real business cycle model.
The intuition from this baseline model continues to apply when we consider stabilizations of the
nominal exchange rate, monetary frictions, preference shocks, and other generalizations in the
following sections.

2.1

Economic Environment

Two discrete time periods exist: t = 1, 2. There exists a unit measure of households i ∈
[0, 1], partitioned into three subsets Θn of measure θn . Each subset represents the constituent
households of a country. We label these countries n = {m, t, o} for the stabilizing (manipulating),
target, and outside country, respectively. Households make an investment decision in the first
period. All consumption occurs in the second period.
Households derive utility from consuming an index composed of a country-specific nontraded
good, CN,2 , and a freely traded good, CT,2 , where
C2 (i) = CT,2 (i)τ CN,2 (i)1−τ

9

(3)

and τ ∈ (0, 1). Each household exhibits constant relative risk aversion according to
U (i) =



1
E (C2 (i))1−γ ,
1−γ

(4)

where γ > 0 is the coefficient of relative risk aversion.
At the start of the first period, each household owns a firm that produces the local, countryspecific, nontraded good using a Cobb-Douglas production technology that employs capital and
labor. Each household supplies one unit of labor inelastically to its own firm and, in addition,
owns one unit of capital, which it can sell to its own firm or to any other firm in the world. Each
firm’s output of nontraded goods is
YN,2 (i) = exp(η n ) (K(i))ν

(5)

where 0 < ν < 1 is the capital share in production, K(i) is the (per capita) stock of capital, and
η n is a country-specific productivity shock realized at the start of the second period,


1 2 2
η ∼ N − σN , σN .
2
n

Capital can be freely shipped in the first period, at the end of which it is invested for use in
the production of nontraded goods in the second period. In the second period, each household
is also endowed with one unit of the traded consumption good.
At the end of the first period, firms trade units of capital and households trade claims to the
output of their firms (stocks) in an international stock market. Throughout, we use the traded
consumption good as the numéraire, such that all prices and returns are accounted for in the
same units. To simplify the derivation, we also assume households receive a country-specific
transfer in the first period, κn , which equates the marginal utility of wealth in the first period
across all households in the world. Finally, because all households and firms within a given
country are identical and consumption only occurs in the second period, we henceforth drop the
household index i as well as the time subscript t whenever appropriate and write the per-capita
n
capital stock, output, and consumption of traded and nontraded goods in country n as K n , YN,2
,

CTn , and CNn , respectively.
In sum, the economic environment of our baseline model is identical to that of a standard
international real business cycle model. Our only, somewhat subtle, departure from this frictionless benchmark is that we confine households to trading stocks in international markets, and

10

do not allow them to trade a full set of state-contingent claims. We prefer adding this modest
restriction on the asset space both for realism and because it gives rise to a model-consistent
rationale for stabilization which we discuss in detail in section 2.5.
In the meantime, however, note that because households can trade a unique set of stocks
for each country and shock, financial markets are “first-order complete” (Coeurdacier and Rey,
2013), in the sense that the payoffs of the available assets span all states of the world in the
log-linear solution to the competitive equilibrium. As a result, the allocation of goods across
households (given a distribution of wealth) in our log-linearized solution is efficient in the absence
of government interventions and coincides with the solution to the Social Planner’s problem with
unit Pareto weights. As a result, all the positive predictions of our baseline model are invariant
to whether or not we impose the aforementioned restriction on the asset space.6 The restriction
is relevant only for the normative analysis.
Currency Stabilization We define a real exchange rate stabilization as any policy that decreases fluctuations of the stabilizing country’s log real exchange rate with the target country
by a fraction ζ ∈ (0, 1] relative to the freely floating regime, without distorting the conditional
mean of the log real exchange rate. Denoting the real exchange rate that would arise under freely
floating exchange rates with an asterisk, a stabilization is thus a policy such that


var st,m = (1 − ζ)2 var st,m∗

(P1)





E st,m |{K n } = E st,m∗ |{K n } .

(P2)

and

We refer to ζ ∈ (0, 1] as a stabilized real exchange rate and ζ = 1 as a “hard” peg.
The stabilizing country’s government has two policy instruments available to achieve (P1)
and (P2): It has the ability to pay a lump-sum transfer, Z̄, to each household in its country in
the first period and to levy a state-contingent tax on the domestic consumption of traded goods
in the second period (Z(ω)). (When we introduce sticky prices and money into the model, these
parts will be taken over simply by the central bank’s control of monetary policy.)
The per-capita cost of implementing exchange rate stabilization is thus

∆Res = Z̄ − E
6

ΛT (ω)
ΛT,1

See Appendix B.4 for details.

11





(Z(ω) −

1) CTm (ω)

,

(6)

where ΛT (ω) represents the (world market) shadow price of one unit of traded consumption in
state ω of the second period and ΛT,1 = E[ΛT (ω)] is the marginal utility of wealth in the first
period.
We begin by assuming the government can finance this cost using an independent supply of
traded goods (currency reserves) that absorbs any surpluses or deficits generated by the taxation
scheme (∆Res). We prefer this specification mainly because it simplifies the exposition and
also allows us to cleanly separate the effects of stabilizations from the (well-studied) effects of
over- or under-valuations of the real exchange rate. However, we stress that none of the positive
predictions of the model depend on this assumption. When we analyze the welfare effects of
exchange rate stabilization in section 2.5, we set ∆Res = 0, so that the cost of the stabilization
is fully borne by the households in the stabilizing country. In this case, any stabilization also
distorts the level of the real exchange rate, and thus violates (P2).
Interestingly, we also show below that, under a range of relevant parameters, the cost of
currency stabilization is negative, so that many exchange rate stabilizations (achieving both
(P1) and (P2)) are implementable even if the government has no access to currency reserves.
The market clearing conditions for traded, nontraded, and capital goods are
Z

CT,2 (i, ω)di = 1 + θm ∆Res,

(7)

i∈[0,1]

Z
i∈θ

n

n
CN,2 (i, ω)di = θn YN,2
(ω),

(8)

and
X

θn K n = 1.

(9)

n

The economy is in an equilibrium when all households maximize utility taking prices and taxes
as given, firms maximize profits, and goods markets clear.

2.2

Solving the Model

Appendix B.1 formally derives the conditions of optimality characterizing the equilibrium allocation. The first-order conditions with respect to CTn equate the shadow price of traded consumption
across the target and outside countries:
τ (C n (ω))1−γ (CTn (ω))−1 = ΛT (ω), n = o, t.

12

(10)

In the stabilizing country, the state-contingent tax that implements the currency stabilization
appears as a wedge on that shadow price
τ (C m (ω))1−γ (CTm (ω))−1 = Z(ω)ΛT (ω).

(11)

n
In all countries, marginal utilities with respect to CN,2
define the shadow prices of nontraded

goods
(1 − τ ) (C n (ω))1−γ (CNn (ω))−1 = ΛnN (ω).

(12)

In addition, households’ portfolio problem and the firm’s capital demand function jointly
imply
Kn =

ν
E [ΛnN (ω)YNn (ω)] ,
ΛT,1 QK

(13)

where QK denotes the first-period price of a unit of capital. This Euler equation defines the level
of capital accumulation in country n as a function of first-period prices and the expected (utility)
value of its nontraded goods, E [ΛnN (ω)YNn (ω)]. This latter term will differ across countries and
reflect any precautionary motives for capital accumulation, including those that arise as a function
of the stochastic properties of the country’s exchange rate.7
Finally, the (redundant) first-order conditions with respect to the consumption index C n pin
down the shadow prices of overall consumption in each country:
(C n (ω))−γ = Λn (ω),

(14)

so that P n (ω) = Λn (ω)/ΛT (ω) is the price of the consumption bundle country n. The real
exchange rate between two countries h and f equals the ratio of these prices,
S f,h (ω) = P f (ω)/P h (ω).
In equilibrium, the resource constraints (7)-(9) and the conditions of optimality (10)-(13)
jointly determine the endogenous variables {CNn (ω), CTn (ω), K n , ΛnN (ω)}n∈{p,t,o} , ΛT (ω), and QK .
To study the model in closed form, we log-linearize around the deterministic solution — the point
at which the variances of shocks are zero (σ N,n = 0) and all firms have a capital stock fixed at the
deterministic steady-state level. To simplify the exposition, we thus ignore the feedback effect of
7

Because households freely trade stocks and capital across borders, (13) holds in all countries, including in
the stabilizing country, even though the government’s intervention drives a wedge between ΛT and the marginal
utility of traded consumption in the stabilizing country. See Appendix B.1 for a formal derivation.

13

differential capital accumulation on the size of risk premia, studying the incentives to accumulate
different levels of capital across countries, while holding the capital stock fixed. Appendix E.3
shows that all propositions in this section continue to hold when we allow for this feedback effect.
Throughout, lowercase variables continue to refer to natural logs.

2.3

The Freely Floating Regime

We begin by showing that, in the absence of currency manipulation, the model predicts that large
countries should have lower real interest rates (Hassan, 2013) and accumulate higher capitaloutput ratios (Hassan et al., 2016). If ζ = 0, equilibrium consumption of traded goods is given
by
cn∗
T =
where ȳN =

P

n

(1 − τ )(γ − 1)
n
(ȳN − yN
),
(1 − τ ) + γτ

(15)

n
is the average log per-capita output of nontraded goods across countries.
θ n yN

The expression shows that households use shipments of traded goods to insure themselves against
shocks to the output of nontraded goods. If γ > 1, households receive additional traded goods
whenever they have a lower-than-average output of nontraded goods, and vice versa.8
This risk-sharing behavior generates a shadow price of traded goods of the form,
λ∗T = −(γ − 1)(1 − τ )

X

n
θn yN
,

(16)

n

where each country’s weight is proportional to its size: shocks to the productivity of larger
countries affect a larger measure of households and thus tend to spill over to the rest of the world
in the form of higher shadow prices of traded goods. If γ > 1, the shadow price of traded goods
falls with the average output of nontraded goods across countries. Thus, λT tends to be low in
good states of the world when countries, on average, experience positive productivity shocks.
The real exchange rate between two countries f and h is
sf,h∗ = pf ∗ − ph∗ =


γ(1 − τ )  h
f
yN − yN
,
(1 − τ ) + γτ

8

(17)

The condition γ > 1 (more generally, γ multiplied by the elasticity of substitution between traded and
nontraded goods > 1) ensures that the cross-partial of marginal utility from traded consumption with respect
to the nontraded good is negative; that is, the relative price of a country’s nontraded good falls when its supply
increases. Because most empirical applications of international asset pricing models find a relative risk aversion
significantly larger than 1 and an elasticity of substitution around 1, most authors assume this condition holds
(see Coeurdacier (2009) for a detailed discussion). We show in section 5 that this condition is not needed if
variation in exchange rates is driven predominantly by monetary or preference shocks.

14

showing that the country with the lower per-capita output of nontraded goods appreciates because its consumption index is relatively more expensive. (The literature often criticizes this
somewhat counter-intuitive prediction of the real business cycle model. However, none of our
conclusions depend on this prediction. Instead, the crucial feature of the model is merely that
whatever shock causes a country’s real exchange rate to appreciate also prompts this country to
demand higher imports of traded goods, as we show formally in section 5.)
Inspecting λ∗T and sf,h∗ shows that currencies of larger countries are “safer” in the sense that
they tend to appreciate when the shadow price of traded goods is high: Whenever a country
suffers a low productivity shock, its real exchange rate appreciates. For a given percentage decline
in productivity, this appreciation occurs independently of how large the country is (note sf,h∗ is
independent of θ). However, a shock to a larger country has a larger impact on the shadow price
of traded goods (λT ). It then immediately follows from (2) that larger countries have a lower
risk-free rate:

 (γ − 1)γ(1 − τ )2 h
θ − θf σ 2N .
rf ∗ + ∆Esf,h∗ − rh∗ = cov λ∗T , ph∗ − pf ∗ =
1 + (γ − 1)τ

(18)

To see that these differences in interest rates across countries translate into differential incentives to accumulate capital, we can rearrange the Euler equation for capital accumulation (13)
and derive an expression that links differences in capital to differences in interest rates9
k f ∗ − k h∗ =


γ
rh∗ − ∆Esf,h∗ − rf ∗ .
2
τ (γ − 1)

(19)

Firms based in larger countries thus have a lower cost of capital, which increases their value in
world markets and prompts them to invest more. It is efficient to accumulate more capital in the
larger country because a larger capital stock in a larger country represents a good hedge against
global consumption risk: Households around the world fear states of the world in which the large
country receives a bad productivity shock. Although households cannot affect the realization of
productivity shocks, they can partially insure themselves against low output in large countries
by accumulating more capital in these countries. This precautionary behavior raises expected
output in these countries and dampens the negative effects of a low productivity shock.
9

For a derivation, see Appendix B.5.

15

2.4

Effects of Currency Stabilization

Under freely floating exchange rates, larger (safer) countries thus have lower risk-free rates and
higher capital-output ratios. With this result in mind, we now analyze how a country can
influence interest rates and the allocation of capital by stabilizing its currency.
Whereas currency stabilization ((P1) and (P2) with ζ < 1) can, in principle, be achieved with
a range of different nonlinear policies, such as intervening only in response to shocks smaller or
larger than some critical value, we focus our discussion on the unique linear policy that entails a
proportional intervention in each state. The advantage of focusing on this case is simply that it
preserves the Gaussian structure of the problem and thus lends itself to closed-form solutions. In
section 4, we discuss issues that arise when the government cannot credibly commit to stabilizing
shocks larger or smaller than some critical value and show that our main conclusions do not
change in that case.
The following lemma characterizes the unique linear form of state-contingent taxes that implements the exchange rate stabilization:
Lemma 1
A tax on the consumption of traded goods in the stabilizing country of the form

z(ω) = ζ

γτ + (1 − τ ) t∗
(p (ω) − pm∗ (ω))
γτ

implements a real exchange rate stabilization of strength ζ.
The cost of implementing the stabilization equals the change in the world-market cost of traded
goods consumed by households in the stabilizing country,

∆Res = E

ΛT (ω)
ΛT,1



"



CTm (ω)

−E

Λ∗T (ω)
Λ∗T,1

!

#
CTm∗ (ω)

.

(20)

Proof. See Appendix B.6.
The intuition for both results is simple and quite general: When the target country appreciates (pt∗ increases), the stabilizing country must increase its own price level to keep pace.
Because the number of nontraded goods in the country is fixed, the only way it can do so is
by artificially increasing the relative price of traded goods in the stabilizing country, driving a
wedge between the domestic and world-market price of traded goods (z(ω)). When the target
country appreciates, the stabilizing country thus reduces the domestic consumption of traded
16

goods relative to what it would have been in the freely floating regime and exports additional
traded goods to the rest of the world.10
m∗
cm
T − cT = −ζ


(1 − θm ) t∗
p − pm∗ .
τγ

(21)

Conversely, when the target country depreciates, the stabilizing country subsidizes imports of
traded goods, resulting in higher imports of traded goods than under the freely floating regime.
The cost of implementing the stabilization, therefore, is simply the change in the world-market
cost of traded goods consumed by households in the stabilizing country.
We start by analyzing the effect of this stabilization policy on allocations, prices, and currency
reserves in the stabilizing country. Afterwards, we analyze its impact on the target country.
2.4.1

Internal Effects of Currency Stabilization

The most immediate effect of currency stabilization is that the price level in the stabilizing
country becomes more correlated with the price level in the target country:
pm = pm∗ + (1 − θm )ζ(pt∗ − pm∗ ).
Because larger countries tend to appreciate when λT is high, a stabilization relative to a larger
country (θt > θm ) naturally also makes the stabilizing country appreciate in these states; that is,
stabilization increases the covariance between the stabilizing country’s price level, pm , and the
shadow price of traded goods, λT , similar to the intervention considered in section 1. As a result,
a risk-free asset that pays one unit of the stabilizing country’s consumption bundle with certainty
becomes a better hedge against consumption risk, increasing its value in the world market, and
lowering the stabilizing country’s risk-free interest rate.
Moreover, stabilizing relative to a larger country increases domestic capital accumulation
because it raises the world-market value of domestic firms by increasing the covariance of their
dividends with the larger country’s price level, and thus with λT :
m
m∗
m∗
pm
N + yN = (pN + yN ) + ζ


(θm + (γ − 1)τ ) t∗
p − pm∗ ,
τγ

(22)

m
where pm
N = λN − λT is the price of nontraded goods in country m.
10

Note the relative prices of nontraded goods are no longer a sufficient statistic for the real exchange rate,
because the state-contingent tax drives a wedge between the domestic and world-market prices of traded goods.

17

Proposition 1
If γ > 1, a country that stabilizes its real exchange rate relative to a target country sufficiently
larger than itself lowers its risk-free interest rate and increases the world-market value of domestic
firms, domestic capital accumulation, and domestic wages relative to the target country.
Proof. The interest rate differential with respect to the target country is

t
m
m
2
γ(1
−
τ
)
(θ
−
θ
)(γ
−
1)τ
+
2θ
(1
−
ζ)
σ 2N .
rm + ∆Esm,t − rt = rm∗ + ∆Esm,t∗ − rt∗ − ζ
τ (1 + (γ − 1)τ )
See Appendix B.7 for details and the corresponding proof for capital accumulation, which requires
that the target country be sufficiently large.
Aside from these effects on interest rates and capital accumulation, the stabilization policy
also affects the level of currency reserves. From (20), we already know the cost of implementing
the stabilization is simply the cost of altering the stabilizing country’s purchases of traded goods
in world markets. Moreover, we also know the stabilization induces the stabilizing country to
sell additional traded goods in response to an appreciation of the target country, and to buy
additional traded goods in response to a depreciation. If the target country is larger than the
stabilizing country, this policy amounts to selling traded goods when they are expensive and
buying them when they are cheap. In other words, stabilization induces the stabilizing country
to provide insurance to the world market against the (larger) target country’s shocks, so that it
pockets an insurance premium.
Proposition 2
If γ > 1 and the stabilizing country is small, θm = 0, the cost of stabilization globally decreases
with the size of the target country and locally increases with the size of the stabilizing country.
Additionally, the cost of stabilization (∆Res) is negative if and only if
θt >

ζ + (γ − 1)τ
.
(γ − 1)2 τ 2

Proof. See Appendix B.8.
If the target country is sufficiently large relative to the stabilizing country, this insurance
premium can be so large that the stabilization generates positive net revenues, so that the
stabilization increases, rather than decreases, currency reserves.11
11

That is, the portfolio of stocks that pays exactly the cost of the stabilization policy in each state of the world
has negative cost in the first period. See Appendix B.6 for details on the form of this portfolio.

18

When the stabilizing country itself is large (θm > 0), its purchases and sales of traded goods
also affect the equilibrium shadow price of traded goods, λT . This price impact generally increases
the cost of stabilization. The reason is that stabilization effectively induces the stabilizing country
to “do more” of what it would have done under freely floating exchange rates: Even under freely
floating exchange rates, all countries increase their exports of traded goods when a large country
appreciates. Stabilization then induces the stabilizing country to export even more than it
ordinarily would have (compare equations (15) and (21)). The larger the stabilizing country is
(i.e., the more price impact it has), the more costly it therefore is to maintain the stabilization.
This increasing cost of stabilization will be key to our finding below that stabilization relative to
the largest country in the world tends to be an optimal policy for small but not large countries.
2.4.2

External Effects of Currency Stabilization

If the stabilizing country is large (θm > 0), its actions also have external effects on consumption
and prices in the rest of the world. The shadow price of traded goods is
λT = λ∗T −


(1 + (γ − 1)τ ) m t∗
ζθ p − pm∗ .
γτ

The second term on the right-hand side shows that stabilization by a large country reduces the
covariance between the target country’s price level and λT . By selling insurance against the
target country’s shocks, the stabilizing country dampens the effect of these shocks on the worldmarket price of traded goods. It follows immediately that becoming the target of a stabilization
raises the target country’s interest rate and lowers its capital accumulation.
Proposition 3
If γ > 1, a country that becomes the target of a stabilization of any strength ζ > 0 imposed
by a large country experiences an increase in its risk-free interest rate, a decrease in capital
accumulation, and a decrease in average wages relative to all other countries. If the stabilizing
country is smaller than the target country (θm < θt ), the stabilization also lowers the volatility
of consumption in the target country.
Proof. The interest rate differential between the target and outside country is

rt + ∆Est,o − ro = rt∗ + ∆Est,o∗ − ro∗ + ζ

θp (1 − τ )2 γ
σ2 .
τ (1 + (γ − 1)τ ) N

See Appendix B.9 for details and the remainder of the proof.
19

Currency stabilization can thus divert capital from the target country to the stabilizing
country even though it has no effect on the level of the real exchange rate. This finding is
particularly interesting because it sheds new light on recent public controversies, for example,
between Chinese and US officials (Levy, 2011), which usually focus on the idea that an undervaluation of the Chinese real exchange rate favors Chinese workers at the expense of U.S. workers.
By contrast, our model suggests that even a currency stabilization that manipulates the variance
but not the level of the real exchange rate can have this effect.
On the flip side, currency stabilization by a large country decreases the volatility of consumption in the target country, because it effectively prompts the stabilizing country to provide
consumption insurance to the target country. We show below that this positive effect of insurance provision can dominate, so that stabilization is associated with utility gains in both the
stabilizing and the target country, at the expense of the outside country.

2.5

Welfare and the Rationale for Stabilization

Having characterized the positive effects of currency stabilization, we next study why a country
might find it optimal to stabilize its currency. The existing literature has shown currency stabilization can be a second-best policy response in the presence of monetary and other frictions.12
Perhaps surprisingly, we show that even in the absence of such frictions, stabilization relative to
a larger country may increase welfare in the stabilizing country through a valuation effect that
increases its share in world wealth.13
So far, we have defined a currency stabilization as reducing the variance of the log real
exchange rate (P1) while not distorting its level (P2). Achieving both objectives simultaneously
requires that the government has the ability to add and subtract resources from the economy
by accumulating or depleting currency reserves. For the purposes of assessing the welfare effects
of currency stabilization, we now drop objective (P2) and assume that, instead, the government
rebates the cost of stabilizing the exchange rate back to households using the lump-sum transfer,
R
so that ∆Res = 0 and (7) becomes i∈[0,1] CT,2 (i, ω)di = 1. That is, households in the stabilizing
country directly bear the financial cost or benefit of stabilizing the exchange rate, shifting the
level of their traded consumption in all states of the world, and thus also affecting the level of
their real exchange rate. Closing the model in this way does not interfere with the intuition
12

For a recent example see Fanelli and Straub (2019).
We define the valuation effect as the (log) difference in the value of the household’s traded consumption from
its value under freely floating exchange rates.
13

20

of the positive results derived above but increases the complexity of the solution, so that we
relegate the mathematical details to Appendix C.
Within this closed model, solving for the effect of an exchange rate stabilization on the utility
of a household in a small stabilizing country (θm = 0) yields:14
(−ζ 2 + ζΘt (γ − 1)τ )(1 − τ )2 2
(ζΘt + ζ 2 )(γ − 1)(1 − τ )2 2
∆u =
σN −
σN
τ (1 + (γ − 1)τ )2
(1 + (γ − 1)τ )2
|
{z
} |
{z
}
m

∆V ar[cm ]

∆K,Revenues
2

(ζΘt + ζ )τ (γ − 1)2 (1 − τ )2 2
+
σN ,
(1 + (γ − 1)τ )2
|
{z
}

(23)

Valuation Effect

where ∆um is measured as the percentage increase of the household’s certainty-equivalent consumption attributable to the stabilization, and Θt = θt (γ − 1)τ − 1 is positive and monotonically
increasing in θt if γ > 1 and the target country is sufficiently large.
The first term on the right-hand side reflects changes in the expected level of consumption that
result from changes in the level of domestic capital accumulation and the cost of implementing
the stabilization. We have already seen that a stabilization relative to a larger country can
increase capital accumulation and generate positive revenue, so that this term is positive if θt
is sufficiently large. However, stabilization also increases the variance of consumption because
the stabilizing country effectively provides insurance to the world market against shocks that
affect the target country. This increase in the volatility of consumption strictly reduces expected
utility, as shown in the second term.
One can show that the second term is always larger than the first term so that stabilizing
would never be welfare increasing if not for the third term: the effect of the stabilization on the
stabilizing country’s share in world wealth.15 This term reflects the fact, already shown above,
that stabilizations relative to a larger country increase the world-market value of firms in the
stabilizing country. Households in the stabilizing country are the monopoly suppliers of domestic
firms so that, even if the country is small and a price-taker in international markets, it is always
large enough to affect the world-market price of its own firms relative to the world-market price
of foreign firms.16 Because we have assumed households and governments can only trade stocks
14

In keeping with the solution method outlined above, we solve for the equilibrium valuation change in households’ portfolios using a second-order approximation around the point at which the marginal utility of wealth of
households in all countries is equalized.
15
See Appendix C for a formal proof of this statement.
16
For a similar result, where small countries benefit from deviating from policy coordination, see Chari and
Kehoe (1990).

21

in these firms in international markets, but not a full set of state-contingent claims, this valuation
effect effectively enables the stabilizing government to shift wealth from the rest of the world to
its own country by announcing a stabilization relative to a larger country.17
Proposition 4
If γ > 1 and all households own the portfolio of stocks that decentralizes the Pareto-efficient
allocation of consumption under freely floating exchange rates at the time of the announcement
of the stabilization policy, then there exists a θ > 0 such that a small stabilizing country (θm = 0)
strictly increases the welfare of its households by stabilizing relative to a target country with
θt > θ.
Proof. See Appendix C.
In other words, the positive effect of the stabilization on the valuation of domestic firms can
be large enough to make stabilization relative to a larger country a welfare-increasing policy for
the stabilizing country.
Panel (a) of Figure 1 illustrates this result graphically by plotting the three terms of (23)
over the size of the target country for a typical numerical example where θm = 0, ζ = 1, τ = 1/3,
and γ = 7.18 If the target country is small, all three terms are negative, but as the size of the
target increases, both the first and the third term monotonically increase and become positive.
The sum across the three lines represents the total change in the stabilizing country’s welfare.
This net effect is positive for all θt > θ̄ = (ζ + (1 − ζ)τ 2 (γ − 1))/(τ 3 (γ − 1)2 ). If it is optimal for
a small country to stabilize relative to any target country, that country is thus always the largest
country in the world.
This increase in welfare through stabilization is, for a given set of parameters, easier to achieve
for a small country than for a large country. As we have already seen above, a stabilization implemented by a large stabilizing country manipulates state-prices of traded goods in an unfavorable
direction, which increases the cost of implementing the stabilization. The welfare benefits of
stabilization thus tend to decrease with the size of the stabilizing country. Panel (b) of Figure
1 shows the utility gain from stabilization is smaller for larger stabilizing countries. The figure
17

One can show the same result holds if instead households are confined to trading international bonds, because,
again, stabilizing relative to a larger country increases the world-market value of the stabilizing country’s bonds.
See Appendix C.1 for details.
18
Because the consumption index (3) has a unit elasticity of substitution between traded and nontraded goods,
the portfolio of stocks that decentralizes the Pareto-efficient allocation of consumption under freely floating
exchange rates is naturally home biased, in the sense that a given country’s households own a relatively larger
share of their own country’s firms. As a result, an increase in the relative valuation of the stabilizing country’s
firms shifts wealth from foreign to domestic agents. Appendix C gives analytical solutions.

22

also shows the optimal stabilization need not be a hard peg: In the example shown, the largest
stabilizing country (θm = 0.2 ) maximizes its utility gains with a soft peg (ζ = 0.2).
Taken together, these findings provide a rich set of predictions for a stabilizing country’s
optimal choice of exchange rate regime (ζ ∈ (0, 1]) as a function of its own size (θm ) and the
size of the target country (θt ). Panel (a) of Figure 2 shows a graphical representation of this
optimal choice for the same numerical example as above. If a sufficiently large target country
exists (θt > θ̄), a small stabilizing country finds it optimal to impose a hard peg relative to that
country. As the size of the stabilizing country increases, the optimal stabilization becomes looser.
Finally, stabilizing countries above a certain size find it optimal to float their exchange rates.
Because the allocation under freely floating exchange rates is Pareto efficient, any utility gains
from exchange rate stabilization accruing to households in a stabilizing country with positive mass
(θm > 0) must be causing losses to households somewhere else in the world. Interestingly, this
collateral damage typically does not fall on the target country, but rather on the outside country
(which, on the surface, has no relation to the stabilization). The reason is that although both the
target and outside countries suffer from distortions to the state prices of traded goods, and from
the relatively higher prices of firms in the stabilizing country, the target country also receives a
benefit: The stabilizing country provides tailor-made insurance against shocks that are specific
to the target country.
Panel (b) of Figure 2 shows the same triangular region as in Panel (a) (the area where
stabilization is welfare improving for the stabilizing country), but now highlights the area where
the target country also receives a net utility gain (the lower shaded area). In this subset of
the parameter space, stabilization is thus welfare increasing for residents of both the stabilizing
and the target country, and goes exclusively to the detriment of residents in the outside country
(which always loses when it is optimal for the stabilizing country to stabilize).19
In the upper-left triangular region, the target country would also prefer the stabilizing country
to float its exchange rate and not stabilize. However, given a stabilization, the welfare loss in the
target country is less than the welfare loss of the outside country (∆ut > ∆uo ). In this sense, the
model generates the intuitive result that for a large country that cannot gain from stabilizing
itself, being the target country of choice can be beneficial: Given that other countries stabilize,
being the target of that stabilization is preferable to being the outside country. (See Appendix
C.2 for a formal proof.)
19

We believe these statements hold quite generally. However we were unable to prove them formally as the
analytical expressions are quite complex. See Appendix C.2.

23

In sum, our simple model endogenously produces a potential rationale, based on the traditional welfare criterion, for the patterns of stabilizations we see in the data, where (i) small
countries find it optimal to stabilize their exchange rates, (ii) larger countries instead find it optimal to maintain looser stabilizations, (iii) the largest countries float their currencies, and (iv) all
stabilizations are relative to the largest economy in the world (the United States). These insights
on the optimal choice of exchange rate regime rely crucially on the interaction of two forces. The
first is the fact that exchange rate stabilization makes domestic firms safer investments from the
perspective of international investors, and thus increases their world-market value. The second
is our assumption that households do not have access to a full set of Arrow-Debreu securities
(the prices of which a small country would not be able to influence), but instead transact only
in an international stock market. Because of this restriction on the asset space, changes in the
value of an asset that even small countries have pricing power over (the relative value of their
own firms) translate into shifts in relative wealth across countries.20
Having studied the positive and normative implications of exchange rate stabilization in this
canonical and (modulo our restriction on the asset space) frictionless environment, we now show
how the insights from this analysis continue to hold in more general settings.

3

Nominal Stabilization and Monetary Policy

We begin by showing that the insights of our baseline model carry over directly to a standard
“new open economy” framework in which the prices of traded goods are sticky and stabilizing
wedges arise naturally from a simple nominal stabilization regime.21 To this end, we extend the
setup of our model in section 2.1 by assuming each country has a central bank that issues and
controls the supply of the domestic currency. The nominal price of the traded good in terms of
20

Maybe as relevant in practice as these welfare considerations, our model also lends itself to a political economy
rationalization for the same patterns: A large literature argues that policymakers trying to win elections have
an interest in raising wages (e.g., if the median voter is a worker, Persson and Tabellini (2002)) and often prefer
generating revenue through central bank or currency board operations to direct taxation, even if these operations
are distortionary, because they are less visible to the public and easier to control (Cukierman et al., 1992; Bates,
2005). Currency stabilizations relative to the largest economy in the world achieve both of these objectives and
may thus be politically attractive. For example, a stabilization relative to the largest economy in the world may
be optimal even in the absence of valuation effects if policymakers in a stabilizing country maximize a function
of the form
EU n + µ1 K n − µ2 ∆Res,
where µ1 and µ2 are constants that may reflect the political influence of workers, externalities from capital
accumulation, or a motive for generating revenues in a way that avoids direct taxation of households or firms.
21
A large body of empirical work documents such rigidity, which creates a wedge in the prices of traded goods
across borders, that is, failures in the law of one price (Mussa, 1986; Engel, 1999; Cavallo et al., 2014).

24

this currency is set before shocks are realized at the beginning of period 1, where P̃Tn denotes
the (fixed) number of units of domestic currency needed to buy one unit of the traded good in
country n. Households face a cash-in-advance constraint denominated in their domestic currency.
That is, they must use their domestic currency when buying stocks in period 1 and when buying
consumption goods in period 2.22
Having introduced money into the model, we can write the log nominal exchange rate as
s̃f,h = pf − ph + p̃fT − p̃hT .

(24)

In keeping with our convention above, we define a stabilization of the nominal exchange rate
of strength ζ̃ as a set of policies that decreases the variance of this log nominal exchange rate
between the stabilizing and target countries, var (s̃t,m ) = (1 − ζ̃)2 var (s̃t,m∗ ), while keeping the
conditional mean of the log nominal exchange rate unchanged, E [s̃t,m |{K n }] = E [s̃t,m∗ |{K n }].
Each central bank controls the growth rate of its own money supply, where ∆mn1 and ∆mn (ω)
denote the growth rate of the money supply in the first period and state ω of the second period,
respectively. We assume the central banks in the target and outside countries use their control
of money supply to recover the efficient allocation of resources, taking as given the actions of the
stabilizing country’s central bank. By contrast, the central bank in the stabilizing country uses
its control of monetary policy to stabilize the nominal exchange rate.
Although the actors and policymakers have different names in this extended version of the
model, the equilibrium is, in fact, identical to the one already discussed above. To see this result,
note first that because the price of traded goods is fixed in the domestic currency, a nominal
stabilization automatically also implements a stabilization of the real exchange rate of equal
strength. (The term p̃fT − p̃hT in (24) is fixed so that the real exchange rate is simply proportional
to the nominal exchange rate.) In other words, if the price of traded goods is sticky, a central
bank that stabilizes the nominal exchange rate relative to some target currency implicity also
stabilizes the real exchange rate relative to that same target country.
Second, through its control of money supply, the stabilizing country’s central bank effectively
has the same ability to drive a state-contingent wedge between λT and the domestic price of
traded goods in the second period (and pay a lump-sum transfer in the first period) as the
stabilizing government in section 2. Solving the extended model therefore yields identical first
order conditions to those in section 2.2, except that Z(ω) is now replaced with the growth rate
22

Appendix D gives formal details and additional notation.

25

of the money supply, exp[−∆mm (ω)]. The condition pinning down the shadow price of traded
consumption in the stabilizing country now reads
τ (C m (ω))1−γ (CTm (ω))−1 = exp[−∆mm (ω)]ΛT (ω).

(25)

Because the nominal price of the traded good cannot adjust in the second period, expansions
and contractions of the money supply thus again drive a wedge between the domestic and worldmarket price of traded goods.
Therefore, intuitively, in order to stabilize its real and nominal exchange rates relative to
a given target country, the stabilizing central bank must contract the domestic money supply
whenever the target country appreciates,
−∆mm (ω) = z(ω) = ζ

γτ + (1 − τ ) t∗
(p (ω) − pm∗ (ω)).
γτ

The only difference to our baseline model is that this policy is now much easier to map to
the real-world nominal exchange rate stabilization policies that central banks typically follow:
When the target country appreciates, the central bank in the stabilizing country decreases the
domestic money supply by buying domestic currency and selling foreign currency, matching the
nominal appreciation. Because the price of traded goods is sticky in domestic currency, this
reduction in domestic money supply increases the real price of traded goods in the stabilizing
country, prompting domestic households to consume fewer traded goods whenever the target
country appreciates. A conventional nominal stabilization thus automatically replicates the
effect of stabilizing state-contingent taxes: The stabilizing country exports additional traded
goods whenever the target country appreciates, and vice versa.
Proposition 5
If the price of the traded good is rigid in terms of the stabilizing country’s currency,
1. a nominal stabilization implements a real stabilization of equal strength ζ = ζ̃, and
2. the seigniorage from stabilization is equal to −∆Res,
"

#


Λ∗T (ω) m∗
ΛT (ω) m
seigniorage = E
C (ω) − E
C (ω) = −∆Res.
Λ∗T,1 T
ΛT,1 T

Proof. See Appendix D.
26

If households need domestic currency to buy consumption goods and prices are sufficiently
sticky to give the central bank some leverage over real allocations, we thus conclude that stabilizations of the real exchange rate can be implemented with a simple rule that commits the
central bank’s control of the money supply to enforce a nominal stabilization. That is, even if
prices are only partially rigid, a nominal peg, where the central bank commits to exchanging
currency at a predetermined rate, implements some real exchange rate stabilization, entailing all
the positive and normative effects on real allocations discussed in the previous section. Appendix
D.2 shows similar results for an economy where prices are flexible and monetary policy instead
affects real allocations because financial markets are segmented.

4

Partially Credible Stabilizations and Floating Bands

A major issue in the study of policies that manipulate the first moment of exchange rates (underor over-valuations), is the depletion of reserves and the credibility of such manipulations in the
face of potential speculative attacks (Krugman, 1979; Garber and Svensson, 1995). By contrast,
we have already shown that stabilizations of the real exchange rate relative to a large target
country may generate, rather than deplete, reserves, assuaging some potential concerns about
the policy’s credibility. (The portfolio of stocks that finances the stabilization policy in each
state has a negative cost in period 1.)
Nevertheless, it is worthwhile to consider the effects of only partially credible stabilizations.
Suppose the government, either by choice or necessity, abandons the stabilization in a subset of
states Ω−s ⊂ Ω (where Ω is the set of all possible states). Assuming the government continues
to stabilize state-by-state within Ωs = Ω\Ω−s , and that this limited stabilization continues to
leave the mean of the real exchange rate undistorted (e.g., the partition of Ω into Ωs and Ω−s is
symmetric around the mean), we can show that23



var(sm,t ) = Prob [ω ∈ Ωs ] (1 − ζ)2 + Prob [ω ∈ Ω−s ] var s∗m,t |Ω−s < var(sm,t∗ )
and


rm + ∆E[sm,t ] − rt = − (Prob [ω ∈ Ωs ] (1 − ζ) − Prob [ω ∈ Ω−s ]) cov λT , s∗m,t |Ωs .
In contrast to partially credible manipulations of the level of the real exchange rate, partially
23

See Appendix E.1 for a formal derivation.

27

credible manipulations of its variance are thus still effective: They reduce the variance of the
real exchange rate and affect interest rates and other outcomes in the same way as characterized
above — only less so than a fully credible stabilization. In this sense, we may simply think of
partially credible stabilizations as “weaker” credible stabilizations.
Additionally, the two expressions above also directly describe the effects of a variety of nonlinear stabilization policies, such as floating bands, that allow a freely floating exchange rate
between some upper and lower limit, and intervene state by state only when the real exchange
rate departs this band.
Similarly, Appendix E.2 shows that our analysis above also extends directly to stabilizations
relative to a basket of currencies, where stabilizing relative to a basket of currencies has effects
akin to a stabilization relative to a (hypothetical) country with a weighted average size of the
basket’s constituents.

5

Segmented Markets and Preference Shocks

So far, we have based our analysis of currency stabilization on a conventional international real
business cycle model, where productivity shocks are the only drivers of variation in real exchange
rates (Backus and Smith, 1993). Although an important benchmark, this framework has a
number of well-known empirical shortcomings. First, it predicts a perfectly negative correlation
between appreciations of the real exchange rate and aggregate consumption growth — a currency
appreciates when the country’s aggregate consumption decreases. Second, the model predicts
consumption should be more correlated across countries than output, whereas the opposite is
true in the data (Backus, Kehoe, and Kydland, 1994). Third, real exchange rates and terms
of trade seem much too volatile to be rationalized by real (productivity) shocks alone (Chari,
Kehoe, and McGrattan, 2002).
In this section, we argue the conclusions from our analysis of exchange rate stabilizations do
not rely on any of these counterfactual features of the international real business cycle model.
Instead, they depend solely on two, more general, features of conventional approaches to modeling
variation in exchange rates: First, whatever shock causes a country’s real exchange rate to
appreciate also prompts this country to demand higher imports of traded goods. Second, shocks
that raise the price of consumption in a larger country spill over more into the world-market price
of traded goods. Both of these forces are common features of a broader class of models where
real exchange rates may also fluctuate in response to shocks to preferences or money supply.
28

To illustrate this finding, we augment our baseline model in section 2.1 with two (widely
cited) demand-based sources of variation in real exchange rates. First, we allow households in
each country to experience preference shocks as suggested Pavlova and Rigobon (2007):
U (i) =



1
E (exp(χn )C2 (i))1−γ ,
1−γ

(26)

where χn is a common shock to households’ preference for consumption goods in country n,


1 2 2
χ ∼ N − σχ, σχ .
2
n

Second, we also allow for a direct effect of inflation on real exchange rates by assuming a
measure 1 − φ of “inactive” households within each country exclusively hold nominal bonds
denominated in their own currency, as suggested by Alvarez et al. (2002).24 The remaining
measure φ of (“active”) households within each country trade stocks and nominal bonds in
international markets as before.25 Each country’s nominal bond pays off one unit of the country’s
n

nominal consumer price index, P2n e−µ , where µn is a (monetary) shock to the growth rate of
the nominal price of one unit of the traded good in the currency of country n,
n

µ ∼N




1 2 2
− σ̃ , σ̃ .
2

A higher µn thus implies a higher inflation rate in country n. Active households own all stocks and
are short the nominal bonds owned by inactive households, so that monetary shocks effectively
shift resources from inactive households (who live hand-to-mouth and are not hedged against
inflation) to active agents whose marginal utilities determine exchange rates and asset prices.
(See Appendix F.1 for details on the budget constraints of both kinds of households.)
As before, the government of the stabilizing country stabilizes its exchange rate with the
target country using state-contingent taxes.
The punchline is that currency stabilization in this richer model of exchange rate determination works in the same way as in our baseline model with productivity shocks. First, note
that larger countries continue to have lower interest rates and a lower cost of capital under freely
24
A substantial fraction of households in the US and in other developed economies own savings accounts or
bonds denominated in their domestic currency, but do not own stocks or other more sophisticated financial
instruments that could hedge their portfolios against inflation (Giannetti and Koskinen, 2010; Nechio, 2010).
25
Because this richer model has six linearly independent shocks, we need a stock and a bond for each country
so that the payoffs of the available assets span all states of the world in the log-linear solution to the competitive
equilibrium, as before.

29

floating exchange rates. Solving the model yields
s

f,h∗

=p

f∗

−p

h∗

γ(1 − τ )
=
φ(1 − τ ) + γτ



 φ (γ − 1) h

h
f
f
(1 − φ) µ − µ +
χ −χ
γ

and
λ∗T


= −γ

1−φ
φ

X

θn µn − (γ − 1)

n

X

θ n χn .

n

The structure of these expressions is identical to (16) and (17): Countries import more traded
goods when they appreciate, and shocks to the price of consumption in a larger country spill over
more to λ∗T , so that larger countries tend to appreciate when λ∗T is high. For example, a low χ
in a given country increases the marginal utility of its households, appreciates its real exchange
rate, and prompts it to import more traded goods. If the country is large, these higher imports
also raise λ∗T , so that a larger country’s preference shocks spill over more to the rest of the world.
Similarly, a low monetary shock (deflation) shifts resources away from active households (who
are short the nominal bonds owned by inactive households), increases their marginal utility, and
thus appreciates the country’s real exchange rate – prompting it to import more traded goods.
If the country is large, these higher imports again have a proportionately higher impact on λ∗T .
As a result, larger countries again have safer currencies, lower interest rates, and more valuable
firms, as they did in our baseline model. Similarly, the effects of exchange rate stabilization follow
the same logic as above: A smaller country stabilizing its real exchange rate relative to a larger
country increases the covariance between its exchange rate and λT :
m

p =p

m∗


+ζ

γτ + θm (1 − τ )φ
γτ



(pt∗ − pm∗ );

and by making its currency safer, the stabilizing government increases domestic capital accumulation and its households’ share in world wealth. As before, the stabilizing government must
artificially increase its exports of traded goods whenever the target country appreciates, in order
to maintain the stabilization:
m∗
cm
T − cT = −ζ


(1 − θm ) (τ + (1 − τ )φ)2 + (1 − τ )(1 − φ)(γτ + (1 − τ )φ) t∗
p − pm∗ .
γτ (τ + (1 − τ )φ)

Moreover, by effectively selling insurance against the target country’s shocks, the stabilizing
country again dampens the effect of the target country’s shocks on the world-market price of

30

traded goods:
λT =

λ∗T

− ζθ

m



γτ + (1 − τ )φ
γτ



(pt∗ − pm∗ ).

It follows directly that all of our positive predictions about the effects of currency stabilizations
carry over to this richer model. (The conclusions of our normative analysis also continue to hold
as long as the traditional welfare criterion is applicable (φ = 1), but are harder to interpret once
we have more than one class of households per country.)
Proposition 6
In the model with market segmentation, monetary shocks, and preference shocks with γ > 1, the
following hold:
1. A country that stabilizes its real exchange rate relative to a target country sufficiently larger
than itself lowers its risk-free interest rate and increases the world-market value of domestic
firms, domestic capital accumulation, and domestic wages relative to the target country.
2. If the stabilizing country is small (θm = 0), the cost of the stabilization globally decreases
with the size of the target country.
3. A country that becomes the target of a stabilization of any strength ζ > 0 imposed by a
large country experiences an increase in its risk-free interest rate, a decrease in capital
accumulation, and a decrease in average wages relative to all other countries.
Proof. See Appendix F.4.
In addition to reinforcing the main insights from our baseline model, this richer framework
addresses the three major empirical shortcomings of the international real business cycle model
outlined above: The combination of market segmentation, monetary shocks, and preference
shocks loosens or even reverses the negative correlation between appreciations of the real exchange
rate and aggregate consumption growth, lowers the correlation of aggregate consumption across
countries, and increases the volatility of real and nominal exchange rates (Alvarez et al., 2002;
Pavlova and Rigobon, 2007; Kollmann, 2012). All of our conclusions from section 2 thus carry
over to this empirically more viable model of exchange rate determination.
Beyond this particular model, we believe that the results stated in Proposition 6 are quite
general and hold in a wide range of models where currency manipulation transmits itself through
a wedge on the price of traded goods. As noted in the introduction, more general models
could also allow governments to stabilize exchange rates by manipulating additional wedges on
31

allocations within countries, such as the sectoral allocation of labor or the distribution of wealth
across households. Within this broader class of models, it is possible to construct examples where
stabilization of the real exchange rate is achieved by reducing rather than increasing exports in
response to an appreciation by the target country. In those examples, stabilizations relative to
larger countries continue to lower domestic interest rates and increase capital accumulation, but
some of the other implications highlighted above may not generalize. In this sense, the first
statement in Proposition 6 is the most general, whereas the second and third statements rely on
the – we believe plausible – assumption that interventions in currency markets affect allocations
primarily through their effect on trade and the prices of traded goods.

Conclusion
The majority of countries in the world stabilize their real or nominal exchange rate relative to
the US dollar. Although exchange rate stabilizations are possibly the most pervasive form of
currency market interventions, existing theories give relatively little guidance on the effects of
such stabilizations, on what might be special about the US dollar as a target currency, and on
how these stabilizations might affect the target country.
Building on a growing literature that views risk premia as the main driving force behind
large and persistent differences in interest rates across developed economies, we propose a novel,
risk-based theory of the effects of currency manipulation: Policies that reduce the riskiness of
a country’s currency from the perspective of international investors reduce its risk premium in
international markets, lower the country’s risk-free interest rate, and increase domestic capital
accumulation, domestic wages, and the world market value of domestic firms.
In particular, we show that stabilizing a country’s real exchange rate relative to a larger (and
safer) target economy is precisely such a policy that enables small countries to increase the worldmarket value of their capital stock, bonds, and firms. Moreover, if the prices of traded goods
are at least partially sticky in terms of the domestic currency, such real stabilizations correspond
directly to the kinds of simple stabilizations of nominal exchange rates relative to the US dollar
we observe in the data, where central banks engage in a variety of open market operations to
maintain pegs, moving bands, or managed floats.
In equilibrium, the effect of exchange rate stabilizations on risk premia gives rise to a pattern
of optimal stabilizations that is remarkably similar to the one we see in the data: In the absence
of coordination, small countries find it optimal to stabilize their exchange rates relative to the
32

currency of the largest economy in the world, which endogenously emerges as the world’s “anchor” currency. By contrast, larger countries optimally choose looser stabilizations or float their
exchange rates. In other words, our model suggests that the dollar-centric pattern of exchange
rate regimes that has arisen since the collapse of the Bretton-Woods system can be understood
as an attempt to manage risk and attract investment.
Interestingly, our model also suggests that this (non-cooperative) equilibrium pattern of stabilization tends to benefit not only the stabilizers, but also target country, while other countries
that are too large to stabilize their own exchange rates are always worse off relative to a worldwide freely-floating regime.
In sum, we believe our paper provides a novel way of thinking about the effects of currency
stabilization. Along with highlighting a model-consistent rationale for stabilizing, we also give
an account of the costs and benefits of important choices for the stabilization regime, such as the
choice of target country, the effects of hard pegs versus floating bands, and stabilizations relative
to a single country versus a basket of currencies.
Our work leaves open at least three avenues for future research. First, careful empirical work
will be needed to identify the effect of currency manipulation in the data and disentangle the
effects of altered risk premia from effects that may transmit themselves through more conventional channels, such as facilitating trade with the target country and establishing credibility for
monetary policy. A prerequisite to making progress on these questions will be to identify (and
control for) stabilizations that also involve manipulating the mean of the real exchange rate—a
contentious political issue that has not been satisfactorily resolved in the empirical literature.
Second, although many models have argued for risk premia as the main drivers of cross-sectional
differences in interest rates, all of these papers, including our own, rely on standard preferences
and thus generally imply risk premia are quantitatively small. Recent work by Govillot et al.
(2010), David et al. (2016), and Colacito et al. (2018) makes progress in this dimension by
studying dynamic models with heterogeneous countries and recursive preferences. However, the
literature is still far from rationalizing the large differences in mean returns across currencies we
see in the data in a microfounded quantitative model. Finally, our analysis has focused exclusively on a simple problem in which each country optimally chooses its own exchange rate regime,
taking as given the policies of other countries. Analogous to a large literature on strategic interactions in trade policy (Bagwell and Staiger, 1999; Ossa, 2011), our prediction that exchange
rate policy alters the equilibrium allocation of factors of production may also serve as the basis
of a multilateral theory of strategic interactions in the choice of exchange rate regime.
33

References
Alvarez, F., A. Atkeson, and P. J. Kehoe (2002). Money, interest rates, and exchange rates with
endogenously segmented markets. Journal of Political Economy 110 (1), 73–112.
Auclert, A. and M. Rognlie (2014). Monetary union begets fiscal union. mimeo Stanford University.
Bacchetta, P. and E. van Wincoop (2000). Does exchange-rate stability increase trade and
welfare. American Economic Review 90 (5), 1093–1109.
Backus, D. K., P. J. Kehoe, and F. E. Kydland (1994). Determinants of the trade balance and
the terms of trade: The j curve? American Economic Review 84 (1), 84–103.
Backus, D. K. and G. W. Smith (1993). Consumption and real exchange rates in dynamic
economies with non-traded goods. Journal of International Economics 35, 297–316.
Bagwell, K. and R. Staiger (1999). An economic theory of gatt. American Economic Review .
Bates, R. H. (2005). Markets and States in Tropical Africa: The Political Basis of Agricultural
Policies: With a New Preface. Univ of California Press.
Bergin, P. R. and G. Corsetti (2015). International competitiveness and monetary policy. Unpublished Manuscript.
Bianchi, J. (2011, December). Overborrowing and systemic externalities in the business cycle.
American Economic Review 101 (7), 3400–3426.
Bocola, L. and G. Lorenzoni (2019). Financial crises, dollarization, and lending of last resort in
open economies. National Bureau of Economic Research.
Boz, E., C. Casas, F. J. Diez, G. Gopinath, P.-O. Gourinchas, and M. Plagborg-Moller (2019).
Dominant currency paradigm. American Economic Review . Accepted.
Calvo, G. and E. Mendoza (2000). Rational contagion and the globalization of securities markets.
Journal of International Economics 51 (1), 79–113.
Campbell, J. Y., K. Serfaty-De Medeiros, and L. M. Viceira (2010). Global currency hedging.
The Journal of Finance 65 (1), 87–121.
Cavallo, A., B. Neiman, and R. Rigobon (2014). Currency unions, product introductions, and
the real exchange rate. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, qju008.
Chahrour, R. and R. Valchev (2019). The international medium of exchange. Boston College.
Chari, V. V. and P. J. Kehoe (1990). International coordination of fiscal policy in limiting
economies. Journal of Political Economy 98 (3), 617–636.
Chari, V. V., P. J. Kehoe, and E. R. McGrattan (2002). Can sticky price models generate volatile
and persistent real exchange rates? The Review of Economic Studies 69 (3), 533–563.

34

Coeurdacier, N. (2009). Do trade costs in goods market lead to home bias in equities? Journal
of International Economics 77 (1), 86–100.
Coeurdacier, N. and H. Rey (2013, March). Home bias in open economy financial macroeconomics. Journal of Economic Literature 51 (1), 63–115.
Colacito, R., M. Croce, F. Gavazzoni, and R. Ready (2018). Currency risk factors in a recursive
multi-country economy. The Journal of Finance 73 (6), 2719–2756.
Corsetti, G., L. Dedola, and S. Leduc (2010). Optimal monetary policy in open economies. In
B. M. Friedman and M. Woodford (Eds.), Handbook of Monetary Economics (1 ed.), Volume 3,
Chapter 16, pp. 861–933. Elsevier.
Costinot, A., G. Lorenzoni, and I. Werning (2014). A theory of capital controls as dynamic
terms-of-trade manipulation. Journal of Political Economy 122 (1), 77–128.
Cukierman, A., S. Edwards, and G. Tabellini (1992). Seigniorage and political instability. The
American Economic Review , 537–555.
David, J. M., E. Henriksen, and I. Simonovska (2016). The risky capital of emerging markets.
NBER Working Paper Series 20769, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Devereux, M. B. and C. Engel (2003). Monetary policy in the open economy revisited: Price
setting and exchange-rate flexibility. Review of Economic Studies.
Engel, C. (1999). Accounting for u.s. real exchange rate changes. Journal of Political Economy.
Fanelli, S. and L. Straub (2019). A theory of foreign exchange interventions.
Farhi, E. and X. Gabaix (2015). Rare disasters and exchange rates. Quarterly Journal of
Economics forthcoming.
Farhi, E. and M. Maggiori (2017). A model of the international monetary system. Quarterly
Journal of Economics 133 (1), 295–355.
Farhi, E. and I. Werning (2013). Dilemma not trilemma? capital controls and exchange rates
with volatile capital flows. mimeo, Massachusetts Institute of Technology.
Farhi, E. and I. Werning (2014). Dealing with the trilemma: Optimal capital controls with fixed
exchange rates. IMF Economic Review 62 (4), 569–605.
Fornaro, L. (2015). Financial crises and exchange rate policy. Journal of International Economics 95 (2), 202–215.
Frankel, J. A. and A. Rose (2002). An estimare of the effect of common currencies on trade and
income. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 117 (2), 437–466.
Gabaix, X. and M. Maggiori (2015). International liquidity and exchange rate dynamics. Quarterly Journal of Economics 130 (3), 1369–1420.
Gali, J. and T. Monacelli (2005). Monetary policy and exchange rate volatility in a small open
economy. Review of Economic Studies 72, 707–734.
35

Garber, P. M. and L. E. O. Svensson (1995). The operation and collapse of fixed exchange rate
regimes, Volume 3, Chapter 36, pp. 1865–1911. Elsevier.
Giannetti, M. and Y. Koskinen (2010, February). Investor protection, equity returns, and financial globalization. Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 45 (01), 135–168.
Gopinath, G. and J. Stein (2019). Banking, trade and the making of a dominant currency. NBER
Working Paper Series No. 24485.
Gourinchas, P.-O. and H. Rey (2007). From world banker to world venture capitalist: U.s. external adjustment and the exorbitant privilege. In G7 Current Account Imbalances: Sustainability
and Adjustment, NBER Chapters, pp. 11–66. National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.
Govillot, N., H. Rey, and P. Gourinchas (2010). Us external returns and the exorbitant duty.
2010 Meeting Papers 371, Society for Economic Dynamics.
Hassan, T. A. (2013). Country size, currency unions, and international asset returns. The Journal
of Finance 68 (6), 2269–2308.
Hassan, T. A. and R. Mano (2019). Forward and spot exchange rates in a multi-currency world.
The Quarterly Journal of Economics 134 (1), 397–450.
Hassan, T. A., T. M. Mertens, and T. Zhang (2016). Not so disconnected: Exchange rates and
the captial stock. Journal of International Economics 99.
He, Z., A. Krishnamurthy, and K. Milbradt (2019). A model of safe asset determination. American Economic Review 109 (4), 1230–1262.
Helpman, E. and A. Razin (1987). Exchange rate management: Intertemporal tradeoffs. American Economic Review 77 (1), 107–123.
Hooper, P. and S. W. Kohlhagen (1978, s). The effect of exchange rate uncertainty on the prices
and volume of international trade. Journal of International Economics 8 (4), 483–511.
Ilzetzki, E., C. M. Reinhart, and K. S. Rogoff (2018). Exchange arrangements entering the 21st
century: which anchor will hold? Quarterly Journal of Economics.
Jeanne, O. and A. Korinek (2010). Excessive volatility in capital flows: A pigouvian taxation
approach. American Economic Review 100 (2), 403–407.
Kenen, P. B. and D. Rodrik (1986). Measuring and analyzing the efects of short-term volatility
in real exchange rates. The Review of Economics and Statistics 68 (2), 311–315.
Kollmann, R. (2002). Monetary policy rules in the open economy: effects on welfare and business
cycles. Journal of Monetary Economics.
Kollmann, R. (2012). Limited asset market participation and the consumption-real exchange
rate anomaly. Canadian Journal of Economics.
Korinek, A. (2013). Capital controls and currency wars. mimeo University of Maryland .

36

Korinek, A. and A. Simsek (2016). Liquidity trap and excessive leverage. American Economic
Review 106 (3), 699–738.
Krugman, P. R. (1979, August). A model of balance of payments crises. Journal of Money,
Credit and Banking (11), 311–325.
Levy, P. I. (2011). The united states and china: Macroeconomic imbalances and economic
diplomacy. AEI Economic Policy Studies Working Paper .
Lustig, H., N. Roussanov, and A. Verdelhan (2011). Common risk factors in currency markets.
Review of Financial Studies 24 (11), 3731–3777.
Lustig, H. and A. Verdelhan (2007). The cross section of foreign currency risk premia and
consumption growth risk. American Economic Review 97 (1), 89–117.
Maggiori, M. (2017). Financial intermediation, international risk sharing, and reserve currencies.
American Economic Review 107 (10), 3038–71.
Martin, I. (2012). The forward premium puzzle in a two-country world. mimeo.
Menkhoff, L., L. Sarno, M. Schmeling, and A. Schrimpf (2012). Carry trades and global foreign
exchange volatility. Journal of Finance 67 (2), 681–718.
Miranda-Agrippino, S. and H. Rey (2015). World asset markets and the global financial cycle.
NBER Working Paper Series 21722, National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.
Mussa, M. (1986). Nominal exchange rate regimes and the behavior of real exchange rates: Evidence and implications. In Carnegie-Rochester Conference series on public policy, Volume 25,
pp. 117–214. Elsevier.
Nechio, F. (2010). Foreign stock holdings: the role of information. Working Paper Series 2010-26,
Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco.
Ossa, R. (2011). A new trade theory of gatt/wto negotiations. Journal of Political Economy 119 (1), 122–152.
Ottonello, P. (2015). Optimal exchange rate policy under collateral constraints and wage rigidity.
manuscript, Columbia University.
Parrado, E. and A. Velasco (2002). Optimal interest rate policy in a small open economy. NBER
Working Paper Series 8721, National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.
Pavlova, A. and R. Rigobon (2007). Asset prices and exchange rates. Review of Financial
Studies 20 (4), 1139–1180.
Persson, T. and G. E. Tabellini (2002). Political economics: explaining economic policy. MIT
press.
Powers, T. Y. (2015). The commodity currency puzzle. mimeo Harvard University.
Ready, R., N. Roussanov, and C. Ward (2017). Commodity trade and the carry trade: a tale of
two countries. The Journal of Finance 72 (6), 2629–2684.
37

Richmond, R. (2019). Trade network centrality and the currency carry trade. The Journal of
Finance 74 (3), 1315–1361.
Schmitt-Grohé, S. and M. Uribe (2012). Pegs and pain. mimeo Columbia University.
Tran, N.-K. (2013). Growth risk of nontraded industries and asset pricing. mimeo Olin Business
School.
Verdelhan, A. (2017). The share of systematic risk in bilateral exchange rates. The Journal of
Finance 73 (1), 375–418.
Zhang, T. (2019). Monetary policy spillovers through invoicing currencies. Boston University.

38

Figure 1: Effect of Stabilization on Utility in the Stabilizing Country

Δum

(a) Drivers of utility gains/losses over the size of the target
country

0

0

θ

0.5
θt

ΔK, Revenues

1
ΔVar[cm]

Valuation Effect

Δum

(b) Utility gains of stabilization over strength of stabilization
for stabilizing countries of different sizes

0

0

0.5
ζ
θm=0

θm=0.16

1
θm=0.20

Notes: Both plots show the percentage increase in the certainty-equivalent consumption of a representative household in the stabilizing country attributable to the stabilization (∆um ) for a numerical
example where τ = 1/3, and γ = 7. Panel (a) shows the three components of ∆um shown on the right
hand side of (23) for a small stabilizing country (θm = 0) and a hard peg (ζ = 1). The net utility gain
is the sum of the three lines. It is positive for all θt > θ̄. Panel (b) shows the net utility gain as a
function of ζ for stabilizing countries of different sizes. See Appendix C for the generalization of (23)
that allows for θm > 0.

39

40

0

θ

1

0

Hard Peg (ζ =1)

θ

m

0.15

Freely Floating (ζ =0)

Soft Peg (ζ ∈ (0,1))

(a) Optimal Choice of Exchange Rate Regime

0

θ

1

0

0 > Δut > Δuo

θ

m

0.15

Δut ≥ 0 > Δuo

(b) Externalities on Target and Outside Countries

Notes: The triangular region shown in both figures marks the subset of the parameter space where a stabilization is strictly welfare-increasing
for the stabilizing country (∆um > 0) for a numerical example where τ = 1/3, and γ = 7. Outside of triangular region the stabilizing country
maximizes its own utility by floating (ζ = 0). Panel (a) marks regions where the stabilizing country’s optimal choice is to impose a hard
peg (ζ = 1, marked in red) versus a “softer” stabilization (ζ ∈ (0, 1), marked in purple). Panel (b) illustrates the (pecuniary) externalities of
these optimal stabilizations on the target and outside countries.

θt

Figure 2: Optimal Stabilizations

θt

Appendix
-For online publication only-

A

Appendix to Section 1

The country n risk-free bond pays off P n units of the traded good at maturity. We derive the
value of the risk-free bond, VPn , by applying the asset pricing equation to the bond payoff:
VPn = E [ΛT P n ] ,
where ΛT denotes the stochastic discount factor. The country n risk-free rate (in levels), Rn , is
the inverse of the price of the risk-free bond:
Rn =

1
.
VPn

Putting the previous two equations together yields the following relationship:
E [ΛT P n ] Rn = 1.
As a result, the risk-free rates of countries f and h are related as follows:




E ΛT P f R f = E ΛT P h R h = 1
If the stochastic discount factor and prices are log-normal, we can perform the following calculations:




E ΛT P f R f = E ΛT P h R h






⇔ E exp λT + pf + rf = E exp λT + ph + rh

 1


1
⇔ E λT + pf + var (λT ) + var pf + cov λT , pf + rf
2
2




1
1
= E λT + ph + var (λT ) + var ph + cov λT , ph + rh ,
2
2

41

We cancel out var (λT ) from both sides of the previous equation.

  1

  1


E pf + var pf + cov λT , pf + rf = E ph + var ph + cov λT , ph + rh
2
2





1
1
⇔ rf + E pf − ph + var pf − var ph − rh = −cov λT , pf − ph
2
2
 f   h 

f
h
⇔ r + log E P /E P
− r = −cov λT , pf − ph
   
 
We define ∆E sf,h = log E P f /E P h . With this definition:

 
rf + ∆E sf,h − rh = −cov λT , pf − ph .

B

Appendix to Sections 2.1 - 2.4

B.1

Equilibrium Conditions

In this appendix, we provide additional details for our baseline model in Section 2.1 and formally
derive its equilibrium conditions. To avoid solving the optimization problem separately for
households in the stabilizing country and households in the rest of the world, we generalize the
notation to allow all countries to impose state-contingent taxes, Z n (ω), and provide lump sum
transfers, Z̄ n . The governments in the target and outside countries do not use these instruments,
such that Z t (ω) = Z o (ω) = 1 and Z̄ t = Z̄ o = 0.
In the second period, all households maximize their utility (4) subject to their budget constraint:
Z n (ω)CTn (ω) + PNn (ω)CNn (ω) ≤

X

Anl PNl (ω)YNl (ω) + YT

(27)

l

where PNn (ω) is the price of the nontraded good in the stabilizing country in state ω, Anl is
number the stocks a country n household owns in the firm in country l, and YT = 1 is the unit
endowment of the traded good.
In the first period, households choose their portfolio of stocks to maximize expected utility
in the second period. The first-period budget constraint reads:
X

Anl QlN + QK KNn ≤ W0n .

(28)

l

where W0n represents initial household wealth in terms of traded goods in the first period.
ΛnT (ω) denotes the Lagrange multiplier on the budget constraint for the country n household
42

in state ω in the second period. The first-order conditions are:
τ (C n (ω)1−γ ) (CTn (ω))−1
= ΛnT (ω)
n
Z (ω)

(1 − τ ) C n (ω)1−γ (CNn (ω))−1 = ΛnT (ω)PNn (ω).

(29)
(30)

The consumption tax drives a wedge between the marginal utility of consumption of traded
goods and its shadow price, as equation (29) shows. Equations (12) and (30) jointly imply
PNn (ω) = ΛnN (ω)/ΛnT (ω).
Next, we derive equilibrium conditions that determine first-period investment in stocks and
capital. Since the final consumption bundle is a Cobb-Douglas aggregate of traded and nontraded
goods, households spend a fraction τ of their second-period wealth on traded consumption and
a fraction 1 − τ on nontraded consumption:
CTn (ω)

P
=τ

l

Anl PNl (ω)YNl (ω) + YT
Z n (ω)


and

CNn (ω)

P
= (1 − τ )

l

Anl PNl (ω)YNl (ω) + YT
PNn (ω)


.

In the first period, households choose their portfolio of stocks and firms decide on their capital
investment, KNn . We plug the consumption of traded and nontraded goods into equations (3)
and (4) and take first-order conditions to obtain:
"
QlN

τ τ (1 − τ )1−τ
ΛnT,1 (Z n (ω))τ (PNn (ω))1−τ

=E

!

#
−γ

n

(C (ω))

PNl (ω)YNl (ω)

,

where ΛnT,1 denotes the Lagrange multiplier on the first-period budget constraint for a household
in country n.
Divide through by QlN and apply the definition of the price index P n (ω) given by equation
(36) in Appendix B.2 to obtain
"

#
ΛnT (ω) PNl (ω)YNl (ω)
E
= 1.
ΛnT,1
QlN
Firms invest in capital to maximize the expected discounted value of profits:
"
max
E
n
K

ΛnT (ω)
ΛnT,1

!

#
PNn (ω) exp (η n ) (K n )ν − QK (K n − 1) .

43

(31)

Their first-order condition with respect to K n yields
"

#
ΛnT (ω) n
ν−1
QK = νE
P (ω) exp (η n ) (K n )
.
ΛnT,1 N
Multiply both sides of the previous equation by K n , divide by QK , substitute YNn = exp(η n ) (K n )ν ,
and apply the definition of PNn (ω) to get (13).
Equations (31) and (13) show ΛnT (ω)/ΛnT,1 are the stochastic discount factors used to price
assets that pay off in traded goods in the second period. Since stocks and capital are freely
traded in international markets, all households must be marginal to investing in all stocks and
all firms must be marginal to purchasing an additional unit of capital. As a result, the stochastic
discount factors are equal in equilibrium across countries,
Λm
ΛnT (ω)
T (ω)
=
n
ΛT,1
Λm
T,1

∀ n, m,

(32)

even though the government’s intervention drives a wedge between ΛT (ω) and the marginal
utility of traded consumption in the stabilizing country, as equation (29) shows.
As a final step, we derive the equations that pin down the first and second-period Lagrange
multipliers. Household wealth in the first period is:
W0n = QnN + QK + κn + Z̄ n ,
Recall that households are endowed with a unit of stock and a unit of capital. κn is the transfer
that equalizes the marginal utility of wealth across households when countries do not manipulate
the exchange rate, and the transfer Z̄ m ensures the same is true under a stabilization, so that
ΛnT,1 = ΛT,1

∀ n.

(33)

As a result, (32) implies
ΛnT (ω) = ΛT (ω) ∀ n, ω.
Hence, we drop the country index on the Lagrange multipliers, and interpret ΛT (ω) as the
shadow price of traded consumption in the target and outside countries in the second period.
This result implies equations (10), (12) and (13).
Equation (33) shows the first-period Lagrange multipliers are equal to each other, but it does

44

not determine the level of the Lagrange multipliers. Without loss of generality, we normalize the
first period Lagrange multiplier:
ΛT,1 = E [ΛnT (ω)] .

B.2

(34)

Deriving the Price Index

The cost of one unit of consumption in country n is given by the price index
P n = arg min CTn + PNn CNn s.t. (CTn )τ (CNn )1−τ = 1.

(35)

First-order conditions imply CNn = (1 − τ ) / (PNn τ ) CTn . We plug this expression for CNn into the
constraint (CTn )τ (CNn )1−τ = 1, and solve for CTn :
CTn


=

τ
Pn
1−τ N

1−τ
.

We plug the expressions for CTn and CNn back into equation (35) to derive the optimal price index:
Pn =

(PNn )1−τ
.
τ τ (1 − τ )1−τ

(36)

The total value of consumption for households in country n is
P nC n =

(PNn )1−τ
τ τ (1 − τ )1−τ

Similarly, we use the expression PNn =

n
1−τ CT
n
τ CN

!

to show that

CTn + PNn CNn =

B.3

 Cn
(CTn )τ (CNn )1−τ = T .
τ

CTn
= P nC n.
τ

Log-linearized System of Equations

This appendix derives the log-linearized first-order conditions. To reiterate, we log-linearize
around the deterministic solution — the point at which the variances of shocks are zero (σ N,n = 0)
and all firms have a capital stock fixed at the deterministic steady-state level.
We have shown in Appendix B.1 that the stochastic discount factor ΛnT (ω)/ΛnT,1 is equalized
across all households in all states. It is convenient to write the logarithm of this stochastic

45

discount factor as:
q = λnT − λnT,1 .
We can then write the log-linear first-order conditions for the second period as
(1 − γ) (τ cnT + (1 − τ )cnN ) − cnT + log τ = z n + q + λnT,1
(1 − γ) (τ cnT + (1 − τ )cnN ) − cnN + log(1 − τ ) = pnN + q + λnT,1 ,
and the log-linear resource constraints are:
n
cnN = yN

X

θn cnT = 0

n=m,t,o

where z m = log (Z m (ω)) and z t = z o = 0. Note that ∆Res is a second-order term (linear in
σ n ) and consequently does not show up in the log-linear resource constraint. This set of ten
linear equations (two first order conditions for each country and four resource constraints) allows
us to solve for the endogenous variables {cnN , cnT , pnN }n=m,t,o and q. Keeping in mind the loglinear relationship between each country’s output and its respective productivity shock (5), it is
m t
o
convenient to solve for these endogenous variables in terms of each country’s output {yN
, yN , yN
},
 m t
o
and the Lagrange multipliers λT,1 , λT,1 , λT,1 .

Solving the system yields:
λ̄T,1 − λm
(γ − 1)(1 − τ )
1 − θm
T,1
m
(ȳN − yN
zm +
)−
1 + (γ − 1)τ
1 + (γ − 1)τ
1 + (γ − 1)τ
m

λ̄T,1 − λtT,1
θ
(γ − 1)(1 − τ )
t
m
t
cT =
ȳN − yN +
z +
1 + (γ − 1)τ
1 + (γ − 1)τ
1 + (γ − 1)τ
m
λ̄T,1 − λoT,1
(γ − 1)(1 − τ )
θ
o
o
m
cT =
(ȳN − yN ) +
z +
1 + (γ − 1)τ
1 + (γ − 1)τ
1 + (γ − 1)τ

cm
T =

n
cnN = yN

∀n

46

where λ̄T,1 =

P

n

θn λnT,1 . In addition, we have the equilibrium prices:

q = −(1 − τ )(γ − 1)ȳN − θm z − λ̄T,1
λ̄T,1 − λm
(γ − 1)(1 − τ )
γ
θm + (γ − 1)τ m
1−τ
T,1
m
ȳN −
yN
+
z +
+ log[
]
1 + (γ − 1)τ
1 + (γ − 1)τ
1 + (γ − 1)τ
1 + (γ − 1)τ
τ
λ̄T,1 − λtT,1
(γ − 1)(1 − τ )
γ
θm
1−τ
t
t
m
pN =
ȳN −
yN +
z +
+ log[
]
1 + (γ − 1)τ
1 + (γ − 1)τ
1 + (γ − 1)τ
1 + (γ − 1)τ
τ
λ̄T,1 − λoT,1
θm
(γ − 1)(1 − τ )
γ
1−τ
o
+
ȳN −
yN
zm +
+ log[
]
poN =
1 + (γ − 1)τ
1 + (γ − 1)τ
1 + (γ − 1)τ
1 + (γ − 1)τ
τ
pm
N =

It is also useful to keep track of the shadow prices of total consumption in each country. To this
end, we also use the log-linear expression λn = −γ (τ cnT + (1 − τ )cnN ) along with the solutions
for traded and nontraded consumption above to obtain:

m
γ(1 − τ ) m
(1 − θm ) γτ m γτ λ̄T,1 − λT,1
(γ − 1)(1 − τ )γτ
yN −
y +
z −
λ =−
1 + (γ − 1)τ
1 + (γ − 1)τ N 1 + (γ − 1)τ
1 + (γ − 1)τ

t
m
λ̄
−
λ
γτ
γ(1
−
τ
)
(γ
−
1)(1
−
τ
)γτ
θ
γτ
T,1
T,1
yN −
yt +
zm −
λt = −
1 + (γ − 1)τ
1 + (γ − 1)τ N 1 + (γ − 1)τ
1 + (γ − 1)τ

o
m
γτ
λ̄
−
λ
γ(1
−
τ
)
θ
γτ
(γ
−
1)(1
−
τ
)γτ
T,1
T,1
yN −
yo +
zm −
λo = −
1 + (γ − 1)τ
1 + (γ − 1)τ N 1 + (γ − 1)τ
1 + (γ − 1)τ
m

Finally, the following log-linear equations determine the first-period Lagrange multipliers.
Again, recall the stabilizing country’s government uses Z̄ m to add and subtract resources from the
economy to achieve (P2), which equalizes the marginal utility of initial wealth across households.
As a result:
t
o
λm
T,1 = λT,1 = λT,1 = λT,1 ,

so that the remaining endogenous term drop out of the solutions above, λ̄T,1 − λm
T,1 = 0. Next,
we normalize λT,1 using the second-order approximation of equation (34):
1
λT,1 = E [λT ] + var [λT ] .
2

B.4

Equilibrium Asset Portfolio

m t
o
In the log-linear solution, all prices and quantities are a linear combination of {yN
, yN , yN
}. In

particular, household expenditure, pn + cn , in each state of the world is a linear combination of
m t
o
m t
o
{yN
, yN , yN
}. All asset payoffs are also linear combinations of {yN
, yN , yN
}. Any set of assets

with the same rank as the set of household expenditures will thus be able to span the space of
47

household expenditure. Therefore, given the appropriate set of assets, we can write household
expenditure in each state of the world as a linear combination of these assets.
It is straightforward to verify that the set of log-linear stock payoffs spans the space of loglinear household wealth.
Lemma 2
Households in the freely floating exchange rate equilibrium hold levered positions in their own
country’s stocks and hold short positions in other countries’ stocks,
Ann

θn τ
1 − θn τ
n
=
and Al = −
for l 6= n
1−τ
1−τ

Proof. The household budget constraint (27) can be re-written as:
P n (ω)C n (ω) =

X

Anl PNn (ω)YNn (ω) + YTn

l=m,t,o

The log-linear approximation of household expenditure of the left-hand side is:
1 n
(γ − 1)(1 − τ )
n
(p + cn + log [τ ]) =
(ȳN − yN
)
τ
τ (1 − (γ − 1)τ )
The log-linear approximation the stock portfolio payoff (right-hand side) is:
X
l=m,t,o

1
Anl

−τ
τ




1−τ
l∗
l
pN + yN − log
.
τ

where:
l∗
pN

+

l
yN




(γ − 1)(1 − τ )
1−τ
l
=
ȳN − yN + log
.
1 + (γ − 1)τ
τ

We equate household expenditures in each state of the world with the portfolio payoff:



X
1−τ
(γ − 1)(1 − τ )
n
n1 − τ
l∗
l
Al
pN + yN − log
(ȳN − yN ) =
(1 − (γ − 1)τ )
τ
τ
l=m,t,o
Since this equation holds state-by-state, we solve for the shares, Anl , by matching the coefficients
l
l
on yN
in the portfolio payoff with the coefficients on yN
in household expenditure.

48

B.5

Derivation of Equation (19)

To derive (19), we use the following second-order approximation of equation (13):
1
n
n
] + var (λnN + yN
),
λT,1 + qK + k n = log[ν] + E [λnN + yN
2
Next, we substitute λnN = pnN + λT , and take differences across two arbitrary countries f and h
to obtain:



 1

1
f
f
h
h
, λT .
k f − k h = var pfN + yN
+ cov pfN + yN
− phN − yN
− var phN + yN
2
2

(37)

For any country n:
n∗
pn∗
N + yN =

(1 − τ )(γ − 1)
n
(ȳN − yN
).
1 + (γ − 1)τ

n∗
Plugging this expression for pn∗
N + yN into the right-hand side of equation (37) shows:

k f ∗ − k h∗ =


(γ − 1)3 (1 − τ )2 τ f
θ − θh σ 2N .
1 + (γ − 1)τ

Combine this equation with equation (18) to derive (19),

B.6

Proof of Lemma 1

First, we solve for the state-contingent taxes that implement the real exchange rate stabilization.
Afterwards, we derive an expression for the cost of stabilizing the exchange rate. We guess a tax
a

of the form Z(ω) = (YNm (ω)/YNt (ω)) stabilizes the exchange rate for a constant a and solve for
t
m
the coefficient a that stabilizes the real exchange rate. In logs, this tax is: z = a (yN
− yN
). We

plug this expression into the solution of the model derived in Appendix B.3 and solve for the log
real exchange rate:
sm,t =



γτ
γ(1 − τ )
t
m
m
t
yN
− yN
+a
yN
− yN
.
1 + (γ − 1)τ
1 + (γ − 1)τ

Choose a such that sm,t = (1 − ζ)sm,t∗ . This yields a = ζ(1 − τ )/τ . Finally, we use the expression
for sf,h∗ given by equation (17) to write z as a function of pm∗ and pt∗ .
∆Res is defined by equation (6). First, we solve for Z̄ by plugging in the equilibrium con-

49

sumption of nontraded goods and K m = 1 into the budget constraint (28):
m
Z̄ = (Am
m − 1) QN +

X

l
m
Am
l QN − κ .

l6=m

Next, multiply equation (27) by the stochastic discount factor, ΛT (ω)/ΛT,1 , and take expectations
to derive the present value of tax revenues:

E
"
=E
= (Am
m

ΛT (ω)
ΛT,1



ΛT (ω)
ΛT,1



−



1) CTm (ω)

(Z(ω) −

1) Qm
N

!#
m
m
(Am
m − 1) PN (ω)YN (ω) +

X

m
n
m
m
Am
l PN (ω)YN (ω) + YT − CT (ω)

l6=m

+

X

l
Am
l QN

+

YTm E

l6=m



ΛT (ω)
ΛT,1




−E

ΛT (ω)
ΛT,1





CTm (ω)

Finally, we derive κm . In the freely floating exchange rate economy, Z̄ = 0 and Z(ω) = 1. Plug
these values into equations (27) and (28). Finally, we substitute equation (34) and use the fact
that YTm is a constant to show:
"
κm = E

Λ∗T (ω)
Λ∗T,1

!

#
CTm∗ (ω) − YTm

(38)

We plug the expressions for Z̄, the present value of tax revenues, and κm in equation (6), and
simplify to arrive at equation (20).
We also derive the portfolio of stocks that exactly finances the stabilization policy. This is
the portfolio that pays the difference between traded consumption when stabilizing and traded
consumption in the freely floating regime given by equation (21). For convenience, this equation
is repeated here where pt∗ − pm∗ is written in terms differences in nontraded output:
cm
T

−

cm∗
T


(1 − θm )(1 − τ ) t
m
=ζ
yN − yN
.
τ (1 + (γ − 1)τ )

We use the same log-linear approximation of the stock portfolio as in Appendix B.4. Letting Am
l
denote the number of shares of country l stock the stabilizing country’s central bank holds, we
get
Am
m = ζ

1 − θm
m
, Am = −Am
m , Ao = 0.
γ − ζ(γ − 1)(1 − τ ) t

50

B.7

Proof of Proposition 1

We use the expressions from Appendix B.3 to calculate pt − pm = λt − λm and we plug the
resulting expression into equation (2):
rm + ∆Esm,t − rt = cov λT , pt − pm
= r

m∗

+ ∆Es

m,t∗


−r

t∗





(1 − τ )2 γ 2θm (1 − ζ) + θt − θm (γ − 1)τ 2
σN .
−ζ
τ (1 + (γ − 1)τ )

When the stabilizing country is smaller than the target country, θm < θt , the right-hand side
of this expression implies the stabilization decreases the risk-free rate in the stabilizing country
relative to the risk-free rate in the target country.
We use equation (37) to calculate the differential incentives to accumulate capital:
k m − k t = k m∗ − k t∗ + ζ

(γ − 1)2 (1 − τ )2 (1 − 2θm )(1 − ζ) + (θt − θm )(γ − 1)τ
2

(1 + (γ − 1)τ )

!
σ 2N .

The last term of the right-hand side of this expression shows that incentives to accumulate capital
in the stabilizing country increase relative to the target country as long as
θt > θm +

(1 − 2θm )(1 − ζ)
.
τ (γ − 1)

Because firms are competitive, wages are given by the marginal product of labor. wn = (1 −
ν) exp (η n ) (K n )ν . Since the marginal product of labor rises with the level of capital accumulation,
the exchange rate stabilization increases wages in the stabilizing country relative to all other
countries.
Recall, the world-market value of the country m domestic firm given by equation (31) is:
Qm
N




ΛT (ω) m m
=E
P Y
.
ΛT,1 N N

The second-order log-linear approximation of the world-market value of the country m domestic
firm is:
1
m
m
m
m
qN
= E [λT − λT,1 + pm
N + yN ] + var [λT − λT,1 + pN + yN ] .
2
The spread between the value of the firm in the stabilizing and target countries yields the same
expression as the right-hand side of equation (37). Hence, we have already shown the value of
the firm in the stabilizing country increases relative to the target country if θt is large enough.
51

B.8

Proof of Proposition 2

Equation (20) shows the cost of the stabilization is the difference in the value of traded consumption between the freely floating regime and stabilized regime. We derive a second-order
log-linear approximation of the value of traded consumption:
1
m
vTm = E [λT − λT,1 + cm
T ] + var [λT − λT,1 + cT ] .
2
We plug the expressions for λT , λT,1 , and cm
T into the previous equation in order to derive the
change in the log value of traded consumption
vTm − vTm∗ =


(ζ + (γ − 1)τ ) − τ 2 (1 − γ)2 θt (1 − τ )2 ζσ 2N
τ 2 (1 + (γ − 1)τ )2

.

This expression is decreasing in the size of the target country, and becomes negative if and only
if the target country is large enough: θt > (ζ + (γ − 1)τ ) / (τ (γ − 1))2 .
Next, we evaluate the derivative of vTm − vTm∗ with respect to θm at the point where θm = 0:
∂(vTm − vTm∗ )
∂θm

=ζ

(γ − 1)(1 − τ )2 θt + 2ζ + 2(1 + θt )(γ − 1)τ
τ (1 + (γ − 1)τ )2

m

θ =0


σ 2N > 0

Hence, the cost of the stabilization increases locally with the size of the stabilizing country.

B.9

Proof of Proposition 3

We use the expressions from Appendix B.3 to calculate po −pt = λo −λt and we plug the resulting
expression into equation (2):
t

r + ∆Es

t,o

o

o

− r = cov λT , p − p

t



t∗

= r + ∆Es

t,o∗

−r

o∗



θm (1 − τ )2 γ
+ζ
σ 2N ,
τ (1 + (γ − 1)τ )

which implies the exchange rate stabilization increases the risk-free rate in the target country
relative to the risk-free rate in the outside country.
We use equation (37) to calculate the differential incentives to accumulate capital,
k t − k o = k t∗ − k o∗ −

θm (γ − 1)2 (1 − τ )2 2
ζσ N
(1 + (γ − 1)τ )2

The last term on the right-hand side shows that incentives to accumulate capital in the target

52

country decrease relative to the outside country.
Because firms are competitive, wages are given by the marginal product of labor. Since
the marginal product of labor rises with the level of capital accumulation, the exchange rate
stabilization decreases wages in the target country relative to all other countries.
Finally, we show that if the stabilizing country is smaller than the target country, θm < θt ,
then the stabilization lowers the volatility of consumption in the target country. The log-linear
approximation of household consumption in the target country is, ct = τ ctT + (1 − τ )ctN . We
use the expression for traded consumption derived in Appendix B.3 and the expression for the
state-contingent tax derived in Appendix B.6 to derive the volatility of aggregate consumption
in the target country:
var c


t

= var c


t∗

−ζ



2θm (1 − τ )2 1 − θm ζ + θt − θm (γ − 1)τ
(1 + (γ − 1)τ )2

σ 2N .

Therefore, var (ct ) decreases when a country stabilizes its exchange rate relative to the target
country as long as the stabilizing country is smaller, θt > θm .

C

Appendix to Section 2.5

We derive the welfare consequences of stabilization when ∆Res = 0 and households hold the
portfolio of assets derived in Appendix B.4. Households continue to maximize utility subject to
their budget constraints (27) and (28). However households initial wealth is:
W0n =

X

l
n∗
An∗
l QN + QK KN .

l∈{m,t,o}

We plug this value of W0n into the budget constraint (28). Next, we multiply equation (27) by
the stochastic discount factor and take expectations. After performing these calculations, the
right-hand side of (27) is equal to the left-hand side of equation (28) plus the value of the traded
endowment. Hence, we substitute (28) into (27) and subtract the value of nontraded consumption
from both sides. We arrive at the following expression for the value of traded consumption in
country n:
"

#
X
ΛnT (ω) n
n∗
n
l
n
E
C
(ω)
=
(A
−
1)
Q
+
An∗
n
N
l QN + YT .
ΛnT,1 T
l6=n

53

(39)

The left-hand side represents the value of traded consumption when stabilizing. The righthand side represents the household’s wealth from its portfolio of stocks after subtracting out
expenditure on nontraded consumption and capital investment.
We derive a second-order approximation for equation (39):
1
1−τ
E [λT − λT,1 + cnT ] + var [λT − λT,1 + cnT ] =
2
τ

!
n
(An∗
n − 1) qN +

X

t
Al∗
t qN

+ qT

(40)

l6=n

where:
1
n
n
n
]
] + var [λT − λT,1 + pnN + yN
= E [λT − λT,1 + pnN + yN
qN
2
and
qTn = 0,
n
are given by equation (22). We solve for the Lagrange multipliers
and the expressions for pnN +yN

λnT,1 that satisfy equation (40). Let us denote the set of Lagrange multipliers derived from solving
equation (39) by λnT,1,Stock . After solving the Lagrange multipliers, we obtain solutions for traded
consumption by plugging the Lagrange multipliers, λnT,1,Stock , into the log-linear expressions for
cnT derived in Appendix B.3. These new expressions for traded consumption reflect the level
shifts in traded consumption due to changes in the value of the household’s stock portfolio.
To decompose changes in welfare, below, we compute traded consumption when the household’s value of traded consumption post exchange rate stabilization exactly equals the value of
traded consumption prior to the stabilization:



 1
1
E [λT − λT,1 + cnT ] + var [λT − λT,1 + cnT ] = E λ∗T − λ∗T,1 + cn∗
+ var λ∗T − λ∗T,1 + cn∗
T
T . (41)
2
2
Denote the Lagrange multipliers derived from solving equation (41) by λnT,1,AD . Again, we plug
these the Lagrange multipliers λnT,1,AD into the expressions from Appendix B.3 to derive expressions for traded consumption with stabilization, but without any change in the total value of
traded consumption.
Next, we calculate changes in welfare using a second-order approximation of household utility.
Utility in country n is:
un =

γ−1
1
log [(1 − γ)U n ] = E[cn ] −
var[cn ]
1−γ
2

(42)

where cn = τ cnT + (1 − τ )cnN . We plug in the solutions for cnT , with the Lagrange multipliers
54

derived above, into the welfare function. Define the welfare change ∆un = un − un∗ , where un∗
is the value of un when ζ = 0. The welfare change in the stabilizing country is:
ζ(γ − 1)2 (θm − 1)(τ − 1)2 τ ((γ − 1)τ (θm − θt ) + 1) 2
σN
(1 + (γ − 1)τ )2


ζ 2 (1 − τ )2 (γ − 1) (θm )2 − 1 τ + (γ − 1)2 (θm − 1)(2θm − 1)τ 2 + θm − 1 2
σN
+
τ (1 + (γ − 1)τ )2

∆um =

Equation (23) displays the welfare consequences for a small stabilizing country (θm = 0).
The first term of (23) is calculated by plugging the expression for cnT with the Lagrange
multipliers ΛnT,1,AD into cn and deriving the change in E [cn ] when ζ deviates from zero. The
γ−1
var [cm ].
2

∆var [cm ] term reflects the change captured by

The “Valuation Effect” is calculated

by plugging the expression for cnT with the Lagrange multipliers ΛnT,1,Stock into cn , deriving the
change in E [cn ] when ζ deviates from zero, and then subtracting out the first term of (23).
When the first term of (23) is combined with the “Valuation Effect”:
 t
2
2
t
2
ζΘ
+
ζ
θ τ (γ − 1)2 (1 − τ )2 2
ζ
(1
−
τ
)
∆um = −
σ 2N +
σN
τ (1 + (γ − 1)τ )
(1 + (γ − 1)τ )2
The first term on the right-hand side is clearly negative, which indicates the welfare losses from
the increase in consumption volatility are larger than any gains from accumulating reserves.
Finally, equation (23) can be condensed to:
m

∆u = ζ

(1 − τ )2 −ζ (1 + (γ − 1)τ ) + (θt (γ − 1)τ − 1 + ζ)(γ − 1)2 τ 2
2

τ (1 + (γ − 1)τ )


σ 2N .

The right-hand side of this equation is positive if:
θt > θ̄ =

C.1

1−ζ
ζ(1 + (γ − 1)τ )
.
+
(γ − 1)τ
(γ − 1)3 τ 3

Equilibrium Bond Portfolio

Suppose households are confined to trading international risk-free bonds rather than stocks. The
country n risk-free bond pays P n (ω) units of the traded good in state ω of period 2. Similar
to the exercise in Appendix B.4, these asset payoffs are linear combinations of the nontraded
output in each country. Likewise, it is straightforward to verify the set of log-linear bond payoffs
spans the space of log-linear household wealth. As a result, equilibrium outcomes in the economy

55

are unaffected by the change in the asset space. We just need to solve for the household bond
portfolios that pay the appropriate payoff in each state in the second period.
Let Bln denote the number of country l bonds purchased by households in country n. Hence,
the log-linear approximation of the payoff received from the portfolio held by country n households is:
1
Bln pl
τ
l=m,t,o
X

l
in the portfolio
Again, we solve for the portfolio weights, Bln , by matching the coefficients on yN
l
payoff with the coefficients on yN
in household expenditure. This procedure yields the following

result:
Bnn =

θl (γ − 1)
(1 − θn )(γ − 1)
and Bln = −
for l 6= n.
γ
γ

Households thus hold levered positions in their domestic risk-free bond. Proposition 1 shows
the stabilizing country’s risk-free rate decreases when the target country is larger than the stabilizing country, increasing the relative value of its bonds. As a result, the same intuition from
Proposition 4 shows that announcing a stabilization relative to a larger country increases the
stabilizing country’s share of world wealth and thus, by the same logic, can increase the welfare
of its households.

C.2

Welfare Consequences in Target and Outside Countries

In this appendix, we provide expressions for the welfare consequences of stabilization on households in the target and outside countries. Analogous to the calculation of ∆um , we plug the
Lagrange multipliers derived in Appendix C into the expression of ctT and coT derived in Appendix B.3. We again plug the value of ctT into the second-order approximation of household
welfare given by equation (42):
ζ 2 θm (1 − τ )2 ((γ − 1)τ ((γ − 1)(2θm − 1)τ + θm ) + 1) 2
σN
τ (1 + (γ − 1)τ )2
(γ − 1)ζθm (1 − τ )2 ((γ − 1)τ ((γ − 1)τ (θm − θt ) + 1) + 2) 2
+
σN .
((γ − 1)τ + 1)2

∆ut =

The analogous calculation for the outside country yields:
∆uo = ∆ut −

ζθm (γ − 1)(1 − τ )2 2
σN .
(1 + (γ − 1)τ )2

56

Households in the outside country are weakly worse off than households in the target country as
a result of the stabilization.

D

Appendix to Section 3

D.1

Sticky Prices

Households enter each period with a fixed quantity of the domestic currency, and all goods
consumed in a given country must be purchased using the domestic currency. In the first period,
households are endowed with a fixed amount of domestic currency that they use to purchase
stocks. We can write the first-period budget constraint as:
!
n
P̃T,1

X

Anl QlN + QK KNn

n
≤ exp [∆mn1 ] P̃T,1
(QnN + QK + κn ) .

l

In the second period, households face the cash constraint
!
n
n
P̃T,1
CTn (ω) + P̃Nn (ω)CNn (ω) ≤ exp [∆mn (ω)] P̃T,1

X

Anl PNl (ω)YNl (ω) + YTn .

l

To reiterate, ∆mn1 and ∆mn (ω) denote the growth rate of money supply in the first period
and in state ω of the second period, respectively. The central banks in the target and outside
countries use their control of money supply to recover the efficient allocation of resources, taking
as given the actions of the stabilizing country’s central bank. By contrast, the central bank in
the stabilizing country uses its control of monetary policy to stabilize the nominal exchange rate.
n
We divide both sides of the first-period budget constraint above by P̃T,1
to recover

X

Anl QlN + QK KNn ≤ exp [∆mn1 ] (QnN + QK + κn ) .

(43)

l
n
We divide through the second-period budget constraint above by exp [∆mn (ω)] P̃T,1
to recover

n

exp [−∆m

(ω)] CTn (ω)

X
P̃Nn (ω) n
C
(ω)
≤
Anl PNl (ω)YNl (ω) + YTn .
+ exp [−∆m (ω)]
N
n
P̃T,1
l
n

(44)

In the second period, households maximize utility (4) subject to (44). Letting Λ˜T (ω) denote
the Lagrange multiplier on this budget constraint, the first-order conditions with respect to
57

traded and nontraded consumption are:
τ (C n (ω))1−γ (CTn (ω))−1 = exp [−∆mn (ω)] Λ̃nT (ω)
(1 − τ ) (C n (ω))1−γ (CNn (ω))−1 = exp [−∆mn (ω)]

P̃Nn (ω) n
Λ̃T (ω).
n
P̃T,1

Next, we derive the Euler equations for investment. Since utility (4) is Cobb-Douglas, consumption in country n is described by:
!!
X

exp [∆mn (ω)]

CTn (ω) = τ

Anl PNl (ω)YNl (ω) + YTn

l
n

CNn (ω) = (1 − τ )

n
exp [∆m (ω)] P̃T,1

n l
l
l Al PN (ω)YN (ω)
P̃Nn (ω)

P

+ YTn

!
.

We plug these expressions into equation (4) and take first-order conditions with respect to Anl ,
subject to (43). Let Λ̃nT,1 represent the Lagrange multiplier on the household’s first-period budget
constraint. The first-order conditions with respect An1 determine the prices of stock in each
country:
"
Λ̃nT,1 QlN = E

n
P̃T,1
(C n (ω))−γ

P̃ n (ω)

#
PNl (ω)YNl (ω)

Next, we show that under the appropriate monetary policy, the central bank in the stabilizing
country can replicate the equilibrium from the baseline model. Suppose the central banks set
o
n
t
o
t
m
m
∆mm (ω) = z m (ω), ∆mm
1 = 1+ Z̄ /(QN + QK + κ ), ∆m (ω) = ∆m (ω) = 0 and ∆m1 = ∆m1 =

1. We plug these expressions for monetary policy into the first-order conditions above. The firstorder conditions with respect to traded consumption show Λ̃nT (ω) coincides with the shadow
price of traded consumption from Appendix B.1, Λ̃nT (ω) = ΛT (ω). Moreover, letting ΛnN (ω)
represent the shadow price of nontraded consumption reveals relative (real) price of nontraded
consumption is defined by:
PNn (ω) =

ΛnN (ω)
P̃ n (ω)
= exp [−∆m̃n (ω)] N n .
ΛT (ω)
P̃T,1

As a result, we have shown that with the appropriate monetary policy, the first-order conditions
in coincide with those from Appendix B.1. Hence, the allocation of goods must also be the same.
Next, we derive an expression for seigniorage and relate seigniorage to ∆Res, given by equation (20). The central bank earns seigniorage by changing the money supply. The net present
58

value of seigniorage is:
seigniorage = −

∆M̃1n
n
P̃T,1

!

"

ΛT (ω)
−E
ΛT,1

∆M̃ n (ω)
n
P̃T,1

!#
,

where
n
∆M̃1n = (exp [∆m̃n1 ] − 1) P̃T,1
(QnN + QK + κn )

and

(45)
!

n
∆M̃ n (ω) = (exp [∆m̃n (ω)] − 1) P̃T,1

X

Anl PNl (ω)YNl (ω) + YTn

(46)

l

are the level changes in the money supply in country n.
Next, we use the budget constraints (43) and (44) to re-write the expression for seigniorage
as a function of household consumption. Plugging (44) into (46) shows:
X
∆M̃ n (ω)
n
l
n
=
C
(ω)
+
P
(ω)C
(ω)
−
Anl PNl (ω)YNl (ω) − YTn
T
N
N
n
P̃T,1
l
X
Anl PNl (ω)YNl (ω) − YTn .
= CTn (ω) − (Ann − 1) PNl (ω)YNn (ω) −
l6=n

The second equality comes from plugging in the equilibrium condition CNn = YNn . We multiply
this result with the stochastic discount factor, ΛT (ω)/ΛT,1 , and take expectations:
"

ΛT (ω)
E
ΛT,1

∆M̃ n (ω)
P̃Tn (ω)

!#






X
ΛT (ω) n
ΛT (ω)
n
n
n l
n
C (ω) − (An − 1) QN −
=E
.
Al QN − YT E
ΛT,1 T
Λ
T,1
l6=n

Plugging equation (43) into equation (45) shows:
∆M̃1n X n l
=
Al QN + QK − QnN − QK − κn
n
P̃T,1
l
X
= (Ann − 1) QnN +
Anl QlN − κn .
l6=n

Combining the two previous expressions yields:
∆M̃1n
n
P̃T,1

!

"

ΛT (ω)
+E
ΛT,1

∆M̃ n (ω)
P̃Tn

!#






ΛT (ω) n
ΛT (ω)
n
=E
C (ω) − YT E
− κn .
ΛT,1 T
ΛT,1

59

We plug in the definition of κm given by equation (38) to show:
!#
ΛT (ω) ∆M̃ n (ω)
seigniorage = −
−E
ΛT,1
P̃Tn (ω)
#
"


ΛT (ω) n
Λ∗T (ω) n∗
C (ω)
=E
C (ω) − E
Λ∗T,1 T
ΛT,1 T
∆M̃1n
n
P̃T,1

!

"

= −∆Res.

D.2

Model with Segmented Markets and Cash-In-Advance Constraint

This appendix analyzes an alternative monetary friction where prices are flexible and monetary
policy affects real allocations because financial markets are segmented (Alvarez et al., 2002).
The key takeaway from this exercise is that, even with this alternate type of monetary friction, a
simple nominal stabilization can implement a real stabilization of the type discussed in Section
2 of the main text.
Each country has a central bank that issues a national currency. All goods must be paid
for in the domestic currency of the country from which they originate. All households face a
cash-in-advance constraint, and all prices are flexible. Within each country, only a fraction φ
of households can trade in the international stock market, label these households ‘active.’ The
remaining 1 − φ of households do not have access to financial markets. The central banks in
the target and outside countries use their control of the money supply to recover the efficient
allocation of resources, taking as given the actions of the stabilizing country’s central bank.
By contrast, the central bank in the stabilizing country uses its control of monetary policy to
stabilize the nominal exchange rate.
In the second period, the cash-in-advance constraint for active households is:
!
P̃Tn (ω)CTn (ω) + P̃Nn (ω)CNn (ω) ≤ M̃1n + P̃Tn (ω)

X

Anl PNl (ω)YNl (ω) + YTn

.

(47)

l

where P̃Tn is the nominal price of the traded good in country n and M̃1n is the nominal money
holding of the active household in terms of the national currency of its home country n that
is carried over from the first period. Since inactive households do not have access to financial
markets, their cash in advance constraint in period 2 is:
P̃Tn (ω)ĈTn (ω) + P̃Nn (ω)ĈNn (ω) ≤ M̂1n ,
60

where M̂1n is the cash holding of an inactive households carried over from the first period. All
households within a given country start the first period with identical cash holdings, M̃0n . The
first-period constraint for active households is
!
n
M̃1n + P̃T,1

X

n
(QnN + QK + κn ) + M̃0n ,
≤ P̃T,1

Anl QlN + QK KNn

(48)

l

and the first-period constraint for inactive households is
n
M̂1n ≤ P̃T,1
(QnN + QK + κ̂n ) + M̂0n .

The assumption that all goods must be paid for in the domestic currency from which they
originate implies the money market clearing condition:
P̃Tn (ω)YTn + P̃Nn (ω)YNn = M̄ n (ω)

(49)

where M̄ n = φM̃ n + (1 − φ)M̂ n is the aggregate money supply in country n. The central bank
changes the monetary base in the second period through open market operations in the stock
market:

!
φP̃Tn (ω)

X

Anl PNl (ω)YNl (ω) + YTn



= M̄2n − M̄1n = φ M̃2n − M̃1n .

(50)

l

Inactive households split their supply of money between traded and nontraded goods. Their
consumption is:
ĈTn (ω) = τ

M̂1n
M̂1n
n
,
and
Ĉ
(ω)
=
(1
−
τ
)
.
N
P̃Tn (ω)
P̃Nn (ω)

Because prices are flexible, changes in the money supply affect the equilibrium allocation in this
economy only because it affects the real purchasing power of these inactive households. That
is, the central bank can affect the allocation by increasing or decreasing the purchasing power
of these households. Define the shock to the real purchasing power of inactive households in
country n, controlled by country n’s central bank as
exp(−µn ) =

1
M̂1n
,
P n (ω) P̃Tn (ω)

(51)

so that a high µ corresponds to an expansionary monetary policy, higher inflation, and lower
purchasing power of inactive households.

61

Given this definition, the consumption of inactive households can be re-written as:
ĈTn (ω) = τ exp(−µn )P n (ω), and ĈNn (ω) = (1 − τ ) exp(−µn )P n (ω)

P̃Tn (ω)
P̃Nn (ω)

Active households maximize their expected utility subject to their budget constraints (47)
and (48), as well as the consumption of inactive households. We derive first-order conditions and
log-linearize around the deterministic equilibrium. The real exchange rate between the stabilizing
country and target country is:
sp,t =


 γ(1 − τ )(1 − φ) t
γ(1 − τ )
p
t
yN
− yN
+
µ − µp
γτ + φ(1 − τ )
γτ + φ(1 − τ )

A positive µn (high inflation) shifts resources to the active households in country n and depreciates the stabilizing country’s real exchange rate.
The real exchange rate under the freely floating regime is:
sm,t∗ =


γ(1 − τ )
t
m
yN
− yN
γτ + φ(1 − τ )

and the variance of this exchange rate is:


var sm,t∗ =

2γ 2 (1 − τ )2
σ 2N
(γτ + φ(1 − τ ))2

The stabilizing country imposes a real exchange rate stabilization of strength ζ by choosing:

1
t
m
yN
− yN
1−φ

γτ + φ(1 − τ )
=ζ
pm∗ − pt∗
γ(1 − τ )(1 − φ)

µm = ζ

(52)

When the target country appreciates, the stabilizing country lowers its own inflation (deflates)
to match the appreciation. Lower inflation shifts resources from the active household towards
the inactive household, which increases the marginal utility of active households and thus the
real price level in the stabilizing country. As a result, we can also recover the relationship:
pm = pm∗ + (1 − θm )ζ(pt∗ − pm∗ ).
Next, we solve for the monetary policy that enforces a nominal exchange rate stabilization.

62

The nominal exchange rate in this economy is equal to the real exchange rate plus inflation:
s̃m,t = pm + µm − pt − µt
µt = µo = 0 by assumption. However, the nominal exchange rate is affected by monetary
policy through µm . We solve for the monetary policy that implements a nominal exchange rate
stabilization of strength ζ̃:

ζ̃γ(1 − τ )
m
t
.
− yN
yN
γ(1 − φ)(1 − τ ) − (γτ + (1 − τ )φ)

ζ̃ (γτ + φ(1 − τ ))
=
pm∗ − pt∗
γ(1 − φ)(1 − τ ) − (γτ + (1 − τ )φ)

µm =

(53)
(54)

Under this policy, the stabilizing country’s real exchange rate is:
sm,t =

ζ̃γ(1 − τ )(1 − φ)
1−
γ(1 − φ)(1 − τ ) − (γτ + (1 − τ )φ)

!
sm,t∗

Hence, a policy that implements a nominal stabilization of strength of ζ̃ will implement a real
stabilization of strength:
ζ = ζ̃

γ(1 − τ )(1 − φ)
γ(1 − φ)(1 − τ ) − (γτ + (1 − τ )φ)

If γ(1 − φ)(1 − τ ) > (γτ + (1 − τ )φ), then a nominal stabilization implements a stronger real
stabilization.
Seigniorage is a function of the present discounted value of the change in the money supply
in both periods:



M̄1n − M̄0n
ΛT (ω) M̄2n (ω) − M̄1n
seigniorage = −
−E
.
n
ΛT,1
P̃T,1
P̃Tn (ω)
Following the same calculations as in Appendix D, we can show:
!
#

Λ∗T (ω)  m∗
seigniorage = E
φCT (ω) + (1 − φ)ĈTm∗ (ω)
Λ∗T,1



ΛT (ω)  m
m
−E
φCT (ω) + (1 − φ)ĈT (ω)
ΛT,1
"

where asterisks denote an equilibrium in which the stabilizing country does not actively manipu63

late the variance of the exchange rate. In the segmented markets model, seigniorage is still equal
to change in the value of traded consumption. However, seigniorage in the segmented markets
model takes into account the consumption of both active and inactive households.

E

Model Extensions

E.1

Partial exchange rate stabilization

This appendix formalizes the effects of partial exchange rate stabilization. In a first step, we
use the partition defined in the main text to write the variance of exchange rates in the freely
floating regime as
∗m,t

var[s

Z
]=

2
s∗m,t − E[s∗m,t |{Kn }] g(ω)dω

ZΩ
s

=

∗m,t

− E[s

∗m,t

2
|{Kn }] g(ω)dω +

Z

2
s∗m,t − E[s∗m,t |{Kn }] g(ω)dω

(55)

Ω−s

Ωs





= Prob [ω ∈ Ωs ] var s∗m,t |Ωs + Prob [ω ∈ Ω−s ] var s∗m,t |Ω−s
since the conditional means in the two subregions of the state space are identical. By the same
token, partial stabilization delivers a variance of the exchange rate of




var[sm,t ] = Prob [ω ∈ Ωs ] var sm,t |Ωs + Prob [ω ∈ Ω−s ] var sm,t |Ω−s




= Prob [ω ∈ Ωs ] var (1 − ζ)(s∗m,t − E[s∗m,t |{Kn }])|Ωs + Prob [ω ∈ Ω−s ] var s∗m,t |Ω−s




= Prob [ω ∈ Ωs ] (1 − ζ)2 var s∗m,t |Ωs + Prob [ω ∈ Ω−s ] var s∗m,t |Ω−s


< var s∗m,t .
(56)
With exchange rate stabilization of strength ζ, the interest rate differential given by equation
(2) becomes


rm + ∆E[sm,t ] − rt = −cov λT , sm,t


= −cov λT , (1 − ζ)s∗m,t


= −(1 − ζ)cov λT , s∗m,t .
The effects of partial stabilization for interest rate differentials work in the same direction. Again
using the fact that the conditional means are identical in the two subregions, we decompose the
64

covariance into the following terms:
m

r + ∆E[s

m,t

t

m,t

Z



= − (λT − E [λT |{Kn }]) sm,t − E sm,t |{Kn } g(ω)dω
Ω
Z

= −Prob [ω ∈ Ωs ]
(λT − E [λT |{Kn }]) sm,t − E[sm,t |{Kn }] gs (ω)dω
Ωs
Z

− Prob [ω ∈ Ω−s ]
(λT − E [λT |{Kn }]) sm,t − E[sm,t |{Kn }] g−s (ω)dω
Ω
Z −s

(λT − E [λT |Ωs , {Kn }]) sm,t − E[sm,t |{Kn }] gs (ω)dω
= −Prob [ω ∈ Ωs ]
Ωs
Z

sm,t − E[sm,t |{Kn }] gs (ω)dω
− Prob [ω ∈ Ωs ] (E [λT |Ωs , {Kn }] − E [λT |{Kn }])
Ωs
Z

− Prob [ω ∈ Ω−s ]
(λT − E [λT |Ω−s , {Kn }]) sm,t − E[sm,t |{Kn }] g−s (ω)dω
Ω−s
Z

sm,t − E[sm,t |{Kn }] g−s (ω)dω
− Prob [ω ∈ Ω−s ] (E [λT |Ω−s , {Kn }] − E [λT |{Kn }])
Ω−s
Z

= −Prob [ω ∈ Ωs ]
(λT − E [λT |Ωs , {Kn }]) sm,t − E[sm,t |{Kn }] gs (ω)dω
Ωs
Z

− Prob [ω ∈ Ω−s ]
(λT − E [λT |Ω−s , {Kn }]) sm,t − E[sm,t |{Kn }] g−s (ω)dω


] − r = −cov λT , s



Ω−s





= −Prob [ω ∈ Ωs ] cov λT , sm,t |Ωs − Prob [ω ∈ Ω−s ] cov λT , sm,t |Ω−s ,

g(ω)
g(ω)
and g−s (ω) =
. The second-to-last step follows from
Prob [ω ∈ Ωs ]
Prob [ω ∈ Ω−s ]
the fact that the conditional means are identical and thus E [sm,t − E [sm,t |{Kn }] |Ωs ] = 0.
where gs (ω) =

With partial exchange rate stabilization, we get


rm + ∆E[sm,t ] − rt = −cov λT , sm,t




= −Prob [ω ∈ Ωs ] cov λT , sm,t |Ωs − Prob [ω ∈ Ω−s ] cov λT , sm,t |Ω−s




= −Prob [ω ∈ Ωs ] (1 − ζ)cov λT , s∗m,t |Ωs − Prob [ω ∈ Ω−s ] cov λT , s∗m,t |Ω−s .
Rearranging the last equation to






rm + ∆E[sm,t ] − rt = −cov λT , sm,t = −cov λT , s∗m,t + ζProb [ω ∈ Ωs ] cov λT , s∗m,t |Ωs ,
we see that the effects of partial stabilization are a milder version of currency stabilization
discussed previously. In fact, partial stabilization of strength ζ in a subset of the state space
corresponds to currency stabilization of strength ζProb [ω ∈ Ωs ] cov [λT , s∗m,t |Ωs ].

65

E.2

Stabilization Relative to a Basket of Currencies

Our analysis above also extends directly to stabilizations relative to a basket of currencies.
Consider a country that wishes to stabilize its real exchange rate with the basket
pb = (1 − w)pt + wpo
where w is the basket’s weight on the outside country and 1 −w the weight on the target country.
Using (2), it is then easy to show that stabilizing relative to a basket of currencies has effects
akin to a stabilization relative to a (hypothetical) country with a weighted average size of the
basket’s constituents:
m

m,o

r + ∆Es

o

t∗

− r = r + ∆Es

t,o∗

−r

o∗




γ(1 − τ )2 (θ̄ − θm )(γ − 1)τ + θm (2 − w − 2w̄ζ) 2
σN
−ζ
τ (1 + (γ − 1)τ )

where θ̄ = wθt + (1 − w)θo is the weighted average size of the basket’s constituents and w̄ =
1 − (1 − w)w is a positive constant less than one.
Although clearly a less effective means of lowering domestic interest rates than stabilizations
relative to the largest economy in the world, stabilizing relative to a basket may be appealing
for some countries, because it reduces price impact. When stabilizing relative to a basket, the
stabilizing country’s exports are less sensitive to shocks affecting only one of the two other
countries, decreasing the volatility of its exports and thus lowering the stabilization’s impact on
world-market prices. For a large country, stabilizing relative to a basket may thus be cheaper to
implement than stabilizing relative to the largest economy in the world.

E.3

Feedback between Risk Premia and Capital Accumulation

In this appendix, we show Propositions 1 through 3 continue to hold when we solve explicitly
for the feedback between risk premia and capital accumulation. First, note that changes in the
level of capital accumulation affect the expected level of consumption, but not the conditional
covariance of consumption across countries in our log-linear solution. It follows immediately that
all statements in Propositions 1 through 3 that depend on the covariances between asset payoffs
and the shadow price of traded goods are unchanged. That is, all statements regarding interest
differentials, expected currency returns, and the world-market value of domestic firms continue
to hold.
Second, to show that all statements in Propositions 1 through 3 pertaining to the capital
66

stock itself continue to hold when we solve explicitly for the feedback between risk premia and
capital accumulation. To this end, we use the second-order approximation of the Euler equation
for capital accumulation (13):
1
n
n
]
] + var [λnN + yN
λT,1 + qK + k n = log[ν] + E [λnN + yN
2

∀n,

and the log-linear resource constraint for capital:
0=

X

θn kn .

n

We plug in the expression for λnN = pnN + q + λnT,1 from Appendix B.3 to write λnN as a function
n
n
n
as a function of the capital stock and
= η + νk n to write the yN
, and then we plug in yN
of yN

the productivity shock. We solve this system of four equations for k m , k t , k o and qK .
In a freely floating exchange rate economy (ζ = 0), we find
k

m∗


(γ − 1)3 (1 − τ )2 τ
−k =
θm − θt σ 2N .
(1 + (γ − 1)τ ) (1 + (γ − 1)(1 − τ )ν + (γ − 1)τ )
t∗

Comparing this expression with k m − k t derived from solving the system of four equations above
shows that allowing for feedback between risk premia and capital accumulation merely reduces
the size of the difference in capital accumulation by a constant factor smaller than one, leaving
the economic insights of our analysis unaffected.
The same is true for the equivalent expression under stabilized exchange rates, though this
factor is too large to reproduce in print. For the special case of ζ = 1, we can show
m

t



k − k |ζ=1 = k

F

m∗


(γ − 1)3 (1 − τ )2 τ θt − θm σ 2N
= 0.
−k +
(1 + (γ − 1)τ ) (1 + (γ − 1)(1 − τ )ν + (γ − 1)τ )
t∗

Appendix to Section 5

In this appendix, we provide additional details about the model in section 5 and formally derive
its equilibrium conditions. To avoid solving the optimization problem separately for households
in the stabilizing country and households in the rest of the world, we generalize the notation to
allow all countries to impose state-contingent taxes, Z n (ω), and provide lump sum transfers, Z̄ n .
The governments in the target and outside countries do not use these instruments, such that
Z t (ω) = Z o (ω) = 1 and Z̄ t = Z̄ o = 0.
67

F.1

Equilibrium Consumption

Inactive households in country n maximize utility, defined in equation (26), in each state of
the world by splitting their wealth exp(−µn )P n (ω) optimally between traded and nontraded
consumption,
1
max
n
n
ĈT (ω),ĈN (ω) 1 − γ



τ 
1−τ 1−γ
n
n
n
exp (χ ) ĈT (ω)
ĈN (ω)

s.t. ĈTn (ω) + PNn (ω)ĈNn (ω) ≤ exp(−µn )P n (ω),
where hats indicate consumption by inactive households. We solve this problem by setting
up a Lagrangian and taking first-order conditions with respect to ĈTn (ω) and ĈNn (ω). Inactive
households then optimally consume the following bundle of traded and nontraded goods,
ĈTn (ω) = exp(−µn )τ P n (ω),

ĈNn (ω) = exp(−µn )

(1 − τ )P n (ω)
.
PNn (ω)

Active households own all the productive assets within the country and are short the nominal bonds owned by inactive households. They maximize their utility (26) subject to their
intertemporal budget constraint:




ΛT (ω)
1−φ n
−µn
n
n
n
n
E
P (ω)e
Z (ω)CT (ω) + PN (ω)CN (ω) +
ΛT,1
φ




1
ΛT (ω) n
n
n
n
n
n
≤
QK − QK K + E
(PN (ω)YN + YT ) + κ + Z̄ ,
φ
ΛT,1

(57)

where (1 − φ)/φ is the number of inactive households per active household in each country and
endowments are adjusted by a factor 1/φ because active households now own proportionally
more productive assets per capita; κn again denotes the transfer that decentralizes the allocation
corresponding to the social planner’s problem with unit Pareto weights under freely floating
exchange rates. In the stabilizing country, the government use the lump-sum transfer, Z̄ m , to
equalize the marginal utility of wealth between the stabilizing country and the rest of the world
(P2).
The first-order conditions of the active households’ problem are:
τ exp((1 − γ)χn ) (C n )1−γ (CTn )−1
= ΛT,1 Q(ω)
Z n (ω)

(58)

(1 − τ ) exp((1 − γ)χn ) (C n )1−γ (CNn )−1 = ΛT,1 Q(ω)PNn (ω).

(59)

68

Analogous to Appendix (B.3), we find it convenient to denote the stochastic discout factor with
Q(ω) = ΛT (ω)/ΛT,1 . The first-order condition with respect to capital accumulation is



ΛT (ω) n
ηn
n ν−1
QK = E
P (ω)e ν (K )
.
ΛT,1 N

F.2

(60)

Log-linearized System of Equations

We next derive log-linearized first-order conditions. Equation (7) defines the resource constraint
for traded goods. Equation (8) defines the (three) resource constraints for nontraded goods
in each country, and equation (9) defines the resource constraint for capital goods. Equations
(58) and (59) define the three first-order conditions with respect to traded consumption and the
three first-order conditions with respect to nontraded consumption. Equation (60) defines the
three Euler equations for capital investment in each country. In total, we derive a system of 14
equations. To study the model in closed form, we again log-linearize around the deterministic
solution — the point at which the variances of shocks are zero (σ N,n = 0) and all firms have a
capital stock fixed at the deterministic steady-state level. To simplify the exposition, we thus
again ignore the feedback effect of differential capital accumulation on the size of risk premia,
studying the incentives to accumulate different levels of capital across countries, while holding
the capital stock fixed. The log-linear first-order conditions are:
(1 − γ)χn + (1 − γ) (τ cnT + (1 − τ )cnN ) − cnT + log τ = z n + q + λT,1
(1 − γ)χn + (1 − γ) (τ cnT + (1 − τ )cnN ) − cnN + log(1 − τ ) = pnN + q + λT,1 .
Similar to Appendix B.1, let q = λT − λT,1 denote the stochastic discount factor. Also recall that
the transfes {κn }, Z̄ m equalize the first-period Lagrange multiplier λT,1 across active households
in all countries. The log-linear approximation of equation (60) is:
1
n
n
).
λT,1 + qK + k n = log[ν] + E [λnN + yN
] + var (λnN + yN
2

69

The log-linear resource constraints are:




1−τ
n
n
n
+ (1 − φ) −µ − τ λN − λT − log
= η n + νk n = yN
,
τ





X
X
1−τ
n
n
n
n
n
= 1,
θ φcT + (1 − φ) −µ − (1 − τ ) λN − λT − log
=
θn yT,1
τ
n=m,t,o
n=m,t,o
X
n n
θ k = 1.
φcnN

n=m,t,o

This set of fourteen equations allows us to solve for the following fourteen unknowns {k n , cnN , cnT , λnN }n=m,t,o ,
λT,1 and q.

F.3

Cost of Stabilization

First, we solve for the state-contingent taxes that implement the real exchange rate stabilization
in the model in section 5, and then we derive an expression for the cost of the peg. Throughout,
we can recover the results in Appendix B.6 by removing the market segmentation (φ = 1),
by setting the monetary shocks to zero (µn = 0) and by setting the preference shocks to zero
(χn = 0).
Analogous to Appendix B.6, we search for a state-contingent tax of the form

Z(ω) =

YNm
YNt

a1 

exp (−µt )
exp (−µm )

a2 

exp (χm )
exp (χt )

a3
.

In logs, this state-contingent tax is



t
m
z = a1 y N
− yN
+ a2 −µt + µm + a3 χt − χm .
We follow the procedure from Appendix B.6 to derive the coefficients a1 , a2 and a3 that stabilize
the exchange rate. The following lemma summarizes these results.
Lemma 3
In the model in section 5, where real exchange rates fluctuate in response to monetary shocks,
preference shocks, and productivity shocks, a tax on the consumption of traded goods in the
stabilizing country of the form
z(ω) =




(1 − τ )(1 − φ)
(γ − 1)(1 − τ )φ
ζ(1 − τ )
m
t
+
yN
− yN
µm − µt +
χm − χt
τ (τ + φ(1 − τ ))
τ (τ + φ(1 − τ ))
γτ (τ + φ(1 − τ ))

70

implements a real exchange rate stabilization of strength ζ.
Next, we derive the cost of the stabilization. We start with the budget constraint of the active
household in the stabilizing country given by equation (57), and we identify the components of
the lump-sum transfer, Z̄. Following the same calculations as in Appendix B.6, we show:



ΛT (ω)  m
m
∆Res = E
φCT (ω) + (1 − φ)ĈT (ω)
ΛT,1


ΛT (ω)  m∗
m∗
φCT (ω) + (1 − φ)ĈT (ω)
−E
ΛT,1

(61)

In the model in section 5, the cost of stabilization is thus the change in the value of the stabilizing
country’s total consumption of traded goods by active and inactive households.

F.4

Proof of Proposition 6

We first prove results for the internal effects of a real exchange rate stabilization. We plug the
log-linear expressions derived from solving the system of equations in Appendix F.2 into equation
(2). We can then write the interest rate differential between the stabilizing country and the target
as
m

r + ∆Es

m,t


γ(1 − τ )2 (θt − θm )τ (γ − φ) + 2φθm (1 − ζ) 2
− r = r + ∆Es
−r −ζ
σN
τ φ (γτ + (1 − τ )φ)

γ(1 − τ )(1 − φ)2 (θt − θm )γτ + 2φθm (1 − ζ)(1 − τ ) 2
σ̃
−ζ
τ φ (γτ + (1 − τ )φ)

φ(1 − τ )(1 − γ)2 (θt − θm )γτ + 2φθm (1 − ζ)(1 − τ ) 2
−ζ
σχ,
τ γ (γτ + (1 − τ )φ)
t

m∗

m,t∗

t∗



which implies the exchange rate stabilization decreases the risk-free rate in the stabilizing country
relative to the risk-free rate in the target country if the target country is larger than the stabilizing
country, θt > θm .
t
Plugging in the log-linear expressions for pm
N , pN , and λT into equation (37), we again find

that the relative incentives to accumulate capital in the stabilizing country increase with the size
of the target country. Because the closed-form solution equivalent to the one above is too large
to print, it is easier to prove this statement by showing that relative incentives to accumulate

71

capital increase linearly in θt :


ζ(γ − 1)(1 − τ )2 τ (γ − φ)2
d  m
m∗
t∗
t
=
−
k
−
k
k
−
k
σ2
(φ + (1 − φ)τ ) (γτ + (1 − τ )φ) N
dθt
ζ(γ − 1)3 (1 − τ )τ (γ − φ)φ2
ζ(γ − 1)γ(1 − τ )τ (γ − φ)(1 − φ)2 2
σ̃ +
σ 2 > 0.
+
(φ + (1 − φ)τ ) (γτ + (1 − τ )φ)
γ (φ + (1 − φ)τ ) (γτ + (1 − τ )φ) χ
It follows immediately that there exists some θmin > 0 such that stabilizing the real exchange
rate relative to any country larger than θmin will increase the incentives to accumulate capital in
the stabilizing country. Analogous to Appendix B.7, the spread between the value of the firm in
the stabilizing and target countries yields the same expression as the right-hand side of equation
(37). Hence, we have already shown the value of the firm in the stabilizing country increases
relative to the target country if θt is large enough.
Because firms are competitive, wages are given by the marginal product of labor. Hence, an
exchange rate stabilization relative to a sufficiently large target country increases wages in the
stabilizing country relative to all other countries, concluding the proof of the first statement in
Proposition 6.
Next, we derive the cost of stabilization. We calculate changes in the log value of traded
consumption in the stabilizing country given by (61). The log-linear approximation of the total
traded consumption in the stabilizing country from active and inactive households is: φcm
T + (1 −
φ)ĉm
T . We calculate:
log ∆Res = vT − vT∗ ,
where we use the following second-order approximation of the log value of total traded consumption:
1
m
m
m
vT = E [λT − ψ T + φcm
T + (1 − φ)ĉT ] + var [λT − ψ T + φcT + (1 − φ)ĉT ]
2
When the stabilizing country is small (θm = 0), the cost of the stabilization decreases as the
target country gets larger:
d
(1 − τ )(1 − φ)2 (γ − φ) 2
(1 − τ )2 (γ − φ)2 2
∗
(v
−
v
)
=
−ζ
σ̃
−
ζ
σN
T
T
dθt
(φ + (γ − φ)τ )2
(φ + (γ − φ)τ )2
−ζ

(γ − 1)2 (1 − τ )(γ − φ)φ2 2
σ χ < 0.
γ (φ + (γ − φ)τ )2

Hence, it is cheaper to stabilize relative to a larger country.
Finally, we prove results for the external effects of a real exchange rate stabilization. Us-

72

ing equation (2) and the solution of the model from Appendix F.2, we can write interest rate
differential between the target country and the outside country as
ζθm γ(1 − τ )2
ζθm γ(1 − τ )2 (1 − φ)2 2
σ 2N +
σ̃
τ (γτ + φ(1 − τ ))
τ (γτ + φ(1 − τ ))
θm ζ(γ − 1)2 (1 − τ )2 φ2 2
+
σ ,
γτ (γτ + (1 − τ )φ) χ


rt + ∆Est,o − ro = rt∗ + ∆Est,o∗ − ro∗ +

which implies the exchange rate stabilization increases the risk-free rate in the target country
relative to the risk-free rate in the outside country.
We plug the log-linear expressions for ptN , poN and λT into (37) to derive the differential
incentive to accumulate capital in the target country relative to the outside countries:
θm γζ(1 − τ )(γ − φ)(1 − φ)2 2
θm ζ(1 − τ )2 (γ − φ)2 2
σ
σ̃ −
−
N
(γτ + (1 − τ )φ)2
(γτ + (1 − τ )φ)2
θm (γ − 1)2 ζ(1 − τ )(γ − φ)φ2 2
σχ.
γ (γτ + (1 − τ )φ)2

k t − k o =k t∗ − k o∗ −

Incentives to accumulate capital in the target country thus decrease relative to the outside
country. Since the marginal product of labor rises with the level of capital accumulation, the
exchange rate stabilization decreases wages in the target country relative to all other countries.

73

