                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




     HOW INFORMATION AFFECTS SUPPORT FOR EDUCATION SPENDING:
EVIDENCE FROM SURVEY EXPERIMENTS IN GERMANY AND THE UNITED STATES

                                       Martin R. West
                                     Ludger Woessmann
                                     Philipp Lergetporer
                                      Katharina Werner

                                     Working Paper 22808
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w22808


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                  November 2016




For helpful comments, we would like to thank Eric Bettinger and participants at the CESifo Area
Conference on the Economics of Education. Michael B. Henderson and Paul E. Peterson made
important contributions to the design of the survey instruments and experiments. We thank
Franziska Kugler for her collaboration in designing and executing the German survey. Financial
support through the Leibniz Competition (SAW-2014-ifo-2) is gratefully acknowledged. The
views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2016 by Martin R. West, Ludger Woessmann, Philipp Lergetporer, and Katharina Werner. All
rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without
explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
How Information Affects Support for Education Spending: Evidence from Survey Experiments
in Germany and the United States
Martin R. West, Ludger Woessmann, Philipp Lergetporer, and Katharina Werner
NBER Working Paper No. 22808
November 2016
JEL No. D72,D83,H52,I22

                                         ABSTRACT

We study whether current spending levels and public knowledge of them contribute to
transatlantic differences in policy preferences by implementing parallel survey experiments in
Germany and the United States. In both countries, support for increased education spending and
teacher salaries falls sharply when respondents receive information about existing levels.
Treatment effects vary by prior knowledge in a manner consistent with information effects rather
than priming. Support for salary increases is inversely related to salary levels across American
states, suggesting that salary differences between the two countries could explain Germans’ lower
support for increases. Information about the tradeoffs between different categories of education
spending shifts preferences away from class-size reduction and towards alternative purposes.


Martin R. West                                               Philipp Lergetporer
Harvard Graduate School of Education                         Ifo Institute for Economic Research
Gutman Library 454                                           Poschingerstr. 5
6 Appian Way                                                 81679 Munich, Germany
Cambridge, MA 02138                                          lergetporer@ifo.de
and NBER
martin_west@gse.harvard.edu                                  Katharina Werner
                                                             Ifo Institute for Economic Research
Ludger Woessmann                                             Poschingerstr. 5
University of Munich                                         81679 Munich, Germany
Ifo Institute for Economic Research and CESifo               werner.k@ifo.de
Poschingerstr. 5
81679 Munich, Germany
woessmann@ifo.de
1. Introduction
     Citizens in Europe and the United States differ widely in their views on various policies.
Such transatlantic differences in policy preferences have been attributed to differences in culture,
social beliefs, and political regulations and institutions (e.g., Alesina and Angeletos (2005);
Alesina, Glaeser, and Sacerdote (2006)). In this paper, we focus on another potential source of
differing preferences for government spending reforms: differences in current spending levels
across countries and the extent to which citizens are informed about these spending levels. To
shed light on how information on spending levels affects policy preferences, we conduct the first
parallel randomized experiments within representative surveys of public opinion in the two
largest industrialized nations in the western world, Germany and the United States.
     We focus on government spending on education, which comprises a large share of public
sector budgets around the world. On average across developed countries, more than one in eight
dollars that governments spend goes to education—more than on defense, public order and
safety, and environmental protection combined (OECD (2014)). 1 The quality of education
systems is a cornerstone for future national prosperity (Hanushek and Woessmann (2015)), and
citizens’ support for education spending is a critical factor in shaping public budgets. 2
     Germany and the U.S. differ in a number of features of education finance that might be
expected to give rise to differences in public support for higher education spending. Among
others, the U.S. has higher overall spending levels, but lower teacher salaries, than Germany.
Ignoring any other differences, one might thus expect Americans to be less inclined to support
overall spending increases, but more inclined to support higher teacher salaries. In addition, the
majority of school funding comes from the local level in the U.S. but from the state level in
Germany. If local control aligns actual spending levels more closely with citizens’ preferences,
one would expect smaller effects of informing about actual spending levels in the United States.
Yet we know very little about the public’s knowledge of current education spending levels, the
extent of support for increased spending, and the role of information in shaping public views in
the two countries.

     1
        In 2011, public spending on education was 12.9 percent of total public expenditure on average across the
member countries of the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD (2014), p. 257). The
figure is 11.0 percent in Germany and 13.6 percent in the United States.
      2
        The importance for public budgets holds irrespective of the debate over whether higher spending levels are
essential to improve school quality (e.g., Hanushek (2003); Jackson, Johnson, and Persico (2016)).


                                                            1
    To investigate these issues, we surveyed representative samples of the adult populations in
Germany and the U.S. and implemented three randomized experiments on how the provision of
information affects support for education spending. The German and American surveys included
more than 4,000 and 2,600 respondents, respectively. Within each survey, randomly selected
subgroups were given different types of information before answering the same questions about
the level and allocation of public spending on education. Earlier in both surveys, we asked
respondents to estimate current levels of education spending and teacher salaries.
    We find that a vast majority of the public in both countries underestimates current levels of
school spending and teacher salaries. Absent the provision of information, an absolute majority
in both countries supports increased government spending on education, with somewhat higher
levels of support among Germans than Americans (71 percent vs. 60 percent).
    Our first survey experiment shows that citizens of both countries also react similarly to two
information treatments, with treatment effects (relative to the control mean) hardly differing.
Informing respondents about the current level of annual public education spending per student
reduces support for increased spending by more than one quarter (to 50 percent in Germany and
43 percent in the U.S.). Additionally stating that the spending increase would be financed
through higher taxation reduces support by more than half compared to the control group (to 30
percent in Germany and 26 percent in the U.S.), with the shares in support no longer differing
significantly between the two countries.
    Our second survey experiment examines preferences for increases in teacher salaries. In
both countries, staff compensation makes up 81 percent of total current school expenditure
(OECD (2014), p. 284), making salary levels a crucial component of overall education spending
levels. When respondents are informed about current salary levels, the share who support
increases in teacher salaries declines sharply by about 40 percent (relative to the control mean) in
both countries, although baseline support is much lower in Germany. The latter difference, the
only notable divergence in preferences that we observe between the two countries, is consistent
with the fact that current salaries are higher in Germany. In fact, based on an estimated negative
relationship between salary levels and support for salary increases across U.S. states, we show
that Germany’s higher current salary levels could account for more than two thirds of the
German-U.S. difference in support for salary increases.




                                                   2
    Further analysis confirms that these treatment effects reflect actual information effects,
rather than simply the effect of being primed to think about monetary values as opposed to, say,
observable conditions in local schools before reporting support for spending increases (Iyengar et
al. (1984); Krosnick and Kinder (1990)). In both countries, treatment effects are substantially
larger for respondents who underestimated actual levels and are almost zero for respondents who
had already been well informed prior to the information treatment. The fact that treatment effects
vary with prior information levels indicates that they at least partly reflect genuine effects of
being better informed, rather than just priming. The heterogeneity by prior information levels is
more pronounced for teacher salaries than for school spending, in line with the hypothesis that
people have a better anchor when estimating salaries compared to spending levels. It is also
particularly noteworthy given that we find virtually no evidence of heterogeneous treatment
effects across population subgroups defined by gender, age, education, income, employment, and
parental and minority status.
    Our third experiment examines how preferences for specific categories of education
spending react to the provision of information on the tradeoffs involved when choosing among
them. When asked how best to allocate new education spending, respondents’ preferences shift
away from class-size reductions towards alternative spending categories—teacher salaries
(particularly in the U.S.) and materials such as new books and technology (particularly in
Germany)—if they are informed about what could be achieved in each category with the same
amount of additional spending.
    The broad pattern of results across the three comparative survey experiments suggests that,
despite numerous institutional and political differences between the two countries, citizens’
knowledge of and preferences over education spending are quite similar in Germany and the
U.S., as are reactions to the provision of information. The overall level of preferences for
increases in government spending on education, their substantial reduction when mentioning
current spending levels and tax financing requirements, and the shift away from preferences for
class-size reductions towards other spending alternatives when informed about the quantitative
tradeoffs involved are all comparable across the two countries. The lone exception is Germans’
lower preference for teacher salary increases, which is consistent with existing salary differences
between the two countries.




                                                    3
    Our results contribute to at least three strands of literature. First, a substantial comparative
literature examines transatlantic differences in the public’s policy preferences in different areas.
In particular, Alberto Alesina and coauthors have studied U.S.-European differences in
preferences for inequality, redistribution, and working times, concluding that preference
differences are not so much related to differences in utility functions or culture as to differences
in social beliefs, political institutions, and regulations (see Alesina and Angeletos (2005) and
Alesina, Di Tella, and MacCulloch (2004) on redistributive policies; Alesina, Glaeser, and
Sacerdote (2001) on the welfare state; and Alesina, Glaeser, and Sacerdote (2006) on working
times). Our results similarly suggest that the views of Americans and Germans about education
spending may not be so different, after all.
    Second, several recent papers use survey experiments in individual countries to study how
policy preferences respond to the provision of different kinds of information. For example, Di
Tella, Galiani, and Schargrodsky (2012) study effects of information treatments on preferences
for privatization reforms in Argentina, Cruces, Perez-Truglia, and Tetaz (2013) and Kuziemko et
al. (2015) for redistributive policies in Buenos Aires and the U.S., respectively, Elias, Lacetera,
and Macis (2015) for payments for human organs in the U.S., Schueler and West (2016) for
education spending in the U.S., Lergetporer et al. (2016) for public spending in general in
Germany, and Bursztyn (2016) for the tradeoff between education spending and cash transfers in
Brazil. To our knowledge, our paper is the first to use parallel survey experiments to compare
how the same information treatments affect public opinion in two countries.
    Third, our results advance our understanding of the political economy of education policy.
They provide empirical underpinning for the mostly theoretical literature on the political
economy of education spending (see, e.g., Glomm, Ravikumar, and Schiopu (2011)) and provide
guidance as to the political feasibility of policies such as increasing teacher salaries or reducing
class sizes (e.g., Woessmann and West (2006)).
    In what follows, Section 2 provides a theoretical framework to guide interpretation of the
information experiments, as well as background on the U.S. and German education systems.
Section 3 introduces the data and the experimental design. Section 4 reports our main results
concerning the effect of information provision on support for education spending and teacher
salaries in the two countries. Section 5 demonstrates that German levels of support are consistent
with the relationship between current salary levels and support for salary increases across



                                                    4
American states. Section 6 provides evidence of heterogeneous treatment effects by respondents’
prior information. Section 7 examines the effects on preferences of highlighting the tradeoffs
between different spending categories. Section 8 discusses our findings and concludes.


2. Background
    We start by providing theoretical and institutional context for the survey experiments
described below. We first propose a theoretical framework based on a standard preference model
that illustrates how the provision of information could influence policy preferences. We then
offer background information on the American and German education systems and the sources
and levels of education spending in the two countries.

2.1 Theoretical Framework

    As a framework for our analyses, let us consider a standard model that represents
preferences as indifference curves for bundles of two goods between which a consumer is
indifferent. In our case, the two goods are policies: spending on public education and other
categories of government spending (see Figure 1 for a graphical exposition and Appendix A for a
formal derivation). A budget line depicts how much of one good must be sacrificed to receive
more of the other. Our analysis refers to the preferences of one individual who represents the
median voter in a given country. There will be a distribution of preferences around that median
voter, so changes in the size of preferred changes for this representative agent will ultimately
translate into changes in the share of people in the country supporting spending increases or
decreases.

The Effect of Status Information on Support for Policy Change

    We start with two assumptions about the median individual’s knowledge and preferences,
which are supported below by evidence from our survey data for both countries. First, the
individual underestimates current levels of spending and teacher salaries. Second, without further
information, what the person perceives to be the current levels of spending and salaries are below
her personal optimal levels, so that she prefers spending and salaries to increase.
    This simple framework allows us to analyze the effects of the two types of information
treatments in our survey experiments. The first type is informing respondents about current



                                                    5
levels of education spending. 3 Let Eu in Figure 1 represent the individual’s estimate of the
current level of education spending. Her optimal policy choice is Eu*, indicating that she favors a
large increase in education spending (Δ uninformed).
     If the person now is informed that the actual level of education spending is in fact not Eu but
rather the higher level Ei, her optimal policy choice would be Ei*, and support for increasing
education spending declines (Δ informed < Δ uninformed). Put differently, Ei* lies to the left of
Eu* projected onto the new budget line with constant levels of other spending. The intuition
behind this shift in preferences is straightforward: The individual in the informed state is
equivalent to an uninformed individual who received an increase in her budget and spent it all on
education. Since under standard preferences she would prefer to spend a portion of this increase
on other items, the allocation after the increase reduces her relative demand for additional
education spending. In a setting of underestimation of current levels of education spending and
preferences for increased education spending, one would therefore expect that informing about
current levels of education spending would reduce support for spending increases.
     If we change the axes in Figure 1 to represent teacher salaries (rather than overall education
spending) vs. other spending (inside or outside the education system) and maintain the same
assumptions, the analysis can similarly be interpreted in terms of providing information about
current levels of teacher salaries, which is predicted to reduce support for salary increases.
     Analyzing the effects of providing information on a single budget item like spending for
schools or teacher salaries is useful in illustrating the potential consequences of transparency
policies focused on these areas. More generally, the analysis illustrates how access to better
information can shape citizens’ policy preferences with respect to public spending, a topic that
has been the subject of surprisingly little scholarly research. One should be cautious, however, in
using such analysis to draw conclusions about how spending levels would need to change to
better align with citizens’ preferences. To the extent that respondents are also uninformed about
areas of public spending beyond education, the analysis does not necessarily reveal the
optimality of policy choices, and providing information on education spending may also affect
estimates of spending levels on other items (see Appendix A).



     3
        We assume for now that the information treatment does not affect the individual’s estimate of other spending
or of the relative price of education.


                                                            6
The Effect of Tradeoff Information on Support for Policy Change

     The second type of information treatment informs about the tradeoffs between different
categories of education spending, rather than about current spending levels. Consider the choice
between the number of teachers per student (the inverse of class size) and other education
spending in Figure 2. The dashed line shows the individual’s uninformed beliefs about the
tradeoff between class-size reduction and other spending categories. Informing the person about
the actual tradeoff makes her aware that the true budget line has a steeper slope (i.e., smaller
reductions in class size for increases in alternative spending than the person had expected). As a
result, the optimal policy choice is one where class sizes are not reduced by as much as in the
uninformed case (Δ informed < Δ uninformed). Support for class-size reduction decreases, while
support for increasing spending in other categories increases.
     If we redefine the axes in Figure 2 to capture overall education spending (rather than
teachers per student) vs. non-education spending, the picture can also be used to analyze the
additional treatment in our first survey experiment designed to raise the salience of taxation:
mentioning the need to raise taxes heightens the person’s awareness that increasing education
spending requires taking money from other (in this case private) uses. Making this tradeoff
salient is therefore expected to reduce support for spending increases.

2.2 Background on the U.S. and German Education Systems

     Education is currently the third largest category of government expenditure (after social
protection and health care) in both Germany and in the U.S. (OECD (2015), p. 73). Each
country’s public school system enrols the vast majority of students. In the U.S., the share of
students who attend a private school is 8 percent from primary through to upper secondary
school (OECD (2014), p. 416). In Germany, it is 4 percent in primary school, 9 percent in lower
secondary, and 8 percent in upper secondary school. However, the American and German
education systems also differ in a number of important respects, including the sources of
education funding, spending levels, and teacher compensation. 4



     4
       The education systems also differ in other aspects such as a reliance on comprehensive high schools versus a
tracked secondary school system, the prevalence of central exit exams, methods of school finance, and the allocation
of educational resources. See Henderson et al. (2015) for a more extensive description of the historical, institutional,
and cultural contexts of the education systems in the two countries.


                                                              7
    In both the U.S. and Germany, the federal government plays only a secondary role in
education governance. The distribution of responsibility for public education across different
levels of government is reflected in the sources of education funding. In 2011, the federal
government contributed 14 percent of total funding in the U.S. and 11 percent in Germany
(OECD (2014), p. 259). While only 35 percent of funding for American schools came from the
states, this share was 72 percent in Germany, underscoring the dominant role of the Länder in
education policy. In the U.S., 51 percent of funding comes from the local level, compared to 17
percent in Germany, giving local school boards a larger role in education governance. If the local
nature of funding aligns spending levels more closely with the local optimum or makes residents
better informed, the theoretical framework presented above would predict smaller effects of
information treatments on preferences for education spending in the United States.
    In addition to funding sources, spending levels also differ between the countries. According
to OECD estimates, spending for primary education is 45 percent higher in the U.S. than in
Germany, and 24 percent higher for secondary education (OECD (2014), p. 215). In dollar terms,
while the U.S. spent $10,958 per student in primary education and $12,731 in secondary
education in 2011, expenditures in Germany were at $7,579 and $10,275, respectively. These
numbers correspond to 3.7 percent of GDP in the U.S. and 3.0 percent of GDP in Germany
(OECD (2014), p. 230). Public expenditure on non-tertiary education accounts for 9.2 percent of
total public expenditure in the U.S. and 6.7 percent in Germany (OECD (2014), p. 257). All else
equal, the theoretical framework would thus lead to the expectation of lower support for
spending increases, as well as smaller absolute information treatment effects, in the United
States.
    The higher overall spending level in the U.S. is not reflected in higher average teacher
salaries. Quite to the contrary, teacher salaries are substantially higher in Germany than in the
U.S., both in absolute terms and relative to other workers with a post-secondary degree (OECD
(2014), p. 467-471). In primary school, the average annual statutory salary of teachers (after 10
years of experience) is 33 percent higher in Germany ($59,795) than in the U.S. ($44,995). The
difference is even more pronounced in secondary school, where German teachers earn 48 percent
more than U.S. teachers at the lower secondary level and 55 percent more at the upper secondary
level. Comparing teacher salaries to the earnings of other workers with a tertiary education yields
a similar picture: At the primary, lower secondary, and upper secondary levels, German teachers



                                                    8
earn 88, 97, and 105 percent, respectively, compared to other college-educated workers. In the
U.S., relative wages are substantially lower at 67, 68, and 70 percent, respectively. Average class
sizes in the two countries are nonetheless quite similar in primary school at 21 students and
slightly smaller in Germany (24 students) than in the U.S. (27 students) in lower secondary
school (OECD (2014), p. 450). Moreover, as noted above, the total share of current education
spending devoted to staff compensation is 81 percent in both countries. Together with the higher
spending levels and lower teacher salaries in the U.S., this implies that the U.S. spends
considerably more than Germany on non-teaching staff. All else equal, one would expect higher
support for salary increases and larger absolute information treatment effects in the United
States.


3. Data and Methods
     Our analysis draws on three randomized survey experiments embedded in representative
surveys of public opinion on education policy that we conducted in the two countries.

3.1 Comparative Opinion Surveys in Germany and the United States

     In spring 2014, we surveyed representative samples of the adult population in both countries
about their opinions on education policy. 5 The German sample includes more than 4,000
respondents, and the U.S. sample used in this paper more than 2,600. Both surveys were
conducted primarily online, with additional provisions undertaken in each country to ensure
representativeness also for residents without internet access.

The German Survey

     The German survey drew a nationally representative, stratified sample of the German
population aged 18 years and older. 6 Random sampling was conducted in two steps: Persons
with internet access at home (75 percent) were selected from an online panel and polled with an
online survey. Persons without internet access at home (25 percent) were polled at their homes
by trained interviewers. These respondents were provided with a tablet computer for completing

     5
        For a descriptive depiction of general patterns of public opinion on education policy in Germany and the
U.S., see Henderson et al. (2015).
      6
        The survey was implemented by the polling firm TNS Infratest (now called Kantar Public Germany); see
www.tns-infratest.com/sofo/index_EN.asp.


                                                            9
the survey autonomously. When necessary, the interviewer assisted with handling the device.
The survey was conducted in German between April and July 2014.
     Overall, the German survey comprised 39 questions on education policy. These included the
questions on education spending used in this paper, which were coordinated with the U.S.
survey. The exact wording of each question can be found at www.cesifo-group.de/ifo-
bildungsbarometer. Within the survey experiments, the maximum number of different treatment
conditions was four.
     The total number of observations in the German survey is 4,171 adults. The specific number
of respondents to each question varies for two reasons. The first reason is item non-response,
which is very low at 1 percent on average. The second reason is that on the spending question
and on the tradeoff question, subgroups of respondents were assigned to additional Germany-
specific treatment conditions that are not discussed here. Survey weights are employed
throughout to ensure the sample’s representativeness with respect to the national adult
population.

The U.S. Survey

     The American survey drew a nationally representative, stratified sample of the U.S.
population aged 18 years and older and representative oversamples of the following subgroups:
public school teachers, African Americans, and Hispanics. 7 The sample was drawn from a
nationally representative panel of adults, obtained via address-based sampling and list-assisted
random digit-dialing sampling techniques, who agreed to participate in a limited number of
online surveys. Individuals who do not have internet access were provided access by the polling
firm. The survey was conducted in May and June 2014. Respondents could elect to complete the
survey in English or Spanish.
     Overall, the U.S. survey comprised 36 questions on education policy, including the
questions coordinated with the German survey used in this paper. The exact wording of each
question is displayed at www.educationnext.org/edfacts. Within the survey experiments, the
maximum number of different treatment conditions was three.



     7
       The survey was implemented by the polling firm Knowledge Networks (KN), a GfK company. Detailed
information about the maintenance of the KN panel, the protocols used to administer surveys, and the comparability
of online and telephone surveys is available at www.knowledgenetworks.com/GANP.


                                                          10
     The total number of observations from the U.S. survey used in this paper is 2,669 adults. 8
The specific number of respondents varies from question to question due to item nonresponse
and the fact that, in the cases of opinion about school spending and teacher salary, the sample
was randomly divided into multiple groups in order to examine the effect of variations in the way
questions were posed. Survey weights are employed throughout to account for nonresponse and
the oversampling of teachers and other demographic subgroups.

3.2 Experimental Design

     In order to identify the effect of the provision of information on public support for education
spending in the two countries, we implemented the same three randomized survey experiments in
both countries. Within each survey, randomly selected subgroups were given different types of
information before answering the same questions about their views on specific aspects of public
education spending. Randomization was independent across the three survey experiments. This
design allows us to identify the causal effect of the provision of the specific information on the
public’s preferences for education spending in a survey setting.
     The first experiment relates to a question on preferences for overall increases in education
spending. 9 The control group (Uninformed) was simply asked about their support for increases
or decreases in government funding for public schools in their school district (U.S.) or nationally
(Germany). Respondents could choose one of the following five answer categories: greatly
increase, increase, stay about the same, decrease, or greatly decrease. There are two treatment
groups. One treatment group (Informed) was first informed about the actual level of spending per
student in their district (U.S.: $12,400 on average across the sample) or nationally (Germany:
€6,400) and then asked the same question as the control group. After receiving the same
information as the first treatment group, a second treatment group (Informed+tax) was asked
whether taxes to fund public schools should increase or decrease. As is evident from Table 1, the
samples are well balanced across the treatment conditions in terms of observable characteristics,
indicating that randomization was successful in both countries.



     8
       The full U.S. survey had a sample size of 5,266 adults and included an additional experiment designed to
estimate the impact of the provision of information on student achievement on policy views; the sample used in this
paper comprises the control group from that experiment.
     9
       The exact wording of the questions in the two countries can be found in Appendix B.


                                                           11
     In the other two experiments, there is only one treatment group each. The second experiment
asked about support for increases or decreases in the salaries of public school teachers. In
contrast to the uninformed control group, the treatment group was informed about the current
level of teacher salaries in their state (U.S.) or nationally (Germany). The third experiment
examined preferences for different categories of education spending. The control group was
simply asked whether a planned increase in government spending should go to class-size
reductions, teacher salary increases, or new books and technologies. The treatment group was
informed that in the U.S. (Germany), reducing average class sizes by 3 students would cost
roughly the same amount as increasing teacher salaries by 13 (15) percent or buying $10,000
(€20,000) in new books and technologies for each class every year before choosing one of these
three options. The balancing table (Appendix Table A1) indicates that observable characteristics
are again well balanced across control and treatment groups in the second and third experiments.
     In addition to the survey experiments on opinions, we asked respondents in both countries to
estimate the current levels of education spending and teacher salaries, respectively. These
questions were asked much earlier in the surveys and were separated from the related opinion
questions by a series of questions on other education policy topics.
     In our analyses, we report results both with and without the following set of control
variables available in both countries: gender, parental and employment status, income, 10 age, 11
and education. 12 As is evident from Table 1, a larger share of U.S. than German respondents are
parents and employed. The U.S. population is also somewhat younger. In addition, it has a larger
share of people with college degrees, whereas the German population has a larger share of
apprenticeship degrees. The available information on minority status differs between the two
countries: in the U.S., it refers to the non-white population, whereas in Germany, it refers to
having a migration background (i.e., both parents not born in the country). We therefore report
the minority variable in Table 1 but omit it as a control variable in our experimental analyses due
to the lack of comparability across countries.
     10
         Income is measured as percentile rank within each country because income was surveyed in different ways
in the two countries that correspond to the most common way of reporting income. In the U.S. survey, income refers
to annual pre-tax household income. In the German survey, income refers to monthly household income net of taxes
and social security contributions.
      11
         To allow for non-linearities in the relationship between age and preferences, we collapse our age variable
into four categories: 18-34, 35-49, 50-64, and 65+.
      12
         To make the different degrees in the two countries comparable, education is measured in three categories:
less than high school, high school but no B.A., and B.A. degree or higher.


                                                          12
4. The Effect of Information Provision on Support for Education Spending
   and Teacher Salaries in Germany and the U.S.
     Our first two experiments study the effect of information provision on support for increases
in education spending and in teacher salaries, respectively. In both cases, respondents in the
treatment and control conditions were asked to indicate their preferences on a five-point scale
ranging from “greatly decrease” to “greatly increase,” with the middle category indicating that
spending or salary levels should “stay about the same.” To simplify presentation, our main
estimations of treatment effects are based on linear probability models where the top two and
bottom three response options are collapsed to create a binary indicator of support for a spending
or salary increase; we report conventional OLS standard errors. We also show results in which
the outcome is defined as the probability of support for decreased spending or salaries. 13

4.1 Preferences for Education Spending

     In the control group that did not receive any specific information, 60 percent of the U.S.
population and 71 percent of the German population favors government funding for public
schools to increase or greatly increase (Figure 3). Note that the lower support for increased
spending in the U.S. compared to Germany is consistent with the fact that spending levels are
currently higher in the U.S. than in Germany, independent of whether they are measured per
student, relative to GDP, or as a share of total public spending. A descriptive analysis of who
supports higher spending in Table 2 shows that in the U.S., females and poorer people are more
likely to be in favor of spending increases and in Germany, respondents with university degrees
are more supportive of spending increases.
     Table 3 reports how the two information treatments affect support for education spending
(see also Figure 3). In each country, both treatments substantially reduce support for increased
spending. The strong majority in favor of spending increases turns into a minority of less than
one third among those who are informed about current spending levels and told that increased
spending would be financed through a tax increase. In this treatment group, preferences for
spending increases no longer differ significantly between the two countries. Being informed
about current spending levels reduces support for increased spending by 17 percentage points in

     13
        Supplemental analyses available upon request confirm that using ordered probit models with the dependent
variable coded 1 for “greatly decrease” to 5 for “greatly increase” yields qualitatively identical results to those
reported in Tables 2-6.


                                                           13
the U.S. (column 1) and by 20 percentage points in Germany (column 2). Treatment effects are
even larger in the second treatment that also raises the salience of tax financing: This reduces
support by 34 percentage points in the United States and by 41 percentage points in Germany.
That is, in both countries the information treatment reduces support for increased spending by
more than a quarter and the additional tax treatment reduces it by more than half.
    Pooling the data from both countries (column 3) reveals that the effect of the information
treatment does not differ significantly between the two countries, whereas the effect of the
combined information and tax treatment is 7 percentage points larger in Germany than in the
United States. If the willingness to accept marginal tax increases is negatively related to status
quo tax levels, Germans’ stronger reaction to the tax treatment could plausibly be related to the
fact that the tax burden is higher in Germany than in the United States (OECD (2016)). Results
do not change qualitatively when controls are included (column 4), indicating that neither the
difference in support levels nor the differences in the treatment effect are due to underlying
demographic differences in the populations of the two countries. The same is true when the
controls are additionally interacted with a country indicator (column 5). This model allows the
associations of the control variables with support for spending increases to differ across
countries. Thus, to the extent that differences exist between the two countries, they cannot be
attributed to differences in background characteristics such as age, gender, education, income,
employment status, parental status, and migration status or in their association with opinions.
    Column 6 reports the same model with an indicator for support for spending decreases
(rather than increases) as dependent variable (with the residual being respondents who prefer
spending levels to stay about the same). While the control mean is low in both countries (7
percent in the U.S. and 4 percent in Germany), the information treatment raises support for
decreased spending by 3 percentage points on average in the two countries and the information-
plus-tax treatment raises support for decreased spending by 11 percentage points. Neither of the
two treatment effects differs statistically significantly between the two countries.

Replication Study

    As a robustness check, we administered a slightly revised version of the experiment to new
representative samples of respondents in both countries in a follow-up survey in 2015. We
randomly assigned respondents in both countries (1,986 in the U.S. and 1,984 in Germany) either



                                                   14
to the control group or the information treatment group. In contrast to the 2014 survey,
respondents in Germany were informed about the average annual spending levels per student in
their respective Land, which varied between €5,800 (in North Rhine-Westphalia) and €8,700 (in
Thuringia). The provision of state-level information is particularly relevant for Germany because
of the Länders’ dominant role for education policy and funding (see Section 2.2).
    Results of the follow-up survey are presented in Appendix Table A2. The control mean of
support for increased school spending is 61 percent in the U.S. and 74 percent in Germany. As in
the 2014 survey, being informed about current spending levels reduces support for spending
increases substantially in both countries (columns 1 and 5). In the U.S., the information reduces
support by 16 percentage points and in Germany by 15 percentage points. The fact that the
information treatment effect for Germany, while still substantial and highly significant, is
somewhat smaller in the follow-up survey than in the 2014 survey, might be due to the
presentation of state information rather than national information. In any case, the 2015 survey
results confirm that the negative effect of informing respondents about current spending levels
on preferences for higher spending is replicated in both countries.

4.2 Preferences for Teacher Salaries

    The second survey experiment examines how the provision of information influences public
support for one specific category of education spending: teacher salaries. In contrast to the
relatively abstract concept of per-pupil spending levels, people are likely to have clearer
benchmarks drawn from their own personal experience when asked to evaluate whether a given
level of compensation is appropriate (an assertion we will return to in section 6 below).
    In the uninformed control group, 62 percent of Americans support increases in teacher
salaries, as compared to just 29 percent of Germans (Figure 4). This difference is consistent with
the evidence presented above that teacher salaries are substantially higher in Germany than the
U.S., both in absolute terms and relative to other college graduates. Note that the pattern is
exactly the opposite from that observed for spending levels (which were lower in Germany, with
Germans more supportive of spending increases), suggesting that the between-country
differences in public preferences do not reflect overall differences in the level of education
spending or in the extent of support for increased educational inputs. In describing supporters for
salary increases, Table 2 shows that minorities and those with a college degree are more likely to



                                                   15
support teacher salary increases in the U.S.; females and older people are less likely to support
increases in Germany.
    Table 4 reports the results of the survey experiment examining how informing respondents
about current levels of teacher salaries affects support for salary increases (see also Figure 4).
The information treatment reduces support for teacher salary increases by 24 percentage points
in the U.S. and by 12 percentage points in Germany. The difference in the absolute magnitude of
the treatment effects of 12 percentage points is statistically significant and unaffected by the
inclusion of control variables (columns 3-5). Likewise, conditioning on the control variables
does not qualitatively affect the German indicator, suggesting that the lower support for salary
increases cannot be attributed to demographic differences between the two countries.
    In the uninformed control group, relatively few people support decreases in teacher salaries
(6 percent in the U.S. and 8 percent in Germany). In the U.S., this is unaffected by the
information treatment (column 6). In Germany, however, support for decreasing teacher salaries
grows by 8 percentage points when people are informed about current salary levels.

4.3 Heterogeneous Treatment Effects by Demographic Subgroups

    Table 5 reports the two treatment effects of the school spending experiment and the
treatment effect of the teacher salary experiment for subgroups defined based on the following
characteristics: gender, parental status, employment status, minority status, income, age, and
education. There are hardly any significant treatment heterogeneities present either in the U.S. or
Germany. In particular, treatment effects are significant in all cases, and they rarely differ across
the subgroups. For example, none of the treatment effects differs in a noteworthy way for people
with different levels of income, age, or education. Neither do the information treatments act
differently for different ethnic groups in the United States. The only cases where treatment
effects differ statistically significantly across subgroups are the combined information-plus-tax
treatment in Germany by parental and minority status and the treatment effect in the salary
experiment in the U.S. by parental status and income level. We refrain from offering substantive
interpretations of these differences due to the large number of subgroup comparisons and the
associated risk of false conclusions.




                                                    16
5. Explaining Differences between Germany and the United States
    Both in Germany and the United States, informing citizens about current levels of education
spending and teacher salaries significantly reduces support for spending and salary increases.
Likewise, making tax financing requirements salient further reduces support for increased
spending in both countries. However, in absolute terms, the tax treatment effect is significantly
larger in Germany and the effect of the salary information treatment is significantly smaller.
Does this reflect differences in the composition of the populations, differences in the status quo
policies in the two countries, or genuine differences in public preferences? We have already
shown that treatment effects hardly budge when controlling for demographic differences
between the populations. We have also noted that the direction of the differences across
countries is consistent with citizens of the two countries reacting in similar ways to divergent
policy environments.
    Here, we use two approaches to provide additional evidence suggesting that the differences
between the two countries reflect differences in current policy. As indicated, current spending
levels are lower, but teacher salary levels are higher, in Germany than in the United States.
Consistent with this, Germans in the control conditions are more likely to support spending
increases, but less likely to support salary increases.
    Thus, a first approach is to look at treatment effects relative to the extent of baseline support
for increases in the two countries in the absence of any treatment. As is evident from the bottom
parts of Tables 3 and 4, treatment effects relative to control means are quite similar in the two
countries: Informing about spending levels reduces support for spending increases by 28 percent
of the untreated support level in the U.S. and by 29 percent in Germany. The combined
information plus tax treatment reduces support for spending increases by 57 percent of the
control mean in the U.S. and by 58 percent in Germany. And relative to the respective control
means, the information treatment reduces support for teacher salary increases by 39 percent in
the U.S. and by 42 percent in Germany. This pattern indicates that differences in absolute
treatment effects are directly related to differences in uninformed levels of support for policy
changes, which may in turn relate to differences in current policies.
    To examine this possibility more formally, we link the analysis directly to current
differences in policy levels. To do so, we make use of the variation across U.S. states. We focus
the analysis on opinions on teacher salaries, where differences are starkest between the two


                                                    17
countries. The analysis proceeds in two steps: First, using our U.S. dataset, we estimate the
association between current levels of teacher salaries and support for salary increases across U.S.
states. Second, from that association we project the level of support we would expect at the
German teacher salary level and compare this to Germans’ actual support for salary increases.
     Figure 5 illustrates this projection analysis. It confirms that higher average salary levels are
systematically related to less support for salary increases across U.S. states. The underlying
regression (which includes our standard set of control variables) indicates that an increase in
average monthly teacher salaries by $1,000 is associated with a decrease in support for increased
salaries by 0.8 percentage points (p-value 0.015). In units equivalent to the U.S. salary data,
current teacher salaries in Germany are at $ 85,450. 14 Based on a linear projection from the
association across U.S. states, at this salary level we would expect 39 percent support for salary
increases, just 10 percentage points higher than the actual support of 29 percent. In other words,
differences in current salary levels can account for as much as 69 percent of the difference
between Germany and the U.S. in mean support for teacher salary increases. 15
     In this sense, even the German results on preferences for teacher salaries are consistent with
the U.S. results: The lower uninformed support level for salary increases is in line with the
higher current salary levels in Germany. And relative to this uninformed support level, the
information treatment effect in Germany is very similar to the one in the United States.
Differences in the absolute size of the treatment effects thus appear to be mostly attributable to
differences in the policy status quo in the two countries.


6. Information vs. Priming: Heterogeneity by Prior Knowledge
     A potential concern with the evidence presented so far is that the apparent treatment effects
of information could reflect respondents having been primed to think about the topic of
education spending in terms of financial values, as opposed to respondents becoming better


     14
         To translate German salary levels into the units available for U.S. states (drawn from the U.S. Department of
Education’s Digest of Education Statistics 2012), we take the relative salary level of Germany compared to the U.S.
on an internationally comparable scale from the OECD (2014), p. 467 (using the statutory salary for lower
secondary teachers after 10 years), which stands at 148 percent of the U.S. level, and inflate the national average
salary level in our U.S. data by this amount.
      15
         Using salary levels at the upper rather than lower secondary level, where German salaries stand at 155
percent of the U.S. level, the expected support would be even closer to the true value at 36 percent, with salary
differences accounting for 78 percent of the U.S-German support difference.


                                                            18
informed. To shed light on this issue, we estimate whether treatment effects differ by
respondents’ prior knowledge of spending and salary levels. 16
     To be able to do so, we asked respondents to report their best estimates of current levels of
school spending and teacher salaries. In both countries, these estimation questions were asked
early in the survey and separated from the respective opinion questions by a number of questions
on other education policy topics.
     Figure 6 shows distributions of the public’s estimates of spending and salary levels in the
two countries (expressed relative to the respective actual levels). Two patterns stand out. First, a
majority of the public in both countries tends to underestimate actual levels of school spending
and teacher salaries. In the U.S., the median estimate of spending per student is $3,000, which is
24 percent of the actual average spending level of $12,400. In Germany, the median estimate is
€1,500, or 23 percent of the actual average spending level of €6,400. 17 Second, in both countries
the distribution of estimates of salary levels comes close to a normal shape, whereas the
distribution of estimates of spending levels, in addition to being further from the actual value, is
more diffuse. 18 This might indicate that people do not have a clear anchor when estimating
current levels of educational spending per student, whereas they have a better anchor (from
knowing their own salary or salary levels in general) when estimating what teachers earn.
Therefore, estimates of teacher salary levels may be more informative and include less noise than
estimates of school spending levels.
     Thus, focusing first on the teacher salary experiment, we analyze whether the information
treatment effect differs by respondents’ prior knowledge of actual teacher salary levels. The key
result is displayed in Figure 7, which plots a linear estimate of how the probability to support
increased salaries depends on the prior guesses of teacher salary levels, separately for the control
group and for the treatment group. 19 In the uninformed control group, there is a clear tendency


     16
         This approach to distinguishing information and priming effects was developed in an observational setting
by Lenz (2009) and has been applied in survey experiments by Cruces, Perez-Truglia, and Tetaz (2013), Clinton and
Grissom (2015), and Schueler and West (2016).
      17
         In both countries, the leftmost bar of the histogram is the highest one, containing estimates below 8.8 percent
of the actual value in the U.S. and below 8.3 percent in Germany.
      18
         The spikes in the distribution of German estimates reflect that respondents tend to answer in multiples of
5000 (spending) or 500 (salary) and that the denominator (the actual levels) is a national constant in Germany (but
not in the U.S.).
      19
         So as not to be driven by extreme outliers, we trim observations whose guesses were below one third of and
above three times the actual level in this analysis.


                                                             19
for respondents who had initially underestimated actual salary levels to be more likely to support
salary increases. In the treatment group that is informed about actual salary levels, this
association turns around.
    The difference between the two lines illustrates the dependence of the information treatment
on prior guesses. In both countries, the treatment effect is largest for those who had initially
underestimated actual salary levels the most: Once these people learn that teachers actually earn
much more than they had thought, their willingness to support salary increases drops by a large
amount. This treatment effect of information in terms of decreasing support for increased salaries
decreases (in absolute terms) as the extent to which people underestimate actual salary levels
decreases.
    For people who had roughly the correct guess about teacher salary levels, the treatment
effect is no longer statistically significantly different from zero. For them, the information
provided was already known, and indeed there is no treatment effect. Finally, for people who had
initially overestimated teacher salaries, the treatment effect turns in the other direction: Having
thought that teachers earned more, now being informed about the actual (lower) levels makes
these people more willing to support salary increases, and significantly more so in Germany.
    The right panel of Table 6 shows these results in regression form. The treatment effect of
informing respondents about actual levels of teacher salaries shows a strong positive interaction
with the extent to which respondents had initially underestimated salary levels in both countries.
For respondents with low estimates of teacher salary levels, the information treatment (revealing
that teachers in fact earn more than they had thought) significantly reduces the probability of
favoring salary increases. For respondents who had roughly had the correct knowledge of actual
teacher salaries (with an estimate roughly equal to the actual level), this information treatment
effect is close to zero. And for respondents whose initial estimate was much higher than actual
teacher salary levels, the information treatment (revealing that teachers in fact earn less than they
had thought) turns positive, so that they are now more likely to favor salary increases. The
pooled model indicates that both the negative treatment effect for under-estimators and the
positive treatment effect for over-estimators are smaller (in absolute terms) in Germany than in
the U.S. when under- and over-estimation is measured in percent of the actual salary level.
    For the school spending experiment, results from a specification that includes a linear
interaction between the information treatment variable and respondents’ estimates of current



                                                    20
spending as a percentage of actual levels are less clear. This is consistent with our suggestion
that estimates of spending levels—for which there is no readily available anchor on which to fix
estimates—contain more noise than estimates of salary levels. However, the first three columns
of Table 6 confirm that a similar pattern of heterogeneity emerges from a simple specification
that interacts the treatment effect with an indicator of whether respondents’ initial guesses had
been above the actual value. In both countries, the effect of information is strongly negative for
the larger group of respondents who had initially underestimated spending levels, whereas it is
significantly smaller (in absolute terms) and close to zero for those who had initially
overestimated spending levels. In the pooled model, the treatment effect is 18 percentage points
smaller (in absolute terms) for those who initially overestimated actual spending levels, and this
difference by prior knowledge status does not differ significantly between the two countries.
    A potential concern with asking respondents to guess spending levels is that doing so creates
a situation in which the information treatment explicitly corrects the false initial guesses offered
by most respondents. Since respondents might feel obliged to state spending preferences which
are consistent with the new information, the reported treatment effects might be due to
experimenter demand effects rather than genuine information effects. Presumably, this reaction
to the correction of false beliefs should be particularly prevalent among individuals who were
very sure about the accuracy of their estimate as compared to those who were very unsure. We
test this proposition in our 2015 follow-up surveys (see section 4.1), where we again asked
respondents for their best estimate of current spending levels and, in addition, asked how sure
they were about their guess. 20 This allows us to test whether the information treatment effect
differs by the degree of initial uncertainty about the guess. Columns 2-4 and 6-8 of Appendix
Table A2 show that, in both countries, the information treatment effect does not vary
significantly with the uncertainty of the prior guess. This finding is inconsistent with an
interpretation where demand effects triggered by the correction of false beliefs are a main driver
of the results.
    In sum, in both countries treatment effects of informing people about actual levels of school
spending and teacher salaries are strongly heterogeneous by respondents’ prior information
status about spending and salary levels. If all that the treatment did was to prime respondents to
think about spending and salaries in terms of dollar or euro values, treatment effects should not

    20
         Respondents indicated their certainty on a seven-point scale from “very unsure” to “very sure”.


                                                            21
differ by prior knowledge. The fact that they do indicates that they do not solely capture priming
effects, but in fact also reflect effects of people becoming better informed. The stark
heterogeneities in treatment effects by prior knowledge of spending and salary levels are
especially noteworthy in light of the fact that treatment effects for the same experiments hardly
differ across demographic groups.


7. Evidence on Tradeoffs between Different Spending Categories
     To study support for different categories of education spending in greater detail, our third
survey experiment examines the effect of providing information on the tradeoff involved
between different spending options. In particular, supposing that the government plans to
increase spending in the school system, respondents are asked to choose one of the following
three options: reducing class sizes, increasing teacher salaries, and purchasing new books and
technologies.
     In the uninformed control group, a plurality of respondents in each country favors class-size
reductions over the other options: 46 percent in the U.S. and 64 percent in Germany (Figure 8).
Consistent with the second experiment, fewer Germans (4 percent) than Americans (24 percent)
favor teacher salary increases. Roughly one third of respondents in both countries favor the
purchase of new books and technologies.
     The treatment group is informed that in the U.S. (Germany), reducing average class sizes by
3 students would cost roughly the same amount as increasing teacher salaries by 13 (15) percent
or buying $10,000 (€20,000) in new books and technologies for each class every year before
choosing one of these three options. 21 This treatment reduces support for class-size reductions in
both countries, to 35 percent in the U.S. and 48 percent in Germany. While in the U.S. support
mainly shifts towards increasing teacher salaries (33 percent), in Germany it mainly shifts
towards buying new books and technologies (46 percent).
     Table 7 reports treatment effects on support for the different spending options as relative
risk ratios estimated by multinomial logit models. In both countries, the tradeoff information
significantly reduces the relative risk of choosing class-size reductions over teacher salary
increases. While the treatment effect is larger in Germany, the difference between the two

     21
       The differences in the calculated tradeoffs in the two countries are consistent with slightly smaller class sizes
and substantially higher teacher salaries in Germany (see section 2.2 above).


                                                             22
countries is not statistically significant. Given the difference in baseline support for teacher
salary increases, the treatment effect of tradeoff information on the relative support for increased
teacher salaries compared to new books and technologies also does not differ significantly
between the two countries. Only the difference in the reduction in support for class-size
reductions over new books and technologies between the two countries reaches statistical
significance, with the relative risk ratio being smaller in Germany.
    In sum, support for education spending is affected not only by information on spending
levels, but also by information on the tradeoffs involved between different categories of
education spending. In particular, once aware of these tradeoffs, the public in both countries
expresses far less enthusiasm for class-size reductions. In the informed group, support is rather
evenly distributed over the three options in the U.S. and closely split between class-size
reductions and purchase of new teaching material in Germany.


8. Discussion and Conclusions
    In a series of survey experiments, we examine how various forms of information affect
public opinion concerning education spending in Germany and the United States. Our results
show that in both countries, providing the public with information on current spending levels and
clarifying the tradeoffs involved in allocating educational resources changes preferences on
education spending. In particular, information on current levels of education spending and
teacher salaries reduces support for spending and salary increases for the public as a whole and
within virtually all demographic subgroups. In both countries, these effects are confined largely
to individuals who had underestimated actual spending and salary levels, indicating that they
reflect genuine effects of becoming better informed. In addition, telling the public that increased
education spending would be financed through higher taxes further reduces support. Finally,
informing the public about the tradeoffs involved between different spending options reduces
support for class-size reductions in favor of teacher salary increases (mostly in the U.S.) and
purchase of new teaching material (mostly in Germany).
    These experimental results are consistent with the preference model presented in our
theoretical framework. Our descriptive data indicates that, in both countries, the public on
average underestimates current levels of spending and salaries and—in the absence of
information treatment—tends to favor spending and salary increases. The preference model


                                                    23
therefore predicts that providing information about current levels of spending and salaries will
reduce support for increases; that making the implications of increasing education spending for
resource uses outside education salient will also reduce support for increases; and that
information on tradeoffs between spending options will affect their relative popularity.
    In this general sense, the public in Germany and the U.S. responds quite similarly to the
provision of information on education spending. Relative to the baseline support for spending
and salary increases in the uninformed group, the information treatment effects are remarkably
consistent across the two countries. The country with higher current levels differs for overall
education spending and teacher salaries—and so do our results on which country exhibits greater
support for increasing these levels. And while current teacher salary levels are substantially
higher in Germany than in the U.S. on average, Germans’ level of support for salary increases is
very much in line with what would be predicted based on the negative relationship between
salary levels and support for increases observed across American states.
    These similarities in citizens’ reactions to information treatments may be surprising in light
of research emphasizing transatlantic differences. For example, the two countries we study have
adopted very different institutional structures for their societies, with Germany considered to be
the leading exemplar of the conservative welfare state and the U.S. the prototype of liberal
capitalism (e.g., Esping-Andersen (1990); Hall and Soskice (2001)). Other work has emphasized
how differences between the U.S. and Europe in political institutions, market regulations, and
social beliefs about matters such as the extent to which effort influences economic outcomes lead
to sharp differences in policy preferences (see Alesina, Glaeser, and Sacerdote (2001, 2006);
Alesina, Di Tella, and MacCulloch (2004); Alesina and Angeletos (2005); Linos and West
(2003)). Despite these differences, our results suggest that German and American citizens’
preferences with respect to education spending are quite similar, as are their responses to the
provision of information.
    The provision of more direct evidence for the notion that public preferences are the same
across countries is of course complicated by the fact that preferences are likely to be influenced
by the policies that are currently in place, which differ across countries. However, our surveys
indicate that Germans and Americans provide very similar responses when asked about the
importance of student performance to future prosperity: fully 97 percent of the public in both
countries stated that the academic performance of high school students is “very” or “somewhat”



                                                   24
important for the country’s future prosperity (on a four-point-scale ranging from “not important
at all” to “very important”). This similarity in perspective on academic performance lends
credibility to our suggestion that preferences are, in fact, similar across countries and that the
differences in documented policy preferences are largely due to differences in the policy status
quo.
       In terms of policy implications, our results first illustrate how information matters in shaping
policy preferences. Citizens in both countries systematically underestimate what is currently
spent on education and, once provided with accurate information, update their preferences
accordingly. Our results therefore cast doubt on whether uninformed opinions accurately reflect
public preferences concerning the size of the education budget. At the most basic level, this
implies that public opinion polls are likely to be an unreliable guide for policymakers seeking
information on citizens’ true preferences with respect to education spending (Althaus (1998)).
Surveys that incorporate information about status quo spending levels across multiple policy
domains and clarify the implications of proposed changes for tax burdens are apt to produce a
more reliable barometer of public sentiment.
       The results also shed light on the potential consequences of proposals prevalent in both
countries to improve information levels by increasing transparency about education spending, for
example by incorporating spending information into educational accountability systems (see,
e.g., Boser (2011)). In the U.S., a new requirement to publish school-level data on per-pupil
spending in annual school report cards was incorporated into the federal Elementary and
Secondary Education Act in its 2015 reauthorization in an effort to promote efficiency in the use
of public resources and expose inequities in the distribution of spending across schools.
Providing citizens with more information on education policy is also high on the agenda in
Germany. In 2006, the meeting of the federal and state ministers of education has instituted a
biannual national education report that reports on leading indicators in different educational
areas, including education spending, in increasing detail. Over recent years, several of the
individual Länder have also started to publish their own education reports. For example, the
government of Schleswig-Holstein announced that it will start to publish a biannual education
report again starting in fall 2016.
       Our results suggest that such proposals to increase transparency may make it more difficult
to sustain public support for increased education spending. The importance of information does



                                                     25
not mean, however, that efforts to improve transparency about government budgets would
necessarily undermine public support for education budgets. First, in no case do we see a
majority emerge in favor of decreasing overall spending levels. Second, citizens may be equally
misinformed about spending levels in other policy domains. Providing them with similar
information on how much the government spends for other purposes (e.g., health care or
incarceration) might well lead to substitution effects towards education. Our results do indicate,
however, that equipping the public with better information about government budgets could alter
their views and help align spending levels with citizen’s preferences.
    Our results also have a bearing on policies governing the allocation of education resources.
Specifically, they suggest that in the absence of information on the relative cost of different
spending options, people in both countries will support greater investment in class-size reduction
than would be the case if they understood its opportunity costs. In that sense, informing the
public about the tradeoffs between different forms of education spending may provide politicians
with leverage to reallocate resources within the education system.




                                                   26
References
Alesina, Alberto, George-Marios Angeletos (2005). Fairness and Redistribution. American
   Economic Review 95 (4): 960-980.
Alesina, Alberto, Rafael Di Tella, Robert MacCulloch (2004). Inequality and Happiness: Are
   Europeans and Americans Different? Journal of Public Economics 88 (9-10): 2009-2042.
Alesina, Alberto, Edward Glaeser, Bruce Sacerdote (2001). Why Doesn't the United States Have
   a European-Style Welfare State? Brookings Papers on Economic Activity (2): 187-254.
Alesina, Alberto, Edward Glaeser, Bruce Sacerdote (2006). Work and Leisure in the United
   States and Europe: Why So Different? NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2005: 1-64.
Althaus, Scott L. (1998). Information Effects in Collective Preferences. American Political
   Science Review 92 (3): 545-558.
Boser, Ulrich (2011). Return on Educational Investment: A District-by-District Evaluation of
   U.S. Educational Productivity. Washington, DC: Center for American Progress.
Bursztyn, Leonardo (2016). Poverty and the Political Economy of Public Education Spending:
   Evidence from Brazil. Journal of the European Economic Association 14 (5): 1101-1128.
Clinton, Joshua D., Jason A. Grissom (2015). Public Information, Public Learning and Public
    Opinion: Democratic Accountability in Education Policy. Journal of Public Policy 35 (3):
    355-385.
Cruces, Guillermo, Ricardo Perez-Truglia, Martin Tetaz (2013). Biased Perceptions of Income
   Distribution and Preferences for Redistribution: Evidence from a Survey Experiment.
   Journal of Public Economics 98: 100-112.
Di Tella, Rafael, Sebastian Galiani, Ernesto Schargrodsky (2012). Reality Versus Propaganda in
   the Formation of Beliefs About Privatization. Journal of Public Economics 96 (5-6): 553-
   567.
Elias, Julio J., Nicola Lacetera, Mario Macis (2015). Sacred Values? The Effect of Information on
    Attitudes toward Payments for Human Organs. American Economic Review 105 (5): 361-365.
Esping-Andersen, Gøsta (1990). The Three Worlds of Welfare Capitalism. Princeton, NJ:
   Princeton University Press.
Glomm, Gerhard, B. Ravikumar, Ioana C. Schiopu (2011). The Political Economy of Education
   Funding. In Handbook of the Economics of Education, Vol. 4, edited by Eric A. Hanushek,
   Stephen Machin, Ludger Woessmann. Amsterdam: North Holland: 615-680.
Hall, Peter A., David Soskice, eds. (2001). Varieties of Capitalism: The Institutional
   Foundations of Comparative Advantage. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Hanushek, Eric A. (2003). The Failure of Input-Based Schooling Policies. Economic Journal 113
   (485): F64-F98.




                                                  27
Hanushek, Eric A., Ludger Woessmann (2015). The Knowledge Capital of Nations: Education
   and the Economics of Growth. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Henderson, Michael B., Philipp Lergetporer, Paul E. Peterson, Katharina Werner, Martin R.
   West, Ludger Woessmann (2015). Is Seeing Believing? How Americans and Germans Think
   About Their Schools. PEPG Working Papers Series 15-02. Cambridge, MA: Harvard
   University, Program on Education Policy and Governance.
Iyengar, Shanto, Mark D. Peters, Donald R. Kinder, Jon A. Krosnick (1984). The Evening News
   and Presidential Evaluations. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 46 (4): 778-787.
Jackson, C. Kirabo, Rucker C. Johnson, Claudia Persico (2016). The Effects of School Spending
   on Educational and Economic Outcomes: Evidence from School Finance Reforms. Quarterly
   Journal of Economics 131 (1): 157-218.
Krosnick, Jon A., Donald R. Kinder (1990). Altering the Foundations of Support for the
   President through Priming. American Political Science Review 84 (2): 497-512.
Kuziemko, Ilyana, Michael I. Norton, Emmanuel Saez, Stefanie Stantcheva (2015). How Elastic
   Are Preferences for Redistribution? Evidence from Randomized Survey Experiments.
   American Economic Review 105 (4): 1478-1508.
Lenz, Gabriel S. (2009). Learning and Opinion Change, Not Priming: Reconsidering the Priming
   Hypothesis. American Journal of Political Science 53 (4): 821-837.
Lergetporer, Philipp, Guido Schwerdt, Katharina Werner, Ludger Woessmann (2016).
   Information and Preferences for Public Spending: Evidence from Representative Survey
   Experiments. CESifo Working Paper 5938. Munich: CESifo.
Linos, Katerina, Martin West (2003). Self‐Interest, Social Beliefs, and Attitudes to
   Redistribution: Re‐Addressing the Issue of Cross‐National Variation. European Sociological
   Review 19 (4): 393-409.
OECD (2014). Education at a Glance 2014: OECD Indicators. Paris: Organisation for Economic
  Co-operation and Development.
OECD (2015). Government at a Glance 2015. Paris: Organisation for Economic Co-operation
  and Development.
OECD (2016). Personal Income Tax: All-in Average Rates by Family Type. OECD Tax
  Statistics. Doi: Http://Dx.Doi.Org/10.1787/Data-00805-En (Accessed March 7, 2016).
Schueler, Beth E., Martin R. West (2016). Sticker Shock: How Information Affects Citizen
   Support for Public School Funding. Public Opinion Quarterly 80 (1): 90-113.
Woessmann, Ludger, Martin R. West (2006). Class-Size Effects in School Systems around the
  World: Evidence from between-Grade Variation in TIMSS. European Economic Review 50
  (3): 695-736.




                                                28
Appendix A: A Simple Model of the Effect of Information Provision on
            Preferences for Increased Education Spending
    Consider a representative individual deciding between spending on education E and
spending on other items O in order to maximize the following expression of her preferences
subject to a budget constraint:

                                  max E α O1−α        s.t. pE + O = B                              (1)
                                      E ,O


where the parameter α ∈ (0,1) reflects the relative importance of education in preferences, p is
the relative price of education, and B is the budget. Optimal spending levels on the two
categories can be derived as

                                                B
                                       E* = α     ,   O* = (1 − α )B                               (2)
                                                p

    Subscripts u and i refer to uninformed and informed, respectively. Let us assume that in the
uninformed state, the individual underestimates spending on education (Eu < Ei), whereas
providing information on education spending does not affect the individual’s estimates of
spending on other items (Ou = Oi = O) or of the price of education (p). Optimal spending on
education, Eu* and Ei*, is given by (2) for the respective budget, Bu = pEu + O and Bi = pEi + O.
Then, the difference in desired increases in spending on education between the informed and the
uninformed status is given by:

                                       (        ) (
                          ∆ i − ∆ u = Ei* − Ei − Eu* − Eu   )
                                       pEi + O           pEu + O       
                                   =  α         − Ei  −  α    − Eu                         (3)
                                            p                 p        
                                   = (α − 1)(Ei − Eu ) < 0

That is, the informed individual is closer to her optimal spending. Her support for increased
spending is reduced by being informed about the actual spending, as depicted in Figure 1.
    If the provision of information on education spending also affects the individual’s estimates
of spending on other items (Ou ≠ Oi), ∆ i − ∆ u is given by the following expression:

                                                                 α
                               ∆ i − ∆ u = (α − 1)(Ei − Eu ) +       (Oi − Ou )                    (4)
                                                                 p

and ∆ i − ∆ u < 0 holds as long as:

                                                      A1
                                                     α
                                     Ei − Eu >             (O − O )                                 (5)
                                                 (1 − α ) p i u
That is, all else equal, the likelihood that informing the individual about the true level of
education spending will reduce her support for higher education spending increases with the
relative extent to which the information affects spending estimates in education compared to
other items, increases with the relative price of education, and decreases with the importance of
education in her preferences.


Appendix B: Wording of the Survey Questions
Estimate of spending level:
    U.S.: Based on your best guess, what is the average amount of money spent each year for a
child in public schools in your local school district?
    Germany: Was schätzen Sie, wie viel wird durchschnittlich jedes Jahr pro Schülerin/Schüler
an öffentlichen allgemeinbildenden Schulen in Deutschland ausgegeben?

Estimate of teacher salary level:
    U.S.: Based on your best guess, what is the average yearly salary of a public school teacher
in your state?
    Germany: Was schätzen Sie, wie viel verdienen Lehrerinnen und Lehrer im Durchschnitt in
Deutschland? Bitte schätzen Sie das Netto-Monatsgehalt einer Vollzeitstelle.

Support for higher education spending:
    U.S.: Uninformed [Informed]: [As it turns out, according to the most recent information
available ${value} is being spent each year per child attending public schools in your district.]
Do you think that government funding for public schools in your district should increase,
decrease, or stay about the same? Informed+tax: As it turns out, according to the most recent
information available ${value} is being spent each year per child attending public schools in
your district. Do you think that taxes to fund public schools in your district should increase,
decrease, or stay about the same?
    Germany: Uninformed [Informed]: [Die staatlichen Bildungsausgaben in Deutschland betra-
gen im Durchschnitt jährlich 6400 Euro pro Schülerin/Schüler.] Sollten die staatlichen Ausgaben
für Schulen in Deutschland Ihrer Meinung nach steigen, sinken oder unverändert bleiben?

                                                     A2
Informed+tax: Die staatlichen Bildungsausgaben in Deutschland betragen im Durchschnitt
jährlich 6400 Euro pro Schülerin/Schüler. Sollten Steuern für die staatliche Finanzierung von
Schulen in Deutschland Ihrer Meinung nach steigen, sinken oder unverändert bleiben?

Support for higher teacher salaries:
    U.S.: Uninformed [Informed]: [As it turns out, public school teachers in your state are paid
an average annual salary of ${value}.] Do you think that public school teacher salaries should
increase, decrease, or stay about the same?
    Germany: Uninformed [Informed]: [In Deutschland verdienen vollzeitbeschäftigte
Lehrerinnen und Lehrer im Durchschnitt rund 3000 Euro netto im Monat.] Was meinen Sie,
sollten die Gehälter von Lehrerinnen und Lehrern in Deutschland steigen, sinken oder
unverändert bleiben?

Support for different spending categories:
    U.S.: Uninformed: Suppose the government plans to increase spending in the school system.
Which one of the following options do you favor? Reducing class sizes – Increasing teacher
salaries – Purchasing new books and technologies. Informed: Suppose the government plans to
increase spending in the school system. Reducing average class sizes by 3 students would cost
roughly the same amount as increasing teacher salaries by 13 percent or buying $10,000 in new
books and technologies for each class every year. Among these options, which do you favor?
Reducing class sizes by 3 students – Increasing teacher salaries by 13 percent – Purchasing
$10,000 in new books and technologies for each class every year.
    Germany: Uninformed: Stellen Sie sich vor, die Regierung plant, die Ausgaben für das
Schulsystem zu erhöhen. Für welche der folgenden Möglichkeiten sind Sie? Schulklassen
verkleinern – Lehrergehälter erhöhen – Neue Schulbücher, Computer und andere Lehrmittel
anschaffen. Informed: Stellen Sie sich vor, die Regierung plant, die Ausgaben für das
Schulsystem zu erhöhen. Die Schulklassen um drei Schülerinnen/Schüler zu verkleinern, würde
in etwa so viel kosten, wie die Lehrergehälter um 15 Prozent zu erhöhen oder neue Lehrmittel im
Wert von jährlich 20000 Euro für jede Klasse anzuschaffen. Für welche dieser Möglichkeiten
sind Sie? Schulklassen um 3 Schüler verkleinern – Lehrergehälter um 15 Prozent erhöhen –
Neue Schulbücher, Computer und andere Lehrmittel im Wert von jährlich 20.000 Euro für jede
Klasse anschaffen.


                                                 A3
Appendix C: Appendix Tables

Table A1: Descriptive statistics and balance across treatment conditions: Teacher salary and spending options experiments

                                              Teacher salary experiment                                      Spending options experiment
                                             U.S.                      Germany                              U.S.                          Germany
                                  Uninformed Informed           Uninformed Informed              Uninformed        Informed       Uninformed       Informed
                                      (1)       (2)                 (3)       (4)                    (5)              (6)             (7)             (8)
Female                               0.527           0.538         0.523         0.502              0.515           0.550            0.508           0.493
Parent                               0.323          0.279**        0.185         0.186              0.289           0.312            0.181           0.187
Employed                             0.585           0.572         0.483         0.499              0.588           0.568            0.498           0.482
Minority                             0.350           0.344         0.077         0.074              0.340           0.354            0.077           0.071
Income (percentile)                  52.86           54.65         53.81         52.77              53.32           54.24            53.64           54.28
Age
  18-34                              0.287           0.304         0.235         0.248              0.295           0.296            0.233           0.241
  35-49                              0.246          0.202**        0.263         0.257              0.223           0.223            0.268           0.251
  50-64                              0.305           0.307         0.265        0.238**             0.312           0.300            0.263           0.253
  65+                                0.162           0.187         0.237         0.257              0.170           0.180            0.236           0.255
Education
  Less than high school              0.090          0.125**        0.098          0.09              0.109           0.107            0.090           0.110
  High school but no B.A.            0.631          0.566***       0.765         0.754              0.601           0.596            0.771           0.753
  B.A. degree or higher              0.277           0.310         0.137         0.156              0.290           0.298            0.140           0.147
Refused                              0.012           0.016         0.011         0.010              0.013           0.018            0.009           0.013
Observations                         1,322           1,347         2,083         2,088              1,331           1,338             986            1,068
Notes: Means. Significance tests indicate whether the mean for the informed treatment group differs from the mean for the uninformed control group.
Observations weighted by survey weights to ensure national representativeness. Significance levels: ***p<0.01, **p<0.05, *p<0.10. Source: The 2014 EdNext
Survey and Ifo Education Survey 2014.
Table A2: Heterogeneity of information effect with respect to certainty of prior guess in the follow-up survey
                                                                     U.S.                                                      Germany
                                              (1)            (2)              (3)           (4)            (5)           (6)             (7)            (8)
                                                    ***            ***              ***           ***            ***           ***             ***
Informed                                  -0.159          -0.185         -0.181           -0.196        -0.149         -0.197        -0.163          -0.212***
                                           (0.022)         (0.024)        (0.027)          (0.029)      (0.0282)        (0.033)       (0.034)         (0.039)
Estimate (Spending: >Actual)                              -0.123***                        -0.023                       0.042                         0.018
                                                           (0.045)                        (0.064)                      (0.045)                       (0.056)
Informed X Estimate                                       0.148**                          0.121                       0.180***                      0.217***
                                                          (0.064)                         (0.085)                      (0.065)                       (0.076)
Certain                                                                  -0.107***         -0.058                                     -0.006         -0.0260
                                                                          (0.034)         (0.038)                                    (0.044)         (0.052)
Certain X Informed                                                           0.066         0.042                                      0.023           0.053
                                                                            (0.047)       (0.052)                                    (0.064)         (0.074)
Certain X Estimate                                                                        -0.155*                                                     0.076
                                                                                          (0.092)                                                    (0.095)
Certain X Informed X Estimate                                                              -0.059                                                     -0.124
                                                                                          (0.132)                                                    (0.148)
Control mean                                0.577                                                        0.740
Observations                                2,010          1,986            1,986          1,972         2,078          1,984         1,984           1,984
R2                                          0.025          0.031             0.31          0.038         0.025          0.048         0.028           0.049
F (Certain X Informed, Certain
                                                                                           0.715                                                      0.665
X Informed X Estimate): p value
Notes: Linear probability models. Dependent variable: binary outcome of support for increased school spending. Estimate: binary variable indicating estimate of
spending level is larger than actual spending level. Certain: binary variable indicating respondent was reasonably sure about his/her estimate of the spending
level, as indicated by the top four points on a seven-point scale ranging from very unsure to very sure. Randomized experimental group: Informed = respondents
informed about current spending level. Regressions weighted by survey weights to ensure national representativeness. Standard errors in parentheses.
Significance levels: ***p<0.01, **p<0.05, *p<0.10. Source: The 2015 EdNext Survey and Ifo Education Survey 2015.
Figure 1: The effect of status information on support for policy change
    Other
    spending




O




                    Eu          Ei   Eu*   Ei*             Education
                                                            spending
                      Δ uninformed

                                Δ informed
Notes: Eu = education spending (uninformed); Ei = education spending
(informed); Eu* = optimal education spending (uninformed); Ei* = optimal
education spending (informed); O = other spending.
Figure 2: The effect of tradeoff information on support for policy change
Other
spending




                                                                       Perceived tradeoff

                                                            Actual tradeoff


                      T             Ta*          Tp*     Teachers per student
                                                         (inverse of class size)
                          Δ informed

                              Δ uninformed
Notes: T = teachers per student (status); Tp = optimal teachers per student
(perceived tradeoff); Ta = optimal teachers per student (actual tradeoff).
Figure 3: Support for higher spending: Information on spending and reference to taxes
            80

                                        71


                               60
  Percent favoring increase
                         60




                                                                  50

                                                      43
            40




                                                                                                       30
                                                                                           26
20          0




                                                            †             †                      †             †
                               U.S.   Germany        U.S.       Germany                   U.S.       Germany

                              Uninformed*            Informed*                          Informed+Tax
Notes: Share of respondents who favor government funding for public schools to either “greatly increase” or
“increase”; other categories are “stay about the same,” “decrease,” and “greatly decrease”. Three randomized
experimental groups. Control group (Uninformed) did not receive further information. First treatment group
(Informed) was informed about current spending levels. Second treatment group (Informed+tax) was additionally
referred to tax financing requirements. See Appendix B for wording of the question in the two countries.
*
  Difference between the two countries is statistically significant at the 5 percent level.
†
  For the country, difference to the control group is statistically significant at the 5 percent level.
Source: The 2014 EdNext Survey and Ifo Education Survey 2014.
Figure 4: Support for higher teacher salaries depending on current salary information
                            60    62
Percent favoring increase
                            40




                                                                                    38


                                           29
                            20




                                                                                                    17
                            0




                                 U.S.   Germany                                   U.S.†        Germany †
                                  Uninformed*                                         Informed*
Notes: Share of respondents who favor teacher salaries to either “greatly increase” or “increase”; other categories
are “stay about the same,” “decrease,” and “greatly decrease”. Two randomized experimental groups. Control group
(Uninformed) did not receive further information. Treatment group (Informed) was informed about current teacher
salary levels. See Appendix B for wording of the question in the two countries.
*
  Difference between the two countries is statistically significant at the 5 percent level.
†
  For the country, difference to the control group is statistically significant at the 5 percent level.
Source: The 2014 EdNext Survey and Ifo Education Survey 2014.
Figure 5: Teacher salary levels and support for increases: Projecting from U.S. states to
          Germany

                              100
  Percent Favoring Increase




                              80


                              60


                              40


                              20


                               0
                                    40          50           60            70                80                  90
                                                     Annual Teacher Salary (USD/1000)

                                         % Favoring Increase by State             Fitted values
                                         Germany: Actual                          Germany: Projected

Notes: Scatterplot of mean support for increasing teacher salaries against average teacher salaries across U.S. states.
State observations are weighted by the number of respondents. Three states with mean support for salary increases
below 10 percent are omitted as outliers; results are substantively identical if they are included. Projection of
German support is based on the (weighted) linear regression line between support and salary levels across U.S.
states. Source: The 2014 EdNext Survey and Ifo Education Survey 2014.
Figure 6: The public’s estimates of spending and salary levels
                      U.S.: School spending estimates                                      Germany: School spending estimates
           .25




                                                                                 .3
           .2




                                                                                 .2
           .15
    Fraction




                                                                      Fraction
           .1




                                                                                 .1
           .05
           0




                                                                                 0
                  0         100                      200        300                    0           100                      200         300
                       Estimate as Percent of Actual Spending                                 Estimate as Percent of Actual Spending




                      U.S.: Teacher salary estimates                                       Germany: Teacher salary estimates
         .1




                                                                                 .2
         .08




                                                                                 .15
            .06
     Fraction




                                                                      Fraction
                                                                        .1
  .04




                                                                                 .05
         .02
         0




                                                                                 0




                  0         50                       100        150                    0            50                       100        150
                       Estimate as Percent of Actual Salaries                                  Estimate as Percent of Actual Salaries



Notes: Histograms of respondents’ best guesses of current levels of school spending and teacher salaries,
respectively, relative to the respective actual levels. Spending (salary) estimates above 300 (150) percent of actual
levels were first replaced by 300 (150). Source: The 2014 EdNext Survey and Ifo Education Survey 2014.
Figure 7: Heterogeneity of information effects in teacher salary experiment with respect
          prior knowledge

                                                               United States: Teacher Salaries
                                                1
   Probability of Support for Salary Increase




                                                .8


                                                .6


                                                .4


                                                .2


                                                0
                                                     40   50      60     70     80     90     100    110       120   130
                                                               Estimated Average Salary as Percent of Actual

                                                                         Uninformed              Informed


                                                                 Germany: Teacher Salaries
                                                1
   Probability of Support for Salary Increase




                                                .8


                                                .6


                                                .4


                                                .2


                                                0
                                                     40   50      60     70     80     90     100    110       120   130
                                                               Estimated Average Salary as Percent of Actual

                                                                         Uninformed              Informed

Notes: Predicted support for increasing teacher salaries (and 95 percent confidence intervals) by experimental
condition depending on respondents’ prior estimates of current salaries (as a percentage of actual salaries) based on
linear probability models reported in Table 6, columns 4 (U.S.) and 5 (Germany). Randomized experimental group:
Informed: respondents informed about current teacher salary levels in their state (U.S.) or nation (Germany).
Respondents with salary estimates greater than 300 percent or less than 33 percent of actual salaries are excluded
from the estimation sample. Source: The 2014 EdNext Survey and Ifo Education Survey 2014.
Figure 8: Support for spending on smaller classes, higher salaries, and teaching material
                                               64
       60




                                                                        60




                                                                                                                                  60
                                                             48
                    46                                                                                                                                                        46
Percent in favor
              40




                                                                        40




                                                                                                                                  40
                                  35
                                                                                            33
                                                                                                                                                    32          32
                                                                                                                                        30

                                                                              24
       20




                                                                        20




                                                                                                                                  20
                                                                                                                         7
                                                                                                           4
       0




                                                                        0




                                                                                                                                  0




                                                                                                                                                                            Informed*†
                                                           Informed*†




                                                                                                                     Informed*†
                                Informed †




                                                                                          Informed †




                                              *                                                         *
                   Uninformed




                                              Uninformed




                                                                             Uninformed




                                                                                                        Uninformed




                                                                                                                                       Uninformed

                                                                                                                                                    Informed



                                                                                                                                                               Uninformed
                       U.S.                  Germany                              U.S.                 Germany                              U.S.               Germany
                   Reduce class sizes                                           Increase teacher                                             Buy new books
                                                                                              salaries                                 and technologies
Notes: Share of respondents favoring the specific spending option over the other two options. Two randomized
experimental groups. Control group (Uninformed) did not receive further information. Treatment group (Informed)
was informed that reducing average class sizes by 3 students would cost roughly the same amount as increasing
teacher salaries by 13 (15) percent or buying $10,000 (€20,000) in new books and technologies for each class every
year in the U.S. (Germany). See Appendix B for wording of the question in the two countries.
*
  Difference to the same category in the U.S. is statistically significant at the 5 percent level.
†
  For the country, difference to the control group is statistically significant at the 5 percent level.
Source: The 2014 EdNext Survey and Ifo Education Survey 2014.
Table 1: Descriptive statistics and balance across treatment conditions: School spending experiment
                                                                 U.S.                                                         Germany
                                         Uninformed           Informed        Informed+tax               Uninformed           Informed        Informed+tax
                                             (1)                 (2)               (3)                       (4)                 (5)               (6)
Female                                       0.502              0.551              0.545                     0.522              0.504              0.516
Parent                                       0.297              0.318              0.288                     0.185              0.175              0.187
Employed                                     0.577              0.581              0.576                     0.473              0.496              0.505
Minority                                     0.336              0.339              0.365                     0.056              0.083              0.069
Income (percentile)                          54.25              53.98              53.12                     53.24              53.50              52.88
Age
  18-34                                      0.276              0.309              0.304                     0.237              0.241              0.255
  35-49                                      0.217              0.228              0.225                     0.241              0.269              0.266
  50-64                                      0.335              0.270*             0.312                     0.272              0.247             0.232**
  65+                                        0.173              0.194              0.159                     0.250              0.244              0.248
Education
  Less than high school                      0.103              0.106              0.114                     0.102              0.103              0.085
  High school but no B.A.                    0.612              0.581              0.601                     0.745              0.767              0.744
  B.A. degree or higher                      0.285              0.312              0.285                     0.153              0.129              0.171
Refused                                      0.008              0.013              0.015                     0.012              0.011              0.015
Observations                                  897                869                903                      1,010              1,092              1,066
Notes: Means. Significance tests indicate whether the mean for the informed or informed+tax treatment groups differs from the mean for the uninformed control
group. Joint F-tests in regressions of each variable on both treatment dummies are statistically insignificant except for minority status for Germany (p=0.077);
age 50-64 for the United States (p=0.037); and BA degree or higher for Germany (p=0.042). Observations weighted by survey weights to ensure national
representativeness. Significance levels: ***p<0.01, **p<0.05, *p<0.10. Source: The 2014 EdNext Survey and Ifo Education Survey 2014.
Table 2: Who supports school spending and teacher salary increases? Descriptive evidence
                                                        School spending                                                  Teacher salaries
                                               U.S.                       Germany                                U.S.                       Germany
                                               (1)                          (2)                                  (3)                          (4)
Female                                 0.070*          (0.040)       -0.026         (0.032)             0.016           (0.034)      -0.065***        (0.022)
Parent                                 0.073           (0.050)        0.019         (0.044)             0.041           (0.042)       -0.034          (0.030)
Employed                               0.002           (0.048)        0.013         (0.037)             -0.033          (0.039)       -0.027          (0.026)
Minority                               0.071           (0.043)       -0.098         (0.068)            0.137***         (0.036)       -0.029          (0.042)
Income (percentile)                   -0.001*          (0.000)        0.001         (0.001)             0.000           (0.001)       -0.001          (0.000)
Age
  35-49                                0.061           (0.063)       -0.010         (0.050)             -0.016          (0.050)        -0.019         (0.034)
  50-64                                0.015           (0.057)        0.018         (0.044)             -0.023          (0.049)        -0.022         (0.032)
  65+                                  0.023           (0.069)        0.004         (0.052)             -0.001          (0.057)       -0.072*         (0.037)
Education
  High school but no B.A.             -0.054           (0.081)       0.095          (0.060)              0.018          (0.069)        -0.050         (0.039)
  B.A. degree or higher                0.007           (0.088)      0.226***        (0.068)             0.148**         (0.074)        0.043          (0.049)
Constant                             0.604***          (0.098)       0.551          (0.077)              0.053          (0.088)       0.436***        (0.051)
Observations                                    894                          997                               1,306                          2,062
R2                                             0.042                        0.034                              0.047                          0.020
Notes: Linear probability models. Dependent variable: binary outcome of support for increased spending. Sample: control group. Regressions weighted by
survey weights to ensure national representativeness. Standard errors in parentheses. Significance levels: ***p<0.01, **p<0.05, *p<0.10. Source: The 2014 EdNext
Survey and Ifo Education Survey 2014.
Table 3: Effects of information treatment on support for school spending
       Support for school spending to:                                                Increase                                                   Decrease
                                                   U.S.            Germany                              Pooled                                    Pooled
                                                    (1)                (2)                (3)              (4)               (5)                     (6)
Informed                                        -0.165***          -0.203***          -0.165***        -0.167***          -0.169***                0.028*
                                                 (0.029)            (0.023)            (0.029)          (0.029)            (0.029)                (0.016)
Informed+tax                                    -0.341***          -0.408***          -0.341***        -0.341***          -0.344***               0.111***
                                                 (0.027)            (0.022)            (0.027)          (0.027)            (0.027)                (0.019)
Germany                                                                                0.107***         0.122***          Included               Included
                                                                                       (0.026)          (0.026)
Germany X Informed                                                                      -0.038           -0.034             -0.031                 0.011
                                                                                       (0.037)          (0.037)            (0.037)                (0.019)
Germany X Informed+tax                                                                 -0.067*          -0.068**           -0.065*                 -0.010
                                                                                       (0.035)           (0.035)           (0.035)                (0.023)
Controls                                            No                 No                 No              Yes                Yes                    Yes
Controls interacted with country                    No                 No                 No              No                 Yes                    Yes
Control mean                                     0.599                0.705                -                -                 -                       -
Information effect/Control mean                  -0.276              -0.288                -                -                 -                       -
Information+tax effect/Control
mean                                             -0.570              -0.578                -                -                 -                       -
Observations                                      2,646              3,128              5,774            5,774              5,774                  5,774
R2                                                0.081              0.110              0.100            0.106              0.116                  0.116
Notes: Linear probability models. Dependent variable: binary outcome of support for increased (column 6: decreased) spending. Randomized experimental
groups: Informed = respondents informed about current school spending levels. Informed+tax = respondents additionally referred to tax financing requirements.
Controls include gender, parental and employment status, income, age (four categories), and education (three categories). Regressions weighted by survey
weights to ensure national representativeness. Standard errors in parentheses. Significance levels: ***p<0.01, **p<0.05, *p<0.10. Source: The 2014 EdNext Survey
and Ifo Education Survey 2014.
Table 4: Effects of information treatment on support for teacher salary
   Support for teacher salaries to:                                               Increase                                                     Decrease
                                              U.S.             Germany                               Pooled                                     Pooled
                                               (1)                 (2)                (3)               (4)               (5)                      (6)
Informed                                    -0.242***          -0.120***           -0.242***        -0.246***          -0.247***                 0.006
                                             (0.023)            (0.014)             (0.023)          (0.023)            (0.023)                 (0.013)
Germany                                                                            -0.327***        -0.314***          Included                Included
                                                                                    (0.020)          (0.021)
Germany X Informed                                                                 0.122***          0.123***          0.122***                 0.076***
                                                                                   (0.027)           (0.027)           (0.027)                  (0.017)
Controls                                       No                  No                 No               Yes                Yes                     Yes
Controls interacted with country               No                  No                 No               No                 Yes                     Yes
Control mean                                 0.617                0.290                -                 -                  -                       -
Information effect/Control mean              -0.392              -0.415                -                 -                  -                       -
Observations                                 2,639               4,127               6,766            6,766              6,766                   6,766
R2                                           0.059               0.020               0.115            0.126              0.128                   0.031
Notes: Linear probability models. Dependent variable: binary outcome of support for increased (column 6: decreased) teacher salaries. Randomized experimental
group: Informed = respondents informed about current teacher salary levels. Controls include gender, parental and employment status, income, age (four
categories), and education (three categories). Regressions weighted by survey weights to ensure national representativeness. Standard errors in parentheses.
Significance levels: ***p<0.01, **p<0.05, *p<0.10. Source: The 2014 EdNext Survey and Ifo Education Survey 2014.
Table 5: Heterogeneous treatment effects by demographic subgroups
                                               School spending experiment                                                     Teacher salary experiment
                               Informed                                        Informed+tax                                           Informed
                     U.S.                   Germany                    U.S.                   Germany                     U.S.                    Germany
             No/Low Yes/High          No/Low Yes/High          No/Low Yes/High           No/Low Yes/High          No/Low Yes/High           No/Low Yes/High
               (1)    (2)               (3)    (4)               (5)    (6)                (7)    (8)               (9)    (10)              (11)    (12)
Female       -0.156*** -0.179***      -0.191***   -0.217***    -0.302*** -0.380***      -0.416***   -0.401***     -0.230***    -0.253***    -0.110*** -0.134***
              (0.041)   (0.040)        (0.033)     (0.031)      (0.039)   (0.040)        (0.033)     (0.030)       (0.034)      (0.032)      (0.022)   (0.018)
Parent       -0.151*** -0.204***      -0.212***   -0.161***    -0.325*** -0.378***      -0.390***   -0.494***     -0.208***    -0.322***    -0.129*** -0.083***
              (0.034)   (0.054)        (0.026)     (0.052)      (0.032)   (0.050)        (0.025)     (0.048)       (0.028)      (0.042)      (0.016)   (0.031)
Employed     -0.177*** -0.157***      -0.206***   -0.202***    -0.360*** -0.338***      -0.377***   -0.441***     -0.260***    -0.229***    -0.123*** -0.117***
              (0.044)   (0.038)        (0.033)     (0.032)      (0.042)   (0.036)        (0.032)     (0.031)       (0.036)      (0.031)      (0.020)   (0.020)
Minority     -0.189*** -0.117***      -0.199***   -0.218**     -0.348*** -0.336***      -0.419***   -0.250***     -0.224***    -0.273***    -0.123***      -0.080
              (0.035)   (0.050)        (0.024)    (0.085)       (0.033)   (0.047)        (0.023)     (0.092)       (0.029)      (0.039)      (0.015)      (0.054)
Income       -0.160*** -0.169***      -0.169***   -0.229***    -0.367*** -0.317***      -0.371***   -0.436***     -0.280***    -0.203***    -0.124*** -0.117***
              (0.040)   (0.041)        (0.035)     (0.030)      (0.037)   (0.039)        (0.035)     (0.029)       (0.032)      (0.034)      (0.022)   (0.019)
Age          -0.200*** -0.134***      -0.186***   -0.222***    -0.349*** -0.337***      -0.420***   -0.394***     -0.279***    -0.206***    -0.125*** -0.115***
              (0.046)   (0.036)        (0.034)     (0.031)      (0.044)   (0.032)        (0.033)     (0.030)       (0.037)      (0.029)      (0.021)   (0.019)
Education    -0.154*** -0.191***      -0.186***   -0.282***    -0.354*** -0.308***      -0.406***   -0.436***     -0.246***    -0.245***    -0.128***     -0.090**
              (0.036)   (0.046)        (0.025)     (0.057)      (0.033)   (0.045)        (0.024)     (0.054)       (0.029)      (0.037)      (0.015)      (0.042)
Notes: Subgroup estimations by characteristic indicated in first column. Binary variables (female, parent, employed, minority): No = subgroup where the status is
wrong; Yes = subgroup where the status is true. Income, age: Low = subgroup where variable is below sample mean; High = subgroup where variable is above
sample mean. Education: Low = below B.A. degree; High = B.A. degree or higher. Linear probability models. Dependent variable: binary outcome of support for
increased spending (columns 1-8) resp. increased teacher salaries (columns 9-12). Randomized experimental groups: Informed = respondents informed about
current levels of school spending (columns 1-4) resp. teacher salaries (columns 9-12). Informed+tax = respondents additionally referred to tax financing
requirements. Treatment effects do not differ significantly between the respective subgroups, with the exceptions that the Informed+tax treatment effect on
support for spending increases differs significantly by parental (p=0.050) and minority (p=0.074) status in Germany and that the Informed treatment effect on
support for salary increases differs significantly by parental status (p=0.023) and income level (p=0.098) in the United States. Regressions weighted by survey
weights to ensure national representativeness. Standard errors in parentheses. Significance levels: ***p<0.01, **p<0.05, *p<0.10. Source: The 2014 EdNext Survey
and Ifo Education Survey 2014.
Table 6: Heterogeneity of information effects with respect to prior knowledge
                                                                  Spending                                                     Salaries
                                                  U.S.            Germany             Pooled                   U.S.           Germany             Pooled
                                                  (1)               (2)                (3)                     (4)              (5)                 (6)
Informed                                        -0.189***         -0.239***          -0.185***              -0.846***          -0.527***         -0.848***
                                                 (0.077)           (0.051)            (0.031)                (0.094)            (0.050)           (0.094)
Estimate (Spending: >Actual;                     -0.098*            -0.023            -0.106*               -0.401***          -0.346***         -0.401***
 Salaries: % of Actual)                          (0.058)           (0.042)            (0.059)                (0.088)            (0.044)           (0.087)
Informed X Estimate                              0.175**           0.153***           0.176**               0.777***           0.471***           0.780***
                                                 (0.083)           (0.057)            (0.085)               (0.121)            (0.057)            (0.121)
Germany                                                                              0.125***                                                    -0.328***
                                                                                     (0.029)                                                      (0.078)
Germany X Informed                                                                     -0.057                                                     0.316***
                                                                                      (0.041)                                                     (0.106)
Germany X Estimate                                                                     0.085                                                       0.052
                                                                                      (0.072)                                                     (0.096)
Germany X Informed X Estimate                                                          -0.014                                                     -0.301**
                                                                                      (0.103)                                                     (0.133)
Controls                                           Yes               Yes                Yes                    Yes                Yes               Yes
Observations                                      1,722             1,904              3,626                  2,426             3,833              6,259
R2                                                0.052             0.070              0.055                  0.103             0.068              0.154
Notes: Linear probability models. Dependent variable: binary outcome of support for increased spending (columns 1-3) and teacher salaries (columns 4-6).
Estimate: binary variable indicating estimate of spending level is larger than actual spending level (columns 1-3) or continuous variable measuring salary
estimate as a percentage of actual salaries (columns 4-6). Randomized experimental group: Informed = respondents informed about current spending (columns 1-
3) or teacher salary (columns 4-6) levels. Controls include gender, parental and employment status, income, age (four categories), and education (three
categories). Observations with teacher salary estimates greater than 300 percent and less than 33 percent of actual salaries excluded. Regressions weighted by
survey weights to ensure national representativeness. Standard errors in parentheses. Significance levels: ***p<0.01, **p<0.05, *p<0.10. Source: The 2014 EdNext
Survey and Ifo Education Survey 2014.
Table 7: Effect of information treatment on preferences for spending options
                                        Class size vs.                                 Class size vs.                              Teacher salary vs.
                                        teacher salary                               books/technologies                            books/technologies
                                 (1)           (2)           (3)               (4)           (5)            (6)              (7)            (8)           (9)
Informed                     0.570***       0.559***      0.562***          0.734***      0.722***      0.722***          1.287***       1.292***      1.285***
                             (0.048)        (0.048)       (0.048)           (0.060)       (0.060)       (0.060)           (0.115)        (0.117)       (0.116)
Germany                      8.713***       8.918***      Included          1.323***      1.462***      Included          0.152***       0.164***      Included
                             (1.603)        (1.654)                         (0.126)       (0.142)                         (0.029)        (0.032)
Germany X Informed             0.754         0.755          0.718           0.706***      0.704***      0.704***            0.936         0.933         0.981
                              (0.183)       (0.183)        (0.178)          (0.093)       (0.094)       (0.094)            (0.233)       (0.232)       (0.248)
Controls                         No           Yes            Yes               No            Yes           Yes               No            Yes           Yes
Controls interacted
                                 No            No            Yes               No            No            Yes               No             No           Yes
 with country
Observations                   7,230         7,230          7,230            7,230          7,230         7,230             7,230         7,230         7,230
Information effect           0.430***       0.422***      0.403***          0.518***      0.508***      0.508***            1.206         1.205         1.260
 for Germany                 (0.098)        (0.096)       (0.094)           (0.053)       (0.053)       (0.053)            (0.280)       (0.279)       (0.298)
Notes: Relative risk ratios of multinomial logit models. Randomized experimental group: Informed = respondents informed about financial tradeoffs involved
between options. Controls include gender, parental and employment status, income, age (four categories), and education (three categories). Regressions weighted
by survey weights to ensure national representativeness. Standard errors in parentheses. Significance levels (of difference from 1): ***p<0.01, **p<0.05, *p<0.10.
Source: The 2014 EdNext Survey and Ifo Education Survey 2014.
