                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




               SHOULD CENTRAL BANKS CARE ABOUT FISCAL RULES?

                                        Eric M. Leeper

                                     Working Paper 22800
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w22800


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                  November 2016




I thank Jesper Lindé for comments. This is based on comments I made at the Sveriges Riksbank’s
conference “Rethinking the Central Bank’s Mandate,” June 2016. The views expressed herein are
those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2016 by Eric M. Leeper. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
Should Central Banks Care About Fiscal Rules?
Eric M. Leeper
NBER Working Paper No. 22800
November 2016
JEL No. E31,E5,E62,E63

                                          ABSTRACT

This essay aims to explain the nature of monetary and fiscal policy interactions and how those
interactions could inform the fiscal rules that countries choose to follow. It makes two points: (1)
monetary policy control of inflation requires appropriate fiscal backing; (2) European fiscal
frameworks appear unlikely to provide the necessary fiscal backing.


Eric M. Leeper
Department of Economics
Indiana University
105 Wylie Hall
Bloomington, IN 47405
and Center for Applied Economics and Policy Research
and also NBER
eleeper@indiana.edu
   Should Central Banks Care About Fiscal Rules?∗

                                            Eric M. Leeper†




1 Introduction
Fiscal crises spawn fiscal rules. On the heels of what may be the worst financial and fiscal cri-
sis in Swedish history in the early 1990s, Sweden adopted sweeping fiscal reforms beginning
in 1993. Although details about Swedish fiscal policy have evolved over time, the guiding
principles have been enshrined in the “Swedish Fiscal Policy Framework” [Swedish Govern-
ment (2011)]. Sweden has followed a net lending target, which currently is 1/3 percent of
GDP, and plans to aim for a “debt anchor” of 35 percent of GDP starting in 2019.1 After the
Euro Area’s sovereign debt crisis that began in 2009, member nations are now required to
adopt medium-term budgetary frameworks [European Commission (Undated)]. Germany,
whose fiscal position was sound despite a large crisis-induced run up in government debt,
adopted a debt brake in 2011 that sets the maximum structural new borrowing limit at 0.35
percent of GDP [Federal Ministry of Finance (2015)].
   Each of these approaches to fiscal rules focuses on ensuring that fiscal policy is “sustain-
able.” 2 Unfortunately, the fiscal rules countries are adopting seem to take “sustainability” to
mean single-minded fiscal austerity. The rules appear to reflect the principle that low debt is
good debt, with little consideration given to how fiscal policy needs to behave for monetary
policy to successfully target inflation and the roles that safe government debt plays in the
financial system.
    This essay aims to explain the nature of monetary and fiscal policy interactions and how
   ∗
     October 26, 2016.
   †
     Indiana University and NBER; eleeper@indiana.edu. I thank Jesper Lindé for comments. This is based
on comments I made at the Sveriges Riksbank’s conference “Rethinking the Central Bank’s Mandate,” June
2016.
   1
     Evidently, the anchor is a target and the government must explain any deviations from target that exceed
5 percent in either direction.
   2
     “Sustainable” is a generally ill-defined concept that gets invoked as a rationale for fiscal rules.


                                                     1
                          Leeper: Central Banks & Fiscal Rules


those interactions could inform the fiscal rules that countries choose to follow. It makes two
points:

   1. Monetary policy control of inflation requires appropriate fiscal backing.

   2. European fiscal frameworks appear unlikely to provide the necessary fiscal backing.

       Before getting into these points, we take a step back to ask what determines the aggregate
price level, and therefore inflation, in the economy. That discussion argues that a unique
price level requires fiscal behavior of a certain sort. The essay then turns to explain how
monetary and fiscal policy must interact in any equilibrium. This establishes point 1. The
essay then briefly discusses fiscal rules to ask if they provide the fiscal backing necessary for
monetary policy to control inflation, point 2. Two appendices provide the formal background
for the verbal arguments in the text.


2 Determining the Price Level
The aggregate price level is a relative price: it measures how much a basket of goods is worth
in terms of nominal government liabilities—money plus bonds. This relative price must be
determined by the interaction of supply and demand for these government liabilities.
    To the private sector—the ultimate holders of government-issued paper money—demand
for money and bonds depends, as it does for any asset, on expected discounted cash flows. In
the case of government paper money, those cash flows are primary government surpluses—tax
receipts in excess of expenditures, exclusive of the interest the government pays to holders
of high-powered money and bonds.3 To the extent the liabilities also provide service flows—
liquidity, collateral, and so forth—those flows also affect the liabilities’ value.
    This asset-pricing logic creates a direct link between the nominal objects being priced
(nominal liabilities) and the “goods” (surpluses) that give them value. Critical to under-
standing how the price gets determined is the fact that the government—the central bank
and fiscal authority jointly—controls both the nominal quantity of liabilities outstanding and
the real quantity of goods that back the liabilities. By varying either the nominal supply or
the real backing, the government can achieve any relative price it desires.
    Appreciating that the price level is the price of goods in terms of nominal liabilities
radically alters how to think about inflation. This is the essence of the fiscal theory perspec-
tive on price-level determination.4 It may be helpful to contrast this perspective with more
conventional views.
   3
    High-powered money is currency plus bank reserves. Although currency earns no interest, many countries
now pay interest on reserves.
  4
    This theory is developed formally in Leeper (1991), Sims (1994), Woodford (1995), and Cochrane (1999).

                                                    2
                       Leeper: Central Banks & Fiscal Rules


   Monetarists emphasize that the equilibrium price level emerges from the interplay of the
supply and demand for money. Individuals seek to hold some real value of money balances
to acquire goods or to hold their wealth in liquid form. The central bank supplies the
nominal quantity of money, but its real value—and thus the price level—is determined by real
factors like private sector wealth, which are ground out by the economy’s general equilibrium.
These real factors are beyond the control of policy, at least in the long run. Expectational
considerations, particularly expectations of inflation, can also affect the desired level of real
money balances, as Obstfeld and Rogoff (1983) show. But these expectations may also be
beyond the control of policy.
   By the monetarist viewpoint, government controls only the nominal object—money
supply—and not the real or expectational objects that determine its value. This is why
monetarist models are plagued by indeterminacies and self-fulfilling equilibria [Kareken and
Wallace (1981), Obstfeld and Rogoff (1983), Sims (1994)].
  New Keynesian analyses fare no better. They shift the focus away from money to the
nominal interest rate, which is the instrument that most modern central banks target. Fun-
damental economic behavior connects real consumption demand negatively to the entire
expected path of ex-ante real interest rates. In the presence of nominal rigidities, monetary
policy’s choice of the nominal rate can affect the real rate in the short run. Higher real rates
reduce demand for goods and, therefore, the price level.
   But few economists believe monetary policy can affect real interest rates forever. In fact,
long-run neutrality is a central tenet of inflation targeting. As in the monetarist view, new
Keynesian theory gives the government control over a nominal object, but only temporary
influence over real variables. Several authors have argued that indeterminacies are ubiquitous
in new Keynesian models of monetary policy [Benhabib, Schmitt-Grohé, and Uribe (2001),
Cochrane (2011), Sims (2013)].
   Determinacy problems with monetarist and new Keynesian perspectives stem from at-
tempts to view inflation as a purely monetary phenomenon. Problems disappear once fiscal
policy, and its control of primary surpluses, is fully integrated into the analysis. Cochrane
(2011) and Sims (2013) illustrate that appropriate fiscal backing for monetary policy can
eliminate self-fulfilling explosive inflation paths. Del Negro and Sims (2015) specify fiscal
behavior that rules out low-inflation traps.
   Perhaps monetary economists dismiss the joint monetary-fiscal message on the grounds
that abstract theoretical arguments have little relevance for the practical problems that
central banks now face. After all, have we ever seen a speculative hyperinflation? Maybe
not. But we are all now living through extended periods of low inflation and tepid economic
growth. Maybe it’s time to adopt a broader perspective on inflation than money-only views


                                               3
                           Leeper: Central Banks & Fiscal Rules


offer.
    Movement toward that broader perspective starts with understanding how monetary and
fiscal policy must interact in any equilibrium. Although there are many similarities between
how monetary and fiscal policy affect the economy, one distinction between the two is central:
fiscal policy has taxing power; monetary policy does not.5


3 How Monetary and Fiscal Policies Interact
Rather than explore the pathologies of exploding inflation or chronic deflations, this discus-
sion focuses, as do most central bank models, on relatively small fluctuations around a stable
and unique steady state. The discussion is about “normal times” or even periods, like now,
when inflation has been moderately below target for some period. Appendix A describes the
formal model and the solution that underlies this verbal description.
    Macroeconomic policies have two fundamental tasks to accomplish: determining the price
level (and inflation rate) and stabilizing government debt. Of course, policies have a great
many other objectives as well, but if they are not successful in achieving these two minimal
tasks, they will be unable to pursue other worthy objectives.
   The Riksbank, like many central banks, has a mandate to target inflation. If inflation is
not determined uniquely, it means that inflation can wander around in a manner detached
from the central bank’s actions and goals. Clearly, an inflation-targeting central bank must
ensure that inflation is unique and that it responds in predictable ways to policy actions.
   Analogously, if policies do not stabilize debt, then debt can grow without limit to a point
where it is impossible for the government to honors its obligations. In this situation, the
government can no longer borrow and it must finance all its spending year-by-year. Inability
to borrow makes fiscal policy unable to conduct countercyclical policy or to build automatic
stabilizers into spending and taxes. Tax rates and spending will have to move dramatically
over time with shocks that hit the economy. Those dramatic movements create inefficiencies
that reduce economic well being.
  Price-level determination and debt stabilization are necessary for good economic perfor-
mance, so it is important to understand how monetary and fiscal policy together can achieve
them. The theoretical literature finds that there are two different mixes of monetary and
fiscal behavior that deliver both a determinate price level and stable debt when attention
is limited to bounded equilibria, as it is in central bank models. I describe these in terms
of common—and simple—specifications of policy rules: monetary policy sets the short-term
   5
     This statement makes the distinction too stark. Modern central banks do have some taxing capacity
through seigniorage revenues. But using this tax instrument will generally conflict with achieving an inflation
target.


                                                      4
                          Leeper: Central Banks & Fiscal Rules


nominal interest rate as a function of current inflation and fiscal policy makes tax revenues
net of transfers respond to past real government debt outstanding, where both net revenues
and debt are measured as ratios of GDP. These are stylized policy rules: actual policy
behavior is far more complex.


                                            Regime M
 Monetary Policy:       targets inflation by raising nominal interest rate
                        more than one-for-one with inflation
       Fiscal Policy:   raises taxes when real government debt rises by enough
                        to cover real debt service and to eventually retire
                        the increase in principal
              Label:    Active Monetary and Passive Fiscal Policy


                                            Regime F
 Monetary Policy:       adjusts nominal interest rate weakly in response to inflation to ensure
                        that interest payments on government debt do not destabilize debt
       Fiscal Policy:   makes taxes unresponsive to state of government indebtedness
                        and the price level
              Label:    Passive Monetary and Active Fiscal Policy


                                           Policy Rules
 Monetary Policy:       it = ī + α(πt − π ) + εit
                                            ∗

   Fiscal Policy:       Tt = T̄ + γ(bt−1 − b∗ ) + εTt


Table 1: Two policy mixes that deliver determinate price level and stable debt. In the policy
rules, i is the interest-rate instrument, πt and π ∗ are actual and target inflation, T is tax
revenues net of transfers as a ratio of GDP, bt−1 and b∗ are actual and target debt-GDP
levels. The ε terms are exogenous changes in policy instruments.

   Table 1 summarizes the combinations of monetary and fiscal policies that are consistent
with a determinant equilibrium.6 Regime M produces an equilibrium that reflects the con-
ventional assignment of the two tasks: monetary policy controls inflation and fiscal policy
ensures government solvency. This is the policy mix that virtually all central bank models
assume prevails.
   Regime F flips the assignments, tasking fiscal policy with determining the price level
and monetary policy with stabilizing debt. Clear instances of this regime have occurred
   6
    The table refers to “taxes” as the fiscal instrument, but this should be understood more generally to be
the primary surplus—revenues less expenditures net of interest payments on debt.


                                                     5
                       Leeper: Central Banks & Fiscal Rules


historically: during wars, when governments borrow heavily, central banks stabilize debt
by pegging the interest rate and keeping bond prices high to help finance the war; during
recoveries from large financial crises—the Great Depression or the 2009 global financial
crisis—central banks keep interest rates at or near their lower bound for extended periods.

3.1 Regime M: Active Monetary/Passive Fiscal Policies

This conventional assignment of tasks produces the conventional monetarist/new Keynesian
outcomes. When the central bank tightens monetary policy by raising the short-term nominal
interest rate—an increase in εit in table 1—inflation falls. But it turns out that fiscal behavior
is central to generating this conventional result. A higher policy interest rate has fiscal
consequences because it raises yields and debt service on government bonds. When the
higher interest rate is engineered by an open-market sale of bonds, the action also raises the
principal held by the private sector.
   Suppose, in contrast to the passive fiscal behavior in regime M, fiscal policy were to hold
taxes fixed following the monetary contraction (that is, fiscal policy sets γ = 0). If taxes
do not rise to cover the additional debt service due to higher interest rates, then the debt
service will get financed by selling more nominal government bonds. In time, people will see
that nominal debt is growing but taxes are not rising and they will come to expect higher
inflation. That expectation will induce people to substitute out of nominal assets and into
buying goods, driving up actual inflation.
    We have a contradiction. Monetary policy actions geared toward reducing inflation set
in train forces that raise inflation if fiscal policy does not respond appropriately. But regime
M posits that fiscal policy will not hold taxes fixed. Higher interest rates raise real debt
in two ways: through increased debt service and through a lower price level that raises the
real value of nominal bonds. Passive fiscal behavior increases taxes enough to finance the
interest payments and gradually retire any increase in real principal. This is the accounting
explanation of passive fiscal policy.
    What is the economics behind passive fiscal behavior? The contradiction arose because
higher debt service raises bond holders’ wealth if taxes are not expected to increase. And
because the higher interest payments get rolled into increased debt issuance every period,
the size of the wealth effect grows over time. Passive fiscal policy eliminates the wealth effect
by following a rule that informs bond holders that their increased bond wealth will be taxed
away in the future. With the wealth effect gone, the monetary policy action successfully
brings inflation back to target.
   Of course, since 2009 central banks have generally been trying to raise inflation, not
lower it. But the reasoning that fiscal policy must eliminate monetary policy-induced wealth

                                                6
                         Leeper: Central Banks & Fiscal Rules


effects is perfectly symmetric. When the central bank reduces interest rates in order to raise
inflation, it triggers negative wealth effects that need to be offset by lower future taxes.
    At the beginning of the financial crisis, monetary and fiscal policies were complementary:
central banks rapidly reduced interest rates and many governments implemented substantial
fiscal stimulus packages. Those packages, though, took the form of temporary increases in
spending and decreases in taxes. And when the stimulus expired, countries quickly began to
consolidate fiscal policy. By 2010, the IMF’s Fiscal Monitor was entitled “Fiscal Exit: From
Strategy to Implementation,” making clear that the time for fiscal retrenchment had arrived
[International Monetary Fund (2010)].
    Consider the situation in which countries like Sweden, Switzerland, Japan, and the Euro
Area find themselves. Inflation has been chronically below target and policy interest rates
have been pushed into negative territory after being near zero for many years. Those central
banks have also engaged in sizeable asset purchases designed to drive down interest rates at
the long end of the yield curve. Despite what in regime M constitutes very loose monetary
policy, inflation has remained stubbornly low. How can this happen? Section 4 will return
to this conundrum.
   Exogenous changes in fiscal policy in this regime are trivial by design. Passive fiscal
behavior delivers Ricardian equivalence in simple representative agent models. Cuts in lump-
sum taxes or increases in transfers are initially financed by more bond issuance. But higher
real debt raises the taxes that people expect to pay in the future. Recipients of the tax
cut save their increase in disposable income to pay for those future taxes. The fiscal rule in
regime M ensures future taxes exactly offset the initial tax cut or transfers increase so there
is no wealth effect and no impact on inflation.7

3.2 Regime F: Passive Monetary/Active Fiscal Policies

Switching policy assignments, as regime F does, dramatically alters the impacts of monetary
and fiscal policies and the roles that the two policies play in determining inflation and
stabilizing debt. The notions that fiscal behavior may determine the price level and monetary
policy can stabilize debt may be alien to some readers, so I’ll try to explain how these can
happen.
   The simplest examples of regime F policies look a lot like the policies many advanced
economies adopted immediately after the financial crisis hit: monetary policy pegged the
nominal interest rate and fiscal policy chose taxes and spending that created deficits designed
to stimulate the economy, setting aside efforts to stabilize debt. In terms of the rules in table
   7
    Of course, exact Ricardian equivalence is an extreme and implausible assumption. Fortunately the logic
of the arguments in this essay does not rely on this assumption.


                                                    7
                          Leeper: Central Banks & Fiscal Rules


1, these policies set α = 0 and γ = 0. Appendix B goes through this case formally; here I
focus on the economic intuition.
   Imagine that the government increases transfers to the public—lower εTt —and finances
those transfers by selling new nominal government bonds. Because fiscal policy is not re-
sponding to debt and the public understands this behavior, people see that the transfers do
not generate higher future taxes (or lower transfers). This makes them feel wealthier and
they try to use those transfers to buy goods they can consume. Higher demand for goods
raises the krona price of goods. As goods prices rise, the nominal assets people hold lose
value, tempering the higher real demand. If the supply of goods in the economy is perfectly
inelastic, equilibrium is restored once the price level has risen enough to eliminate the initial
positive wealth effect.8
    How does monetary policy behavior fit into this chain of reasoning? An essential step
in the reasoning is that the price level (and inflation rate) rises sufficiently to eliminate the
initial wealth effect from higher transfers. Suppose that the central bank tries to combat
this inflation by sharply raising the nominal interest rate, as it does in regime M. This policy
reaction triggers a very different sequence of events. Higher rates increase bondholders’
interest receipts, which do not portend offsetting future taxes in regime F. People will want
to convert this interest income into consumption goods, further increasing demand for goods
to drive prices still higher. A hawkish central bank responds to this second round of inflation
by raising interest rates still more. This sets off a cycle that puts the economy on a path
along which inflation and nominal government debt explode. Loyo (1999) argues that a
mix of active monetary and active fiscal policies caused Brazil’s hyperinflation in the late
1980s. This is why stability in regime F requires monetary policy to respond only weakly to
inflation.
   Pegging the interest rates means monetary policy does not respond at all to the inflation
that the original transfers increase produces. Keeping the nominal interest rate fixed prevents
interest payments from destabilizing debt. In this simple economy, a one-time increase in
transfers financed by nominal bonds creates a jump in the price level that keeps the real
value of newly-issued debt unchanged. Pegging the interest rate permits this jump to occur.
    If the central bank does not hold the interest rate fixed, instead raising it modestly with
inflation, the mechanism takes on a dynamic element. A weak increase in the interest rate
produces a weak increase in bondholders’ interest receipts in the subsequent period.9 Higher
    8
      Inelastic supply is a simplifying assumption that can be dispensed with at the cost of substantial com-
plication. In the presence of nominal rigidities, goods supply becomes elastic, responding to changes in the
price level. Nominal rigidities enrich, but also greatly complicate, the analysis.
    9
      Here all government bonds are pure discount bonds that mature in one period. Bonds bought in period
t cost Bt /(1 + it ) krona and pay Bt krona next period. Generalizing to a full maturity structure for bonds



                                                     8
                         Leeper: Central Banks & Fiscal Rules


interest income is spent on goods next period, raising the price level. Once again, this sets off
a cycle, but in this case the cycle is stable and the interest income and price effects gradually
dissipate.
   Just as fiscal policy provided backing for monetary policy’s control of inflation in regime
M, monetary policy supports fiscal policy in regime F by ensuring government debt is stable.
In both regimes, stability comes from a passive policy authority that accommodates the
actions the active authority takes.
    We have established that exogenous fiscal actions have very different impacts in regime
F than in regime M. It turns out that monetary actions also have very different effects in
the two regimes. Alert readers have probably deduced that a positive shock to the interest
rate in regime F will eventually raise rather than lower inflation. This seemingly perverse
outcome stems from precisely the wealth effects from debt service that have been a theme
of this essay. Whether the higher interest rate raises, lowers, or leaves unchanged the price
level on impact depends on various model details.
   In regime M, positive wealth effects from higher interest rates were eliminated by higher
taxes. Those taxes are not forthcoming in regime F. By the reasoning above, higher future
interest income will raise future demand and future prices. One immediate result is that
“tighter” monetary policy—a higher policy interest rate—raises expected inflation in regime
F.

3.3 Summary

In one important respect the policy effects in regime F require far less stringent assumptions
about private behavior than do the outcomes in regime M. Central to both the monetary and
fiscal impacts in regime M is the assumption that private agents know the policy rules that
authorities obey and form expectations of future policies rationally. For example, Ricardian
equivalence requires the private sector to save current tax cuts to pay for rationally expected
future tax hikes. Similarly, monetary policy’s control of inflation rests heavily on private
agents anticipating that future taxes will eliminate the wealth effects of changes in nominal
interest rates. Eusepi and Preston (2013) and Sims (2016a) show that if private behavior is
purely backward-looking, equilibria always resemble those in regime F.
    I trust that this exposition makes it clear that a central bank tasked with targeting
inflation needs to be confident that fiscal policy will behave in a passive manner. In practice,
discovering the nature of fiscal behavior can be tricky. A first step in the process of discovery
is for central bank models to include fiscal details—nominal government debt, tax rates,
various types of expenditures, and rules for fiscal behavior. A second step is to permit the
alters the dynamics, but not the basic logic. See Cochrane (2001) or Leeper and Leith (2016).

                                                    9
                           Leeper: Central Banks & Fiscal Rules


data to inform about the prevailing monetary-fiscal regime. I know of no central banks that
have taken these steps.


4 Fiscal Rules & Fiscal Backing
In this section I focus on two countries that have had fiscal rules for some years and take
those rules seriously. By “seriously” I mean the governments actually follow the rules. My
intent is not to conduct a rigorous analysis of exactly how fiscal policies in these countries
have affected their inflation processes—such analysis goes well beyond this essay. Instead, I
briefly describe the countries’ rules and point to some merely suggestive evidence that these
rules may make it difficult for the Swedish and Swiss central banks to achieve their inflation
targets.
    Sweden’s Fiscal Policy Framework lays out the general principles that guide fiscal policy
[Swedish Government (2011)]. Each government then adopts the particular rules it will
follow to be consistent with the framework. Currently, Sweden aims for a 1/3 percent of
GDP target for net lending (the surplus inclusive of interest payments) and is now considering
also imposing a 35 percent of GDP “debt anchor.” This anchor is akin to a target around
which debt will fluctuate within prespecified bounds.10
   Since a nationwide referendum in 2001, Switzerland has followed a debt brake, which
limits spending to average revenue growth over several years. If spending differs from this
limit, the difference is debited or credited to an adjustment account that has to be corrected
in coming years. Debt brakes have a built-in error-correction mechanism intended to restrict
the size of government debt.11
   The top panel of figure 1 suggests that Swedish and Swiss fiscal rules have worked to limit
debt growth. In both countries, debt has steadily fallen over the past 15 years and now is
about 35 percent of GDP. Remarkably—and these two countries may be the sole exceptions—
debt either continued to fall or was flat during the financial crisis. This stunning outcome is
a testament to the effectiveness of fiscal rules that are followed.
   But this prudent fiscal policy may have come at a cost in terms of inflation targeting.
Both countries have 2 percent inflation targets that have been missed. In Switzerland,
inflation has been persistently below target since the beginning of 2009. As of this writing in
October 2016, CPI inflation in Sweden is about 1 percent, while it is approaching 0 percent
in Switzerland.
   Money-only understandings of inflation that neglect fiscal policy have a difficult time
explaining why zero or negative policy interest rates that have lasted for years have failed
 10
      Many more details are available on the Swedish Fiscal Policy Council’s web page.
 11
      See Danninger (2002) and Bodmer (2006) for additional details and analyses.


                                                     10
                          Leeper: Central Banks & Fiscal Rules



       55
       50


                                              Swiss
       45



                                              government debt
                             Swedish          (% GDP)
                     government debt
       40




                            (% GDP)
       35
       30




            2000   2002      2004      2006        2008         2010    2012         2014    2016

                                                                         Negative policy
       4




                                                                          rates adopted

                                                                               Target
       2




                                                                               Swedish
                                                                               inflation
       0




                                                                       Swiss
                                                                       inflation
       -2




            2000   2002     2004       2006       2008      2010       2012         2014    2016


Figure 1: Debt-GDP ratio and CPI inflation rates in Sweden and Switzerland. First vertical
line in bottom panel is when Swiss National Bank adopted negative policy rates and second
line is when Sveriges Riksbank did.



to bring inflation up to target.12 The discussion in section 3.1 points toward one possible
explanation. If the urge to reduce government debt makes fiscal policy respond asymmet-
rically to monetary policy—raising taxes/cutting spending when interest rates rise, but not
cutting taxes/raising spending when interest rates fall—then fiscal policy is not providing the
backing necessary for monetary easing to raise inflation. Whether governments in Sweden
and Switzerland are implementing fiscal policy in this asymmetric manner requires careful
analysis that extends well beyond the data in figure 1.
    To my knowledge, central banks are not even asking the questions that arise from con-
ceiving of inflation as a joint monetary-fiscal phenomenon. And central bank models, as
currently specified, cannot address the questions. Those models impose symmetric rules—
when they impose any fiscal rules at all—that behave as regime M prescribes. Conditional
on those rules, the models attribute below-target inflation rates in the wake of extremely
  12
   The Swiss National Bank set the policy rate negative beginning in December 2014 and Sveriges Riksbank
made the repo rate negative starting in February 2015.


                                                    11
                                           Leeper: Central Banks & Fiscal Rules


low monetary policy interest rates to a host of non-policy shocks—price or wage markups,
preferences—or to foreign policy disturbances. The argument in this essay points away from
shocks and toward systematic, asymmetric fiscal policy behavior.

                        .8
                        .6        .4
               Yield on Gov't Bonds
                           .2




                                             Jan2015
            -.2      0




                                                Feb2015
                        -.4




                                                       Sep2015
                                                       May2016
                        -.6




                                       0        2          4               6   8   10
                                                           Years to Maturity

      Figure 2: Yield curves for Sweden at various dates. Source: Sveriges Riksbank.


   Figures 2 and 3 report evidence consistent with the view that Swedish and Swiss fiscal
policies have focused strongly on debt reduction. The figures plot estimated zero-coupon
government bond yield curves at various dates. In Sweden yields are negative for maturities
up to five years, as figure 2 shows. Swiss yields are even more striking: negative at maturities
of 10 years, as figure 3 plots.
   A careful analysis would decompose these negative yields into components due to ex-
pected inflation, long-term real interest rates, and term premia. It’s treacherous to read too
much into these figures, but they do stimulate some questions. Is there a shortage of safe
assets in these countries? Do these yields mean that inflation expectations have become un-
tethered from the central banks’ inflation targets? Or do the yields largely reflect declining
real interest rates worldwide, which are beyond the policy authorities’ influence?
    We can infer something with confidence. The private sector is willing to pay these
governments to borrow from them for periods of 5 to 10 years. But the governments have
refused the private sector’s generous offer. At a minimum the figures raise the question of
why governments do not take up this offer and invest the proceeds in sovereign wealth funds,
infrastructure, or any other investment whose return is likely to exceed the negative cost of

                                                                 12
                                        Leeper: Central Banks & Fiscal Rules




                       1
                       .5
             Yield on Gov't Bonds
                       0




                                            Nov2014


                                                 Jun2015
                       -.5




                                                                       May2016

                                                   Feb2016
                       -1




                                    0        2         4               6         8   10
                                                       Years to Maturity

   Figure 3: Yield curves for Switzerland at various dates. Source: IHS Global Insight.



borrowing.


5 Concluding Remarks
Research on monetary-fiscal policy interactions is not new. Friedman (1948) originally advo-
cated a policy mix much like that in regime F. By Friedman (1960) he shifted his advocacy
to something close to regime M. Importantly, both positions explicitly specified monetary
and fiscal behavior. From about Friedman (1970, 1971) on, though, Friedman’s analyses
focused solely on money and monetary policy. Fiscal considerations had been pushed so
deeply into the background that they didn’t play any role in his views of inflation. Contem-
porary economists like Patinkin (1965), Tobin (1974) and Brunner and Meltzer (1974) never
adopted Friedman’s extreme money-only views, but their more complex approaches never
gained much traction against simple monetarism.
   Friedman’s money-only view continue to dominate analyses of inflation and inflation-
targeting frameworks in which central banks operate. Even the massive economic disruptions
caused by the global financial crisis and the unprecedented and unconventional monetary
policy actions of the past eight years have not shaken the belief that price-level and inflation
determination can be understood without reference to fiscal policy.
   Sims (2016b) offers a non-technical exposition of how bringing monetary and fiscal policy


                                                             13
                      Leeper: Central Banks & Fiscal Rules


jointly into the picture alters one’s perceptions on several pressing macroeconomic issues:

  1. central bank independence;

  2. large central bank balance sheets;

  3. the apparent ineffectiveness of monetary policy in advanced nations in recent years;

  4. providing economic stimulus when interest rates are at their lower bound.

Sims does not explicitly address the matter of whether adopted fiscal rules can conflict with
the central bank’s mandate to target inflation, but this is implied by much of what he writes.
   Fiscal rules are designed to solve a political problem—the bias toward running excessive
budget deficits—but may create an economic problem. And the cure may be worse than
the disease if it undermines the ability of monetary policy to control inflation. Central
banks cannot rely on fiscal authorities to work through the implications of their rules for
monetary policy. That requires a level of analysis that in the realm of government, central
bank economists are uniquely qualified to perform.




                                             14
                            Leeper: Central Banks & Fiscal Rules


Appendices
A A Model of Price-Level Determination
We examine the simplest model that can determine the economy-wide price level and inflation
rate. Although simple, this model underlies the more complex models that central banks
employ for policy analysis and forecasting [Christoffel, Coenen, and Warne (2008), Adolfson,
Laséen, Christiano, Trabandt, and Walentin (2013), Brayton, Laubach, and Reifschneider
(2014)]. To make the analytics neat, we use the model after it was been linearized around a
deterministic steady state.13 This model shows that the two basic tasks of determining the
price level and stabilizing the debt can be accomplished by two distinct assignments of the
tasks to monetary and fiscal policy.
   A single representative consumer populates the model economy. That consumer receives
an endowment of goods each period and decides how much to consume and how much to
save in the form of nominal government bonds. The real interest rate is constant at 1/β,
where β, which is between 0 and 1, tells how much the consumer discounts the future. We
treat this discount factor as a primitive of the economy that policy cannot affect.
    Because this is an economy with only a single asset—nominal bonds—the price level, P ,
is how many krona (in bonds) it takes to purchase the single consumption good, and the
inverse of the price level, 1/P , is the goods price of one krona worth of bonds.
      Four equations constitute the complete model14

                               Fisher relation :      it = Et πt+1                                     (1)
                             Monetary policy :        it = απt + εit                                   (2)
                                 Fiscal policy :     τt = γbt−1 + ετt                                  (3)
                      Government budget :          bt−1 = βbt − βit + πt + (1 − β)τt                   (4)

The Fisher relation comes from a no-arbitrage condition and connects the nominal interest
rate, it , to the expected inflation rate, Et πt+1 . Monetary policy aims to target inflation
by adjusting the interest rate in response to current inflation, with an exogenous shock to
reflect times when policy deviates from that simple rule. Fiscal policy adjusts taxes net of
transfers, τt , with the level of real government debt, bt . The exogenous shock permits fiscal
choices to deviate from reactions to debt. Government purchases are zero. Government
choices must satisfy a budget constraint that says any excess of existing debt payments and
 13
      This model appears in Leeper and Li (2016).
 14
      The deterministic steady state has zero net inflation and a surplus-debt ratio of s/b = 1 − β.



                                                      15
                            Leeper: Central Banks & Fiscal Rules


current surpluses must be financed with new bond sales. At date t, the government sells
pure discount nominal bonds, Bt , at price 1/(1 + it ), which pay 1 krona in period t + 1.15
We assume the two policy disturbances are AR(1) with AR coefficients ρi and ρτ .
   This model reduces to two dynamic equations that determine how inflation and real debt
evolve over time. Inflation dynamics come from combining equations (1) and (2) and debt
dynamics from substituting (2) and (3) into (4) to yield

                             απt =Et πt+1 − εit                                              (5)
                               bt =Γbt−1 + (α − β −1 )πt + εit − (β −1 − 1)ετt               (6)

where Γ = β −1 − γ(β −1 − 1). These two equations determine equilibrium inflation and real
debt.
   Before solving this model, we can learn about how monetary and fiscal policies interact
by inspecting these two equations. Equation (5) might seem to suggest that inflation evolves
independently of government debt, but this appearance is deceiving. Inflation at t, πt , is the
rate of change of the price level between period t − 1, Pt−1 , and t, Pt , and real debt, bt , is
nominal debt deflated by the price level, Pt . So (5) shares both Pt and Pt−1 with (6). The
price level connects monetary to fiscal policy.
    Equation (6) shows that the inflation rate and the monetary policy shock, εit , directly
affect debt dynamics. Inflation enters in two ways. First, higher inflation at t reduces the
value of nominal debt carried over from the previous period, which tends to reduce new
debt issuance. Second, inflation affects the nominal interest rate through monetary policy
behavior: higher inflation raises the nominal rate, which reduces the price of new bond sales,
and requires the government to issue more bonds to support the same level of financing.
Because the monetary policy disturbance also affects bond prices, it influences the evolution
of debt.
    To study this model, we will need to take a stand on how monetary and fiscal policy
behave, as summarized by their choices of the parameters α and γ. We focus on finding
solutions that satisfy two sensible criteria. First, inflation and debt should be stable, which
is a sign that policy has been effective. Second, the solutions should be unique, otherwise
we cannot say for certain what paths these variables would follow after a shock hits the
economy.
   Two regions of the policy parameter space deliver unique bounded equilibria [see Leeper
 15
      This is a cashless version of the model in appendix B.




                                                      16
                       Leeper: Central Banks & Fiscal Rules


(1991)]:

           |α| > 1, |γ| > 1 : active monetary/passive fiscal policies “Regime M”
           |α| < 1, |γ| < 1 : passive monetary/active fiscal policies “Regime F”

A.1 Regime M

Equilibria in regime M are conventional monetarist/new Keynesian/Ricardian solutions. Ac-
tive monetary policy makes inflation depend only on monetary policy parameters and shocks
and passive fiscal policy makes debt converge gradually back to steady state following either
kind of policy disturbance. The equilibrium is

                                   1
                         πt = −        εi                                                  (7)
                                 α − ρi t
                                        −1      
                                         β − ρi
                          bt = Γbt−1 +             εit − (β −1 − 1)εSt                     (8)
                                          α − ρi
                         τt = γbt−1 + ετt                                                  (9)

where Γ ≡ β −1 − γ(β −1 − 1) < 1.

A.2 Regime F

For this regime, we consider the case of exogenous surpluses, γ = 0, which is an analytically
simple case of active fiscal policy. Inflation now depends on the fiscal disturbance and the
state of government debt, while monetary policy acts to stabilize the real value of debt. This
equilibrium is

                                        1−β τ
                          πt = bt−1 −          ε                                          (10)
                                       1 − βρτ t
                                                             
                                         i     (1 − β)(ρτ − α) τ
                           bt = αbt−1 + εt +                    εt                        (11)
                                                   1 − βρτ
                           τt = ετt                                                       (12)

where we take α ∈ [0, 1) because negative responses of the interest rate to inflation, although
theoretically possible, make little economic sense.
   Notice that government debt is stable in both regimes. In regime M, the fiscal choice of γ
ensures stability and determines how rapidly debt returns to steady state. In regime F, the
monetary choice of α does the job: as (11) reveals, α determines the speed of adjustment of
debt toward steady state. In fact, if monetary policy were active, α > 1, debt would grow


                                              17
                            Leeper: Central Banks & Fiscal Rules


without bound. A weak response of monetary policy to inflation—a setting of α between 0
and 1—is necessary for debt to be stable.
   Another important difference between regimes is the equilibrium inflation process. In
regime M, as (7)–(9) make clear, inflation is decoupled from the joint (st , bt−1 ) process, an im-
plication of Ricardian equivalence. In regime F, although the surplus evolves autonomously,
it feeds directly into inflation and bt−1 affects πt through a breakdown of Ricardian equiv-
alence. In regime F, nominal debt expansions raise nominal wealth and nominal spending,
raising the price level to ensure that in equilibrium there is no change in real wealth.16


B The Fiscal Theory Mechanism
We posit a permanent income theory of consumption in which a representative household
makes a consumption-saving decision. The household receives an endowment yt , pays lump-
sum taxes net of transfers τt , and saves in the form of nominal assets, money Mt , which
earns no interest, and government bonds Bt , which sell at price 1/(1 + it ). The household
takes prices and initial nominal assets, M−1 and B−1 , as given when it chooses sequences
ct , Mt , Bt to maximize
                                       ∞
                                       X
                                 E0          β t [u(ct ) + v(Mt /Pt )],      0<β<1            (13)
                                       t=0


where u and v are strictly increasing, strictly concave, and differentiable functions, Mt /Pt is
real money balances, and E0 is the expectations operator conditional on inflation at time 0,
subject to
                                      Mt     1 Bt                Mt−1 + Bt−1
                               ct +      +           = yt − τt +                              (14)
                                      Pt   1 + it Pt                 Pt
   Let At ≡ Mt−1 + Bt−1 denote total nominal assets and qt,t+1 denote the one-period real
stochastic discount factor for the household, where

                                                                 u′(ct+1 )
                                                 qt,t+1 = βEt                                 (15)
                                                                  u′ (ct )

       The household’s intertemporal budget constraint in period 0 is
                               ∞                                   ∞
                               X                  it        A0      X
                          E0          qt ct +          mt =    + E0     qt [yt − τt ]         (16)
                               t=0
                                                1 + it      P0      t=0


where qt is the stochastic discount factor for computing the real value in period 0 of a unit
  16
       See Leeper and Leith (2016) and appendix B for details.



                                                            18
                        Leeper: Central Banks & Fiscal Rules


of consumption goods in period t, so q0 = 1, and mt ≡ Mt /Pt is real money balances.
Expression (16) uses the limiting condition limt→∞ E0 [qt At /Pt ] = 0.
   The first-order condition for money implies

                                           v ′ (mt )     1
                                                     =                                           (17)
                                           u (ct )
                                               ′       1 + it

which permits us to write the liquidity preference schedule as mt = L(it , ct ).
   If we specialize the model by setting government purchases of goods to be identically
zero, then goods market clearing is ct = yt for all t ≥ 0. Imposing goods and money market
clearing on (16) leads to an expression that links the real value of initial government liabilities
to their real backing, seigniorage revenues and net taxes.
                                        ∞                               
                               A0      X          it
                                  = E0     qt           L(it , yt ) + τt                         (18)
                               P0      t=0
                                                1 +  it


   This expression may be further simplified by assuming the endowment process implies
yt ≡ ȳ, so that qt = β t . If output is constant, liquidity preference simplifies to L(it , ȳ), and
(18) becomes
                                           ∞                              
                                A0        X
                                                t     it
                                   = E0       β            L(it , ȳ) + τt                        (19)
                                P0        t=0
                                                    1 + it

   Policy chooses sequences {it , τt }. To illustrate how the fiscal theory operates, we posit
the policy rules

                                              it =ī                                             (20)
                                              τt =τ̄ + εt                                        (21)

where Et εt+j = 0 for j > 0.
   Notice that pegging the nominal interest rate pegs expected inflation since 1/(1 + it ) =
βEt [1/(1 + πt+1 )] Assume ī is chosen to ensure π̄ = 0. This and the rule for setting net taxes
collapse (19) to
                                   A0                      β
                                       = L(ī, ȳ) + τ0 +     τ̄                             (22)
                                    P0                    1−β
The real value of initial government liabilities is determined by seigniorage, summarized by
L(ī, ȳ), and by current net taxes, τ0 , and the present value of future net taxes.
    Consider an increase in transfers or decrease in taxes at time 0—lower τ0 . Equilibrium
condition (22) says that this reduced backing for liabilities must reduce their value by in-
creasing the price level, P0 (because initial nominal assets, A0 are given at time 0, and the


                                                  19
                       Leeper: Central Banks & Fiscal Rules


tax rule, (21), implies that a change in current taxes carries no predictions about future
taxes).
   But the equilibrium condition masks the economic mechanisms. Those mechanisms are
made clear from the household’s intertemporal budget constraint, (16). Adjustment to equi-
librium after a tax cut—a decline in τ0 —involves two offsetting wealth effects. The tax
cut reduces the government’s holdings of goods and raises the households’. Households feel
wealthier and try to spend that tax cut on consumption goods. Because the supply of goods
is fixed, the household’s increased demand drives up the price of goods, P0 . As the price
level rises, the real value of household financial wealth, A0 /P0 , falls. This negative wealth
effect must be sufficient to eliminate the excess demand for goods so that the household is
content to consumer its endowment, ct = ȳ.




                                              20
                      Leeper: Central Banks & Fiscal Rules


References
Adolfson, M., S. Laséen, L. Christiano, M. Trabandt, and K. Walentin (2013):
 “Ramses II—Model Description,” Sveriges Riksbank Occasional Paper No. 12, February.

Benhabib, J., S. Schmitt-Grohé, and M. Uribe (2001): “The Perils of Taylor Rules,”
  Journal of Economic Theory, 96(1-2), 40–69.

Bodmer, F. (2006): “The Swiss Debt Brake: How it Works and What Can Go Wrong,”
  Schweizerische Zeitschrift für Volkswirtschaft und Statistik, 142(3), 307–330.

Brayton,      F.,  T.      Laubach,   and   D. Reifschneider (2014):     “The
 FRB/US       Model:         A   Tool   for   Macroeconomic Policy   Analysis,”
  https://www.federalreserve.gov/econresdata/notes/feds-notes/2014/a-tool-for
  -macroeconomic-policy-analysis.html, April.

Brunner, K., and A. H. Meltzer (1974): “Friedman’s Monetary Theory,” in Milton
 Friedman’s Monetary Framework, ed. by R. J. Gordon, pp. 63–76. University of Chicago
 Press, Chicago.

Christoffel, K., G. Coenen, and A. Warne (2008): “The New Area-Wide Model of the
 Euro Area: A Micro-Founded Open-Economy Model for Forecasting and Policy Analysis,”
  ECB Working Paper No. 944, October.

Cochrane, J. H. (1999): “A Frictionless View of U.S. Inflation,” in NBER Macroeconomics
 Annual 1998, ed. by B. S. Bernanke, and J. J. Rotemberg, vol. 13, pp. 323–384. MIT Press,
  Cambridge, MA.

         (2001): “Long Term Debt and Optimal Policy in the Fiscal Theory of the Price
  Level,” Econometrica, 69(1), 69–116.

        (2011): “Determinacy and Identification with Taylor Rules,” Journal of Political
  Economy, 119(3), 565–615.

Danninger, S. (2002): “A New Rule: “The Swiss Debt Brake”,” IMF Working Paper
 WP/02/18, January.

Del Negro, M., and C. A. Sims (2015): “When Does a Central Bank’s Balance Sheet
 Require Fiscal Support?,” in Monetary Policy: An Unprecedented Predicament, ed. by
 M. Goodfriend, and S. E. Zin, vol. 73 of Carnegie-Rochester-NYU Conference Series on
  Public Policy, pp. 1–19. Amsterdam.

                                             21
                     Leeper: Central Banks & Fiscal Rules


European      Commission     (Undated):     “Medium    Term    Budgetary    Objectives,”
  http://ec.europa.eu/economy_finance/economic_governance/sgp/preventive_arm
  /index_en.htm, accessed 19 October 2016.

Eusepi, S., and B. Preston (2013): “Fiscal Foundations of Inflation: Imperfect Knowl-
 edge,” Manuscript, Monash University, October.

Federal Ministry of Finance (2015): “Germany’s Federal Debt Brake,” Public Rela-
  tions Division, March.

Friedman, M. (1948): “A Monetary and Fiscal Framework for Economic Stability,” Amer-
  ican Economic Review, 38(2), 245–264.

        (1960): A Program for Monetary Stability. Fordham University Press, New York.

         (1970): “A Theoretical Framework for Monetary Analysis,” Journal of Political
  Economy, 78(2), 193–238.

         (1971): “A Monetary Theory of Nominal Income,” Journal of Political Economy,
  79(2), 232–337.

International Monetary Fund (2010): Fiscal Monitor—Fiscal Exit: From Strategy to
  Implementation. IMF, Washington, D.C., November.

Kareken, J., and N. Wallace (1981): “On the Indeterminacy of Equilibrium Exchange
 Rates,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 96(2), 207–222.

Leeper, E. M. (1991): “Equilibria Under ‘Active’ and ‘Passive’ Monetary and Fiscal Poli-
  cies,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 27(1), 129–147.

Leeper, E. M., and C. Leith (2016): “Understanding Inflation as a Joint Monetary-Fiscal
  Phenomenon,” in forthcoming in Handbook of Macroeconomics, ed. by J. B. Taylor, and
  H. Uhlig, vol. 2. Elsevier Press, Amsterdam, NBER Working Paper No. 21867, January.

Leeper, E. M., and B. Li (2016): “Surplus-Debt Regressions,” Economics Letters, forth-
  coming.

Loyo, E. (1999): “Tight Money Paradox on the Loose: A Fiscalist Hyperinflation,”
  Manuscript, Harvard University.

Obstfeld, M., and K. Rogoff (1983): “Speculative Hyperinflations in Maximizing Mod-
  els: Can We Rule Them Out?,” Journal of Political Economy, 91(4), 675–687.

                                          22
                     Leeper: Central Banks & Fiscal Rules


Patinkin, D. (1965): Money, Interest and Prices. Harper & Row, New York, 2nd edn.

Sims, C. A. (1994): “A Simple Model for Study of the Determination of the Price Level and
  the Interaction of Monetary and Fiscal Policy,” Economic Theory, 4(3), 381–399.

        (2013): “Paper Money,” American Economic Review, 103(2), 563–584.

        (2016a): “Active Fiscal, Passive Money Equilibrium in a Purely Backward-Looking
  Model,” Manuscript, Princeton University, May.

       (2016b): “Fiscal Policy, Monetary Policy and Central Bank Independence,” in forth-
  coming in Designing Resilient Monetary Policy Frameworks for the Future. Federal Reserve
  Bank of Kansas City Economic Conference Proceedings, 2016 Jackson Hole Symposium.

Swedish Government (2011): The Swedish Fiscal Policy Framework. Regeringskansliet,
 Stockholm.

Tobin, J. (1974): “Friedman’s Theoretical Framework,” in Milton Friedman’s Monetary
 Framework, ed. by R. J. Gordon, pp. 77–89. University of Chicago Press, Chicago.

Woodford, M. (1995): “Price-Level Determinacy Without Control of a Monetary Aggre-
 gate,” Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy, 43, 1–46.




                                           23
