                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




  E-GOVERNANCE, ACCOUNTABILITY, AND LEAKAGE IN PUBLIC PROGRAMS:
EXPERIMENTAL EVIDENCE FROM A FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT REFORM IN INDIA

                                         Abhijit Banerjee
                                          Esther Duflo
                                         Clement Imbert
                                        Santhosh Mathew
                                          Rohini Pande

                                       Working Paper 22803
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w22803


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   November 2016




We thank Abhishek Anand, Madeline Duhon, Pooja Khosla, Shweta Rajwade, M.R. Sharan, Niki
Shrestha and Pankaj Verma for excellent research assistance. We thank the International Initiative
for Impact Evaluation (3ie) and the International Growth Centre (IGC) for financial support. We
thank Julien Labonne, Eliana la Ferrara, Rema Hanna, Ben Olken, Debraj Ray, and Sandip
Sukhtankar for helpful comments. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w22803.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2016 by Abhijit Banerjee, Esther Duflo, Clement Imbert, Santhosh Mathew, and Rohini Pande.
All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without
explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
E-governance, Accountability, and Leakage in Public Programs: Experimental Evidence from
a Financial Management Reform in India
Abhijit Banerjee, Esther Duflo, Clement Imbert, Santhosh Mathew, and Rohini Pande
NBER Working Paper No. 22803
November 2016
JEL No. H11,O2

                                         ABSTRACT

In collaboration with the Government of Bihar, India, we conducted a large-scale experiment to
evaluate whether transparency in fiscal transfer systems can increase accountability and reduce
corruption in the implementation of a workfare program. The reforms introduced electronic fund-
flow, cut out administrative tiers, and switched the basis of transfer amounts from forecasts to
documented expenditures. Treatment reduced leakages along three measures: expenditures and
hours claimed dropped while an independent household survey found no impact on actual
employment and wages received; a matching exercise reveals a reduction in fake households on
payrolls; and local program officials’ self-reported median personal assets fell.


Abhijit Banerjee                                   Santhosh Mathew
Department of Economics, E52-540                   Joint Secretary
MIT                                                Ministry of Rural Development
77 Massachusetts Avenue                            Government of India
Cambridge, MA 02139                                R 254-B Krishi Bhawan
and NBER                                           New Delhi 110 001
banerjee@mit.edu                                   India
                                                   indiaruraldevelop@gmail.com
Esther Duflo
Department of Economics, E52-544                   Rohini Pande
MIT                                                Kennedy School of Government
77 Massachusetts Avenue                            Harvard University
Cambridge, MA 02139                                79 JFK Street
and NBER                                           Cambridge, MA 02138
eduflo@mit.edu                                     and NBER
                                                   rohini_pande@harvard.edu
Clement Imbert
Department of Economics
The Social Sciences Building
The University of Warwick
Coventry CV4 7AL
United Kingdom
C.Imbert@warwick.ac.uk

A randomized controlled trials registry entry is available at https://www.socialscienceregistry.org/
trials/search?utf8=%E2%9C%93&commit=Search&query=AEARCTR-0000009
1       Introduction
Implementation bottlenecks constrain the effectiveness of social programs the world over,
but their costs – in terms of reducing program inefficiency and creating opportunities for
officials to seek rents – are particularly severe in the developing world (Finan et al., 2015).
The theoretical literature on corruption has long emphasized the importance of a lean
administrative structure and streamlined organization of tasks in safeguarding against
malfeasance (Shleifer and Vishny, 1993; Banerjee, 1997; Banerjee et al., 2012). Yet,
somewhat perversely, implementation bottlenecks are often themselves a consequence
of government-instituted accountability mechanisms: more monitoring means a longer
pipeline with more joints that can spring leaks.
    Empirical studies of corruption have typically focussed on the effects of information
disclosure, increased monitoring, and monetary incentives, while holding the administra-
tive structure constant (Reinikka and Svensson, 2011; Olken, 2007; Ferraz and Finan,
2011). A few papers examine the effect of changes in the number of independent and
potentially competing functionaries or jurisdictions (Olken and Barron, 2009; Burgess
et al., 2012) and the impact of reducing bureaucratic discretion (Duflo et al., 2014; Rasul
and Rogger, 2016). However, other aspects of the bureaucratic architecture are rarely the
subject of study by empirical economists, despite receiving significant attention in the
public administration literature (Klitgaard, 1988; Wallis, 1989; Peters and Pierre, 2003;
Pollitt and Bouckaert, 2011).
    In this paper, we focus on how corruption levels respond to changes in administrative
structure of fiscal transfers made possible by innovations in e-governance.
    The fund-flow mechanism for decentralized programs traditionally involves a transfer
of funds from a higher level of government (the state or the federal government in the case
of India) to the local implementing body. The standard practice in low-income countries
is for funds to be disbursed as advances. This is because the communications of the needs
from local authorities to the center and the physical transfer of funds back out to them (as
well as the ancillary mechanisms for checking that it does not get “lost” on the way) can
be time-consuming if the communication infrastructure is low quality and distances are
large. Without advance financing, the local authorities would need the parties expecting
payment to extend credit for what could be long and unpredictable lengths of time. This
would considerably constrain the local government’s ability to implement the program.
    The downside to the cash-advance system is that the local authorities acquire tem-
porary control rights over the advances and can delay accounting for expenses till a time
convenient for them.1 To reduce the possibility of malfeasance, it is standard public-sector
    1
    Of course, the higher level of government could (and sometimes does), refuse to send the next
tranche until the current one is fully accounted for. However, given the delays in getting all the receipts
together, preparing the documents, sending them and then getting the funds released and sent, this
creates problematic long gaps between tranches. For this reason, the deadline for the full accounting for


                                                    2
management practice to require that fund-requests by local governments be ratified at
immediately higher levels of government (in effect certifying trust that the money will
be spent appropriately). But creating a chain of intermediaries with veto-power over
advances both slows down the process (and therefore makes larger advances necessary)
and increases the number of players who can rent-seek.
    If additional intermediaries do indeed translate into greater leakage, then electronic
platforms that enable an immediate link between fund transfer and program expenditures
should lower the scope for corruption at the ground level. We use an unusually large-
scale randomized experiment to examine this possibility in the context of India’s Mahatma
Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme (MGNREGS), the world’s largest
workfare program. MGNREGS is supposed to provide employment at a given wage to
all those who request work and use that labor to improve local infrastructure. The
evaluation was conducted between September 2012 and March 2013 in conjunction with
Bihar’s Department of Rural Development and spanned 12 districts with a population of
33 million.
    In the status quo system, funds flowed through four tiers of administrative hierarchy
on their way from the Department of Rural Development to the village authority: state,
district, block and Gram Panchayat (GP). The GP could request advance funds without
specifying intended purpose, but authorities at intermediate levels of the hierarchy (the
block and the district) had to approve the request before it went to the state treasury.
In the reformed system, fund disbursement to a GP for labor expenses was based on
incurred expenditures. Specifically, GP officials entered the names of those employed and
wages owed in a central database, which automatically triggered fund release into the GP
account. The GP official no longer required approval from block or district officials for
the submission of the fund request (although many block officials remained involved, as
the data-entry infrastructure was typically only available at the block level). All other
aspects of the fund-flow process remained unchanged.2
    Not only did the reform reduce involvement of higher administrative tiers, it also
enhanced transparency. The fact that each fund request required a list of beneficiaries
enabled a more effective audit process – it eliminated the several-month lag between fund
transfer and wage payment and when the names of those purportedly paid were available
to the auditor.
    Theoretically, the impact of this kind of fiscal reform on leakage and corruption is am-
biguous. On one hand, increased transparency should improve monitoring and, thereby,
a particular tranche of money tends to be loose, which makes it harder to verify these expenses (people
move, they forget, receipts get lost, etc). This, in turn makes it easier for local officials to get away with
malfeasance.
   2
     This included fund disbursement from GP account to villagers and the subsequent uploading of
information on who was hired, for how many days, and for what payments, as well as expenditures on
materials purchases. This information was uploaded by GP officials on a separate public access database
(nrega.nic.in).


                                                      3
reduce rent-seeking. On the other hand, if rent-seeking by GP officials is constrained by
the need to reserve some of the spoils for those higher up the administrative hierarchy,
then removing tiers could increase, rather than decrease, rent-seeking by GP officials.
The net effect, therefore, depends on the trade-off for the GP official between the threat
of retribution through increased monitoring and the promise of a bigger slice of the ill-
gotten pie. In situations with weak state capacity, one may be concerned that the latter
effect would dominate.
    Our empirical analysis focuses on identifying this net impact. A key contribution is
to provide robust evidence of declines in leakages by triangulating across multiple data
sources, including administrative databases and independent surveys. First, using ad-
ministrative data on daily GP finances, we show a 17 percent expenditure reduction in
treatment GPs relative to control GPs. We corroborate the decline with spending data
reported in the MGNREGS public access database where we also observe a corresponding
decline in the reported number of hired workers in treatment GPs. Meanwhile, in an in-
dependent household survey, we find that the number of beneficiaries, the wage payments
received and assets built are statistically indistinguishable across treatment and control
GPs.
    While this seems to be evidence that the reform reduced leakage, a remaining concern
is that the relatively small survey sample size may have limited our ability to identify
employment declines in treatment GPs. We, therefore, bolster our analysis with two
pieces of direct evidence on the reduction in corruption.
    First, we construct a measure of leakage that fully exploits the scale of our experi-
ment and the large amount of data available. To systematically identify “ghost workers”
(households who are reported to have worked but, in fact, do not exist), we take the
6,292,307 names that the public database reports as having worked on the program and
match them with names from the Socio-Economic Census, which the Government of India
conducted in 2012 (and itself yields a database containing 34 million names for the 12
districts of our sample). First, using a Hindi-specific Levenshtein linguistic algorithm we
match the names of our approximately 18,000 sample villages across the two databases.
Then we use the same method to match household names within a given village.3 The
name of a ghost worker should fail to be matched, except in the rare case where there are
two persons with the same full name and gender in the same village. This matching-based
strategy systematizes and implements at scale the audit approach pioneered by Niehaus
and Sukhtankar (2013) and also used by Muralidharan et al. (2014) where investigators
physically track down workers reported in the public database. The matching process is
imperfect (there are errors in both direction); however, the scale of our experiment allows
it to serve as a statistical test of the impact of the reform on corruption. The fraction of
  3
   Our analysis is based on the adaptation of a code developed and graciously made public by Paul
Novosad.


                                               4
unmatched households is significantly lower in GPs where our reform was implemented:
for example, 35.5 percent of single-worker households (which make up the majority in
our sample) are unmatched in the control group, compared to 33.6 percent in treatment
villages – a reduction of 5 percent. This difference is absent outside the reform period.
    Our second measure of corruption traces the “missing money” by examining affidavit
data on public employee assets reported just after the reform period. We find that median
wealth of block and GP officials is 14 percent lower in treatment relative to control areas,
and a Kolmogorov-Smirnov test rejects equality of the two distributions. If we use mean
wealth as the measure, the decline is of similar magnitude, though more noisily estimated.
Taken at face value, the point estimate would imply that this decline in officials’ wealth
accounts for half of the savings the reformed program achieved.
    Turning to other dimensions of program performance, we observe a decline in idle
funds sitting in GP accounts, which represents an implementation efficiency gain from
a public accounting perspective, since disbursed funds are considered a government ex-
pense.4 Specifically, the reform reduced fiscal transfers in treatment GPs by 24 percent,
of which the decline in expenditure accounted for two-thirds. The other one-third reflects
a decline in idle funds in GP accounts. It is conceivable that treatment, everything equal,
increased the budget available for the program in all GPs (treatment and control), by
freeing up funds that were previously idle balances. On the other hand, the reform did
not directly improve program delivery for villages or beneficiaries: we do not see an in-
crease in the number of work-days or constructed assets in treatment GPs, and we do see
an initial increase in delays in payment for beneficiaries in the treatment group, though
they declined over time.
    Our paper contributes to a growing set of studies which evaluate administrative re-
forms in settings with limited state capacity (Banerjee et al., 2012; Duflo et al., 2013; Bó
et al., 2013; Banerjee et al., 2016). Several recent papers focus on the use of informa-
tion technology, or e-governance (Barnwal, 2014; Muralidharan et al., 2014; Lewis-Faupel
et al., 2016), and of those the most closely related to ours is the ‘smart card’ for MGN-
REGS project in Andhra Pradesh studied by Muralidharan et al. (2014). Under this
reform, beneficiaries received biometric smart cards and wage disbursement was shifted
from the post office to locally hired bank employees armed with a Point-of-Sale machine
for verifying identity. From the beneficiary perspective, the reform gave them more con-
trol over the process (since they had to be present to use the smart card) and made it
more difficult for local authorities to skim off worker wages by colluding with the post
office officials. Muralidharan et al. (2014) find that the intervention increased worker
   4
    However since public sector banks handle the money, from the point of view of the government as a
whole, only the expenses involved in handling this extra money (which includes interest on extra funds
that the government borrowed from the money market) is actually a cost; the rest of it is a transfer from
one set of state-owned accounts to another. The fact that more funds are now available to use on other
programs is also a potential gain.


                                                   5
payments and, consequently, household incomes, with no change in government outlay,
indicating lower leakage. This test of disbursement reform complements our intervention
which changes the fund flow and leaves disbursement processes constant.
    Our paper is also inspired by the literature on ways to objectively estimate corruption
(see Olken and Pande (2012) for a review). Using a randomized control trial to examine
the impact of administrative reforms on the incidence of corruption, we follow Olken
(2007) and Muralidharan et al. (2014) in combining the “forensic” method of tracking
expenditure by comparing official records of funds release with actual receipt by ben-
eficiaries. However to the best of our knowledge, ours is the first study to carry out
the forensic exercise with administrative rather than survey data. Such cross-validation
across administrative data sources provides a promising avenue to detect corruption and
a possible basis for effective auditing. Finally, like Fisman et al. (2014) we use officials’
affadavit data to examine wealth effects attributable to corruption – our innovation is to
use these data in the context of a large scale experimental evaluation of an administrative
reform.
    The rest of the paper is structured as follows. Section 2 presents the context for the
reform and its expected impact. Section 3 details the data we use and our empirical
strategy. Section 4 presents the results, and Section 5 concludes.


2     Background and intervention
India’s Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme (MGNREGS)
was created in 2005 by the National Rural Employment Guarantee Act. The Act guaran-
tees every rural household 100 days of unskilled manual labor at the stipulated minimum
wage per year. Local GP officials are responsible for registering beneficiaries and pro-
viding them work on local infrastructure projects. With close to 50 million beneficiary
households in 2013, the MGNREGS is the largest social protection program in the world
today, costing 0.5 percent of India’s GDP.
    Below, we first describe the relevant program aspects for Bihar and the reform that
we evaluate. We then use a simple theoretical framework to identify conditions under
which the reform will reduce leakages.


2.1    MGNREGS in Bihar: Performance and program monitoring
From the start, the quality of MGNREGS program implementation has differed across
Indian states. Dutta et al. (2012) note “the incidence of unmet demand tends to be higher
in poorer states even though demand for the scheme is higher.” This is particularly stark
in the case of our study state Bihar, which has one of the highest poverty rates in India,
and possibly the highest unmet demand for MGNREGS work. Using National Sample


                                             6
Survey data for 2009-2010, we estimate that 77 percent of households in Bihar who wanted
MGNREGS work could not obtain it, and at most 10 percent of households have worked
on MGNREGS worksites during the year. By comparison, in the better performing state
of Andhra Pradesh, only 27 percent of those who wanted work could not find it, and 39
percent of households participated in MGNREGS.
    The quality of MGNREGS implementation has improved over time, likely due, in
part, to more regular auditing and the channeling of payments directly to beneficiaries
through banks or post offices.5
    An important impetus for audit reform was a MGNREGS corruption enquiry con-
ducted by India’s federal vigilance authority (CBI) in the neighboring state of Orissa.
This led many Indian state governments - including Bihar - to tighten up their internal
audit systems. In the case of Bihar, this included official audits conducted by teams of
administrators and engineers, as well as social audits where officials convened villagers at
a meeting and heard their grievances.
    In June 2011, the Bihar principal secretary for Rural Development sent district author-
ities a letter noting the MGNREGS program requirement that block officers undertake
random weekly audits of ongoing and recently concluded works. In November 2011, re-
vised department guidelines clarified that the MGNREGS public database should be used
for audit and also that additional MGNREGS documentation should be made available
to the official audit teams and during the social audit. Finally, coinciding with the start
of our reform, the state government issued an audit reform letter on September 1, 2012.
This letter explicitly stated that projects to be audited should be chosen from the set com-
pleted in 2011-12 and those ongoing in Fiscal year 2012-13 (according to nrega.nic.in).
According to official data, between June 2012 and May 2013, 64% of the GPs in our
sample districts were audited at least once (IDinsight, 2013).
    However, leakage of funds remains an important program concern. For our control
GPs, a comparison of outcomes in our independent household survey to the public ac-
cess database shows that the (appropriately weighted) number of households who say
they have worked in MGNREGS sites account for only 59 percent of households listed
as having worked in that period in the official database.6 We also surveyed 346 GP
heads (Mukhiyas) and 47 percent of them in control GPs mentioned corruption in the
administration as a major implementation issue. On average, they estimated the system
   5
     For an early program year (June 2007 and July 2008), employment estimates from national survey
data only account for 42-56% of official figures on MGNREGS employment (Imbert and Papp, 2011).
Four years later (July 2011 to June 2012), the same method shows that about 80% of the reported
workdays could be accounted for (Imbert and Papp, 2014). These national household surveys, however,
cannot provide reliable state-level leakage estimates.
   6
     Using data from a household survey representative of the whole of Bihar in 2009-10, Dutta et al.
(2014) estimate significant, but somewhat smaller leakages of MGNREGS funds (20-30%). A possible
explanation is that our survey specifically checked with the respondents which MGNREGS project they
had worked on (using the list of MGNREGS projects from nrega.nic.in). Hence, we may be less likely
to assign other state-run public works project as MGNREGS work.


                                                 7
of “taxes” extracted by MGNREGS functionaries as making up 21-30 percent of program
expenditures. 72 percent of Mukhiyas in control GPs also identified a lack of funds as a
reason for poor program implementation.


2.2     Fund-flow management in MGNREGS
2.2.1   Fiscal architecture

MGNREGS is largely financed by India’s federal government but implemented by local
GP officials. The first level of fund transfers for MGNREGS are tranche-wise transfers
from the central government to the state: the first tranche is provided at the start of
the fiscal year on the basis of anticipated demand and expenditure from previous years;
additional tranches are supposed to be available upon request by the state. To enable ex-
penditure accountability, the central government releases these subsequent fund tranches
only after the state accounts for a minimum fraction of labor expenditures by document-
ing worker details (and amounts paid) on a publicly accessible electronic data collection
system (nrega.nic.in) – this reporting also serves as the basis for audits. Just after our
reform began (in September 2012) we saw this policy in action: the central government
refused to release the requested tranche of funds to Bihar until 60% of labor expenditures
was accounted for in nrega.nic.in.
    Turning to within-state fund flows, fund requests originate from GP authorities and
are then aggregated up the chain to the state-level at the start of each financial year (we
discuss this further below). Historically, once disbursed from the state treasury, funds
move down the administrative hierarchy: via districts and blocks to GP accounts. Since
the money disbursed to a district (and then block) is typically less than the total requested
by the lower level of hierarchy, each administrative tier enjoys significant discretion in
resource allocation to the tier below. The lumpy and sporadic nature of transfers also
implies that at each level (below the state) some units lack funds while others have large
unspent amounts.
    In 2010-11, the Bihar government reformed its fiscal architecture to prevent unspent
funds from accumulating in districts. It created a single state account to receive central
transfers and opened district Zero Balance Accounts such that funds withdrawn from the
district account would be automatically replenished. Alongside, an electronic platform
called Central Planning Scheme Monitoring System (CPSMS) was created. This both
allowed the state government to monitor GP account balances and to directly transfer
funds from the state pool to the GP account upon district authorization. Thus, funds no
longer transited through district and block accounts before reaching the GPs.
    Finally, to reduce the discretion enjoyed by block and district administration in pass-
ing on fund requests by the GPs, guidelines were issued requiring districts to transfer
funds to a GP whenever it’s account balance fell below Rs. 100,000. However, in prac-

                                             8
tice these guidelines were not followed and fund requests continued to involve bargaining
between the district, the block and the GP. Our analysis of GP accounts fund-flow data
for 12 Bihar districts shows that the average time taken to replenish a GP account was
about three months between July 2011 and July 2012.

2.2.2    Experimental design of Fund flow reform

Cognizant of continuing frictions in fund flows, in 2012 Bihar’s Rural Development De-
partment decided to further reform MGNREGS fund flow within the state and to evaluate
the reform experimentally.
    The reform occurred between September 2012 and March 2013. It spanned 12 dis-
tricts in South, West and North of Bihar, covering a rural population of 33 million, and
905,000 reported MGNREGS workers (see Figure A.1). In collaboration with Bihar’s
rural development department, we identified 69 treatment blocks. Specifically, in each
study district, one-third of the blocks were randomly selected to implement the reformed
fund flow system. Overall, the study districts were divided into 69 treatment (1033 GPs)
and 126 control blocks (2034 GPs).
    Figure 1 summarizes the status quo fund flow system. At the start of the financial
year, each GP account receives a first tranche of funds. When these funds are exhausted
and if automatic replenishment of GP account fails to occur then the GP makes a fund
request to the higher administrative tier (block). This request is typically based on
anticipated need and is supported by an utilization certificate for the previous tranche of
funds. The block officials, who are supposed to play a monitoring role, ratify and pass
the request on to the district administration who then requests a fund transfer from the
state treasury to the GP savings account via the CPSMS platform.
    Figure 2 describes the reformed fund flow for labor payments that was introduced
in treatment blocks: the GP official logs into CPSMS and enters beneficiary details;
this, in turn, initiates an automatic transfer of incurred wage expenses from the state
account to GP saving account. In practice, since most GPs lack necessary infrastructure
and/or knowhow, uploading of beneficiary data typically occurred at the block office with
assistance from a block-level data entry operator.
    The reform left three important elements of the fund-flow system unaffected. First,
the final step of payments from GP to beneficiaries, was unchanged: the GP continued
to send a check and a list of intended beneficiaries and amounts due to them to the local
bank/post office, which then were supposed to credit the beneficiaries account.7 Second,
the state continued to disburse payment for materials utilized for MGNREGS through
CPSMS, with districts and block authorities acting as intermediaries. To enable this, GPs
   7
    As emphasized by Muralidharan et al. (2014), direct payment from state treasury into the benefi-
ciary’s account does not necessarily prevent GP authorities from claiming a part of it. For example the
bank/post office staff may permits the GP official to act as a stand-in for the actual beneficiary.


                                                  9
continued to have a savings account available for transaction use. This created a channel
through which GPs could get paid for materials and divert this to pay labor, although
this was prohibited through a government instruction for treatment GPs. Partly for this
reason, like in Muralidharan et al. (2014), the implementation of the reform was both
gradual and never quite complete, as we document below. Finally, independent of the
within-state fund flow process, GP officials were still required to document every job spell
– including the identity of the beneficiary and the payment – on a public access database
(nrega.nic.in).8


2.3     How may financial reform affect rent-seeking?
There are two distinct mechanisms through which the reformed financial flow system
could impact funds leakage.
    First, by directly linking each disbursement to a specific (reported) expenditure the
reform facilitated monitoring. Recall that in the status quo, the GP gets an advance,
and the district is supposed to replenish the account as soon as funds fell below some
threshold, based on an “utilization certificate.” The utilization certificate is, in principle,
backed up by the electronic entry of the “muster roll” (the information on each beneficiary,
and how much they worked), which can serve as a basis for audit.
    Data entry, however, significantly lagged spending. During our intervention period,
we observed a delay of six months in getting 60 percent of expenditures entered, and
one year to record sufficient expenditures in the public database to match the CPSMS
data (see appendix table A.2). Lags in data entry on the public database limits its use
as a monitoring tool; long lags between purported occurrence of work and audit limits
potential cross-checking of information in the field. Migration, for instance, could explain
an inability to find individuals listed in the database who cannot be found in the village.
And those who can be found may not remember how much they worked.9
    In the reformed system, fund release to GPs occurred after beneficiary details were
documented on the electronic platform. By directly linking fund transfer to expenditure
documentation, and by enabling (almost) real time documentation, quicker verification
and more effective audits became possible. It made it harder for GP authorities to create
fake workers, and auditors had more recent data on who worked.
    Indeed, an analysis of the reports of all audits of the MGNREGS program conducted
by the Rural Development Department between May 2012 and June 2013 suggests that
audits were more likely to pick up irregularities in treatment blocks (see appendix table
   8
     In practice, treatment GP officials entered the same information twice: once to get paid, and once
after the fact. An interface between CPSMS and public portal was planned but never implemented.
   9
     Santhosh Mathew witnessed “flexible memories” during a field investigation of a few cases of workers
who had reported looking for, but not receiving, work and had, therefore, requested unemployment
compensation. Within a few hours of his arrival, every worker had produced an affidavit stating that
they had been offered, but had refused, work and were withdrawing their compensation request.


                                                   10
A.3, panel D). During the intervention period, the share of audits finding irregularities was
similar in both groups, but in the period immediately after, it was twice as large (from 5%
of audits finding irregularities in the control group to 10% in the treatment group). Since
audits happen with a lag, this captures irregularities found on projects conducted during
the intervention period. As we will show below, the weight of the evidences suggests that
corruption in the treatment group actually declined over this period. Thus, this increase
in the number of audits finding irregularities is strongly suggestive that there was indeed
a greater probability of being caught in the treatment group, conditional on cheating.
Table A.3 also shows that audits are not infrequent. There was on average 33 projects
audited in each block during the intervention period, and 9.5 during the three subsequent
months.10
    A second reform feature was a reduction in the number of people involved in fund dis-
bursement. As pointed out by Shleifer and Vishny (1993) and empirically demonstrated
by Olken and Barron (2009), the involvement of multiple uncoordinated agencies, each
with its own rent-seeking goals, typically increases rent-seeking and hence inefficiency.
However, in our setting many GP officials who were the target of rent-seeking by higher
levels of administration may have been themselves engaged in rent-seeking. As a result,
more rent-seeking by higher-ups in the hierarchy might, perversely, increase efficiency by
discouraging stealing by GP officials (since what they steal gets taxed).
    Hence the reform’s impact on total leakages is a priori ambiguous: increased monitor-
ing should reduce leakages but reduced rent-seeking by officials higher up in the hierarchy
might go the other way. We formalize this argument below.
    • The status quo regime
    We label an official at tier i of the administrative hierarchy in the status quo regime
as: P (GP), B (block) , D (district) and S(state). Tier P is responsible for program
operation and can skim off amount s if she exerts a non-contractible non-pecuniary effort
cost 12 cs2 . In expectation, the penalty for skimming is π T s.
    For P to receive s, B and D have to sign off on the fund claim. Assume, following the
literature, that i ∈ B, D can commit ex ante to a price pi for approving every rupee of
funds skimmed by P . Further, B and D choose pB and pD non-cooperatively to maximize
earnings. Therefore s maximizes

                                                          1
                              (1 − π T )s − pi s − p−i s − cs2 ,
                                                          2

which implies that
                                       1 − π T − pB − pD
                                  s=                     ,
                                                c
 10
    Data on audits was compiled in July 2013 by the Rural Development Department for IDinsight
(2013). See Appendix 5 for more details.



                                             11
i’s earnings in status quo regime is therefore

                                            (1 − π T − pi − p−i )
                                       pi                         ,
                                                      c

and the pi that maximizes this expression is given by:

                                                (1 − π T − p−i )
                                        pi =
                                                       2

which from the (evident) symmetry of the solution, yields

                                                     (1 − π T )
                                              pi =
                                                         3

and therefore the amount skimmed under the status quo is

                                                     (1 − π T )
                                              s=                .
                                                        3c

Under the status quo B (and D) therefore earn an amount

                                                         (1 − π T )2
                                       Y BT (π T ) =                 ,
                                                             9c

                                                                   (1 − π T )(1 + 2π T )
 while P earnings from skimming (which we observe) is Y P T (π T ) =                     .
                                                                            9c
Note that to compute P’s utility we would need to deduct the expected penalties and the
cost of her effort from this expression.
• The new regime
    Two things change: First π T goes up to π N . And second, P can, in principle, unilat-
erally claim the money. However, she lacks the technological capacity to do so. So she
needs B to collude with her. We consider two cases:
    • Case 1: Assume P and B can collude and entirely cut out D: pD = 0. From above
it should be evident that

                                       (1 − π N )           (1 − π N )
                                pB =              , and s =
                                           2                   2c

which together imply that

                   BN     N    (1 − π N )2        PN N    (1 − π N )(1 + π N )
               Y        (π ) =             while Y (π ) =                      .
                                   4c                             4c

    A comparison of skimmed funds under the two schemes, Y P T (π T ) versus Y P N (π N )
or Y BT (π T ) versus Y BN (π N ), shows two countervailing effects: the negative effect of an
increase from π T to π N and the positive effect of not having to pay D, reflected in the

                                                      12
fall in the denominator. The net effect is ambiguous; for the negative effect to dominate,
1 − π T needs to be reasonably close to zero or the increase in π T to π N must be very
large in proportional terms. Otherwise, by reducing the number of officials involved, the
reform increases corruption.
    • Case 2: Consider an arguably more realistic scenario, where D retains some leverage,
so that she can continue to extract rents, but with probability α < 1, D has to be paid a
price pD (per rupee stolen). First, if pD can be as high as possible, the solution is identical
to the status quo, but with a larger penalty:

                                           (1 − π N )         (1 − π N )
                           αpD = pB =                 and s =
                                               3                 3c

The reason is straightforward: D increases pD exactly enough to cancel out the effect of
α < 1, and the problem is solved as before. The only effect of the reform is to change the
penalty rate, and skimming will unambiguously decline.
    While the point that reducing D’s influence encourages her to demand even more when
she gets a chance, is general, the exact neutrality result relies on the arguably unrealistic
ability of D to extract very large bribes. In particular, as α → 0, pD → ∞, which means
that P will be, ex post, paying large amounts out of pocket to D whenever she can extract
rents. It seems more reasonable to define a cap, p̄D , on how high pD can go. For α small
enough that p̄D binds, B maximizes

                                          1 − π N − pB − αp̄D
                                     pB                       .
                                                   c

The pB chosen will be
                                             (1 − π N − αp̄D )
                                      pB =                     ,
                                                     2
and therefore
                                             (1 − π N − αp̄D )
                                       s=
                                                    2c
which implies that

                           (1 − π N − αp̄D )2                       (1 − αp̄D )2 − (π N )2
        Y BN (π N , α) =                      and Y P N (π N , α) =                        .
                                   4c                                        4c

Clearly for π N < 1 − αp̄D (which is the only case that makes sense), an increase in π N
reduces s, Y BN and Y P N , while a fall in α increases all three. Once again, the net effects
are ambiguous. Finally:
                              Y BN (π N , α)    1 − αp̄D + π N
                                              =
                              Y P N (π N , α)   1 − αp̄D − π N
This ratio goes up when π N goes up and down when α goes down. The net effect of
changing both, as occurs with the reform we study, is ambiguous: the loss may be greater

                                                  13
for P or B.
    This model, thus, demonstrates that, despite the added transparency, both the re-
form’s impact on overall corruption and also whether it will relatively favor (or disfavor)
block or GP officials (in terms of their earnings) is ambiguous.


3     Data and experimental design
3.1    Data
Our analysis exploits multiple data sources. We first describe the administrative data
sets that we use (these typically cover the universe of GPs in the experiment) and then
the survey data we collected.
    First, we use the daily financial database associated with the CPSMS system for the
period September 2011 to January 2014. This includes all credits and debits in each
treatment and control GP savings account, and allows us to monitor daily fund flow. In
our analysis, we aggregate these daily transactions to compute total credit and debit for
each treatment period. The data does not, however, identify transfer recipients: we can
not distinguish between material and labor expenditures, nor can we identify the names
of the workers being paid.
    Second, we use the public access database, nrega.nic.in, which includes category-wise
expenditures aggregated at the fiscal year level (i.e. April 1st to March 31st of every
year). The financial year 2012-13 data includes three pre-reform and nine reform (set-up
and intervention) months. Four expenditure categories are reported: unskilled labor,
material, skilled labor and administrative expenses. In addition, the database includes
beneficiary details: who has worked in the household, duration and dates of work and
wages paid. This database includes information for all beneficiaries for whom funds have
been released: for actual beneficiaries it lists days worked which include both genuine
work spells and also days falsely claimed as work days (ghost days) and for ghost workers
(those who did not work but against who’s name payment was released) it lists names
and days purportedly worked.
    Third, we obtained data from India’s Socio-Economic Caste Census (SECC), which
was conducted in 2012, for the 12 study districts. These data cover 16,480 villages across
195 blocks and for each household in the village include name and age of each household
member (and relationship to household head). We have data for 34 million individuals,
living in more than five million households.
    Our matching exercise across SECC and the public access database is a population-
level version of the forensic method pioneered by Niehaus and Sukhtankar (2013), that
cross-check administrative data with household survey data.



                                            14
    First, we use an algorithm to match village names across the databases.11 Among
matched villages, we use the same algorithm to find a match for each household with a
job card in the public access database in 2014 (for more details, see Appendix 5).12
    Our outcome of interest is the match rate, defined separately for people reported to
have worked during and after the intervention period: a household (name) with a job-
card in the public access database but missing in the SECC database is more likely to be
a “ghost” than a household (name) found in both.
    The matching process is probabilistic (based on a threshold), with errors in both di-
rections: individuals may be omitted from the SECC census for example, or the matching
could fail because names are spelled too differently to match, or on the other side, two
different persons with the same name could be incorrectly matched. That said, there is
no reason to expect differential errors across treatment and control groups. Note that
this exercise only identifies non-existent workers, not households who report working but
in reality never did (and, of course, it does not capture over-reporting of days by working
households). On average, in the control villages, we match 50% of the job cards where
work was reported during our intervention period to a household in the SECC (67% of
the single-worker job cards, and 28% of the job cards with more than one worker).13
This is comparable to 59 percent match rate we obtain by comparing the public access
database to (population) estimates of workers from our household survey.
    Fourth, we use affidavit data on GP and block official assets. In 2012 and 2013,
Bihar’s Rural Development Department instructed GP, block and district employees to
declare their and their spouse’s personal assets, both movable (cash, jewelery, vehicles)
and immovable (land, real estate). Since the data is self-reported it should, of course, be
treated with some caution. Recent studies, however, show that the affidavit data contains
useful signal.14
    Finally, we use data from surveys we conducted: in May-July 2013 we conducted
an independent survey of 10,036 households in 390 GPs to measure MGNREGS partic-
ipation, employment and payments. We randomly sampled two GPs per block, and 25
  11
      Since MGNREGS basic administrative unit is the GP, not the census village, the database lacks a
village census code. 84% of villages in the MGNREGS database have a match in the SECC census. For
the 16% remaining one, we look for matches in all the villages in the GP
   12
      To determine whether two names (village or individual) match, we start from an algorithm developed
by Paul Novosad (starting from a standard string matching algorithm, adjusted for language and tested in
a large sample), and graciously made publicly available. We adjusted the algorithm for our application.
For household job card with one individual, we match the individual based on names (first, last and
middle) and gender. When a job card has two or more individuals, we look for a household in the SECC
data base with two individuals whose names and gender match that on the job card. The match rate is
lower for households with two or more working members.
   13
      The difference between single worker and multiple worker households is natural – it is harder for two
names to match than one.
   14
      Fisman et al. (2014) use politician affidavit data and show a 3% to 4% higher estimated annual
growth rate of wealth for winners than for runner-ups in close election. Fisman et al. (2016) further
show that the requirement to disclose discourages several politicians from even running for office.



                                                    15
households per GP, oversampling poor households, who were more likely to participate
in the MGNREGS (see Appendix Table A.4 for details). Starting July 2012, each house-
hold member was asked about weekly MGNREGS participation and the amount, date
and payments for each work-spell. As MGNREGS participation was extremely low dur-
ing our study period, the survey (despite reasonable sample size) only identifies a small
number of participants. Hence, estimated treatment effects using the survey are quite
imprecise. We also interviewed the elected GP head (the Mukhiya) in 346 of the 390
survey GPs about the main issues they faced in implementing MGNREGS.
    Alongside, we surveyed 4,165 MGNREGS infrastructure projects (10 per GP) ran-
domly sampled from the official list of ongoing and recently completed projects (nrega.nic.in).
Surveyors recorded whether the asset was found and whether it was completed.


3.2    Reform implementation
A key prerequisite for the reform was IT infrastructure to enable GPs to connect with
CPSMS (computers, data entry operators, generator to ensure constant power supply,
Internet access, scanner and printer). Appendix Table A.1 shows that a minority of
blocks had the required facilities in July 2012 but that by January 2013 a majority of
treatment blocks had the needed equipment. In large part, this reflected a big push to
procure and install IT infrastructure in treatment blocks during the “set up” months of
July and August 2012.
    The intervention was officially launched on September 8, 2012, but faced multiple
implementation hurdles. In October, the central government froze program fund release
as less than 60 percent of expenditures incurred since April 2012 in Bihar had been
documented on nrega.nic.in. Funds were only released mid-December once data docu-
mentation was completed. As soon as the money arrived in December, GP functionaries
launched a two-week strike. Figure 3 shows that MGNREGS spending fell sharply in
September and rose only slowly in January 2013. This, in part, reflects seasonality:
MGNREGS work-sites often close during the peak agricultural season (between July to
December (Imbert and Papp, 2015)). However the dip was longer and stronger that year.
Finally, the bank which processed payments entered on CPSMS initially lacked resources
to deal with the large number of small invoices sent by treatment GPs, and gave prior-
ity to the fewer large invoices coming from Control GPs. By December 2012, the bank
increased its capacity and treatment GPs started sending larger invoices.
    Thus, the fund-flow reforms really became operational in January 2013. Figure 4
shows that the fraction of treatment GP that used CPSMS at least once increased from
less than 20 percent in December 2012 across all districts to 60 percent in April 2013. We
observe significant heterogeneity across districts: the best performing district, Begusarai
had more than two-thirds of GPs using the system in December 2012, and that proportion


                                            16
reached more than 90 percent in April 2013. By contrast, the fraction of GPs using the
system in Madhubani, the worst performing district, only increased to 40 percent by
April 2013. Treatment GPs that did not use CPSMS to draw funds were prohibited
from receiving funds for wage payments through another route but could still spend from
their savings account. Only 1.5 percent of treatment GPs did not spend any money
during the intervention period. This imperfect implementation of an at-scale reform is
reminiscent of the difficulties encountered by other evaluation of at-scale government
programs (Muralidharan et al., 2014; Banerjee et al., 2016).


3.3     Randomization check
The random selection of treatment blocks ensures, in principle, that GPs in the 69 treat-
ment blocks are ex ante identical to GPs in the 126 control blocks. To check this, we
estimate regressions of the form:

                                      Xpd = α + βTp + ηd + εp

where Xpd is a vector of baseline characteristics of GP p in district d, Tp is a dummy
which is equal to one if GP p is in a treatment block, ηd are district fixed effects, and
errors εp are assumed to be correlated within each block. The estimated coefficient β
represent pre-treatment differences between treatment and control GP.
    Table 1 presents the results. We observe very few significant differences: Villages
in treatment and control GPs had similar socio-demographic characteristics and had
the same level of infrastructures according to 2011 census. Our survey of 390 GPs also
shows that households in treatment and control GPs have similar characteristics. Finally,
according to the public access database, treatment GPs had 13% higher MGNREGS
labor expenditures in the financial year preceding the intervention (April 2011-March
2012), and the difference is significant at the 5% level. However, since total MGNREGS
spending between treatment and control GPs was similar at baseline according to CPSMS,
and we observe no statistically significant difference in work days, workers, or material
expenditure in the public access database for the financial year 2011-12, we conclude this
difference in labor expenditures in the database is a reporting error or a fluke, rather
than reflecting systematic differences between treatment and control GPs.15
  15
    It is also worth keeping in mind that we will find that labor expenditures go down in treatment GPs
relative to control and therefore this baseline imbalance would bias our results towards zero, if anything.




                                                    17
4          Results
4.1          Financial data
In Table 2, we use GP-level financial data from CPSMS (balances, expenditures, and total
debit data) to evaluate the impact of the reform on program finances. Let Ypdt denote the
outcome for GP p in district d for period t.16 As before, Tp is a dummy variable which
equals to one if GP p is in a treatment block and ηd is a district fixed effect. We estimate
the following equation:
                                  Ypdt = α + βTp + ηd + εpt                              (1)

where errors εpt are clustered at the block level. The coefficient β estimates the treatment
effect when t is the treatment period (September 2012 to March 2013). We divide the
pre-intervention period to consider separately the July-August (set up) period. We also
split the interventions period between the September-December 2012 period, when the
state pool of funds was dry and the PRS were on strike, and the January-March 2013
period, when MGNREGS was working relatively smoothly. We do not include any control
variables in our estimation.
    Figure 3 plots average daily spending in treatment and control GPs between July 2011
to January 2014. Since MGNREGS work largely occurs in agricultural lean season, we
observe significant seasonality in spending in the fiscal year prior to treatment (Imbert
and Papp, 2015). The pre-reform spending trends are similar across treatment and control
GPs (and this is also true for the set-up months of July and August). Between September
2012 and March 2013, spending in treatment GPs is significantly lower than control GPs.
Once the intervention is rolled back on April 1, 2013, treatment and control GPs rapidly
converge to similar spending levels.
    In Panel A of Table 2 we summarize these findings: Spending levels are similar across
treatment and control GPs before the reform, and during the set-up period (July-August).
Between September to December 2012, spending is 19% lower in treatment GPs, and from
January to March 2013 it is 31% lower. After April 2013 treatment and control GPs report
similar spending.
    In Panel B the outcome variable of interest is the closing balance in GP accounts. This
closing balance was similar across treatment and control GPs at the start of treatment in
September 2012 and then, reflecting the freeze on funds transfer from the center to the
state, similarly declined in both groups as GPs depleted funds until December 2012.
    In December 2012, the state account was replenished and control GPs received large
inflows corresponding to outstanding tranches, while treatment GPs only received funds
corresponding to expenditures they had documented in the electronic system, and which
they immediately used to pay wages. As a result, by the end of the reform period in April
    16
         CPSMS reports daily transactions, which we aggregate by period for the purpose of the analysis.


                                                      18
2013, the account balance in treatment GPs was 33% lower than that in control GPs.
    By April 1, 2013, MGNREGS expenditure in treatment GPs relative to control had
declined by 17% and GP account balances were reduced by 30%. Panel C in Table 2 shows
that the combination of lower spending and a decline in idle funds in the treatment
GP accounts, reduced program expenditure by 24% in treatment GPs. This, in turn,
translates into a cost saving of roughly 6 million dollars.17 An immediate question –
which we address below – is whether this reduction in program costs reflected a decline in
real outcomes (days of employment offered, and assets built), or a reduction in leakage,
or both. The expenditures were not just postponed: in the six months following the
intervention, the difference between treatment and control group goes back to zero.
    In Table 3 we examine program finance impacts using a different data source: expen-
diture data from the program’s public data portal (nrega.nic.in). In both treatment and
control GPs, officials faced identical requirements on electronically reporting beneficiary
details (name, payment received, work spell) that then feature on the public data por-
tal. While data entry occurs with significant lag, eventually it does accounts for close to
100% of the expenditures observed in the CPSMS financial database.18 As these data are
aggregated to the fiscal year (from April to March), we present the results for 2011-2012
(before the intervention), 2012-2013 (which includes the intervention), and 2013-2014
(after the intervention). We continue to report regressions of the form in equation (1).
    The public portal expenditure data shows a decline in MGNREGS spending in treat-
ment GPs in line with the CPSMS data. For the fiscal year 2012-13, labor and material
expenditures were respectively 16% and 14% lower in treatment GPs. Note that fiscal
year includes three pre-intervention months. Accounting for the different time spans of
9 and 12 months respectively, nrega.nic.in data provide slightly more negative treatment
estimates on spending than CPSMS data.
    It may seem surprising that both labor and material expenditures declined in the
same proportion, when the financial reform only affected labor expenditures. However,
by law, MGNREGS material expenditure may not exceed 40% of total spending on a
project. As Table 3 shows, for the average GP, the rule is close to binding: expenditures
on material amounted to 36% and 38% of total expenditure in the financial year 2012-13
and 2013-14, respectively.
  17
      We obtain this figure by multiplying the reduction in expenditure per GP by the number of treatment
GPs, and converting the total of 3.19 × 1003 = 3, 204 lakhs Rupees into million dollars (using the April
1, 2013 INR/USD exchange rate of 0.0183).
   18
      Appendix Table A.2 compares annual expenditures per GP in CPSMS and nrega.nic.in. The dis-
crepancies are only about 8-11% in 2012-13.




                                                   19
4.2    Reported beneficiary outcomes
In Table 4, we use data from the public portal. As we noted, the Government of India
insists on the reporting of beneficiary information, and the beneficiary data as reported
in the portal matches the total that are reportedly spent on beneficiaries. Therefore, it
is not surprising that the treatment effects matches what we found in the financial data.
In Panel A, consistent with lower labor expenditures, we observe a negative treatment
effect on the number of work days reported during the reform period (Columns 3 - 5).
In Panel B, we observe no effect on the days per working household and Panel C shows
that this decline comes entirely from a reduction in the number of individuals who have
supposedly worked. The estimated treatment effect for the intervention period is a 13%
decline in the number of days reported, and a 10% decline in the number of working
households.


4.3    Real outcomes
Did the reported drop in MGNREGS expenditures and employment in the portal reflect
actual changes in program implementation or reduced leakage (was there less work done
or just less ghost work)? To find this out, we conducted household and asset surveys.
    in Table 5, we consider the household survey data. Let Yhdt denote outcome for
household h in district d at period t and Th is a dummy variable for whether the household
lives in a treatment block:

                             Yhdt = α + βTh + δZh + ηd + εht                           (2)

Zh denotes a vector of household characteristics, which includes religion, caste, gender
and literacy of the head of the household, household size, the number of adults in the
household, the type of house which the household occupies and a dummy variable for
whether the household owns land. Standard errors are clustered at the block level.
    We lack baseline data, but estimate separate regressions for the set-up period, the two
phases of the reform, and a short post-period. To account for over-sampling of poorer
households, our estimation of the treatment effect on household outcomes uses sampling
weights, and thus reflects village-level population averages.
    Using data from the detailed survey module on MGNREGS employment, which asked
about every MGNREGS participation spell between July 2012 and March 2013, we con-
struct three MGNREGS employment measures: first, a binary indicator of MGNREGS
participation; second, the number of weeks in which households declares having worked
in MGNREGS; and third the number of days worked.
    Panel A of Table 5 reports treatment impacts on the probability of participating in
MGNREGS during the set-up period (July-August), the two halves of the intervention


                                            20
period, the whole intervention period (September 2012-March 2013) and the post period.
The observed MGNREGS participation rates between September and March 2013, while
low (below 4%), are consistent with National Sample Survey data: For the year 2011-2012,
the NSS reports a participation rate of 9%. Aggregating over the entire year 2012-2013,
we find a participation rate of 8%.19 The lower number during our reform period is likely
due to the fact that it fell outside the peak season of MGNREGS work.
    The treatment effect is significantly negative and large in proportion in the set-up
period (July-August), most likely reflecting a sharp drop in work provision while officials
were setting up the infrastructure. During the intervention period (columns 2-4) the
effect is positive and insignificant. The 95% confidence interval, expressed in fraction of
the control mean is [-5%; +42%], i.e. we can reject at a 95% confidence level a decline
of 5% in NREGA participation. Thus, the significant negative impact we observe on
the number of households hired in the NREGA database (10%) appears to be a pure
reporting effect, and does not reflect an actual decline in the provision of work. Post
intervention, the participation returns to the same level in treatment and control group.
    Panel B looks at numbers of days worked (set as zero for households who did not
participate during a given period). We also find a negative point estimate during the
set up period, positive point estimate during the two interventions period, and overall a
positive point estimate for the whole period. We can reject a reduction of 8% at the 95%
confidence level, a smaller decline than the 13% we find in the NREGA database. Once
again, this suggest that the reduction in workdays reported in the NREGA database is
mainly due to a reporting effect.
    Panel C considers reported wage payments. For each spell worked in the MGNREGS,
the respondents declared whether, when, and how much they had been paid, and we
are attributing each payment to the time period where the work happened, regardless
of when it was made (Panel D directly looks at delay).20 Unfortunately, the payment
data is based on relatively few observations and is quite noisy. Consistent with a lower
probability of working, wage payments were significantly lower in the treatment GPs
during the set-up period. During the intervention periods, the estimates are imprecise
and not significant, but the point estimate suggests a slight decline in payment during the
first period, and a slight increase during the second period. Overall, the point estimate
is positive (11.96), but the 95% confidence interval, expressed in percentages, is [-27%;
+52.2%]. Thus, we cannot reject at the 5% level the hypothesis that the wages declined
by as much (in proportion) as the total debit from the Panchayat accounts, although we
  19
      We also asked the household head whether anybody had participated in the scheme “since the last
rainy season,” and 9% of households report that they did. There is no treatment effect on this variable
either, see Appendix Table A.4
   20
      If the payment has not happened yet, this is set as zero. Replacing it by missing does not change
the estimate very much, though it makes the treatment looks more positive, since delays increased in
the treatment group.



                                                  21
cannot reject large increases either: the data seems to be too noisy to be informative.
    In Panel D, we examine worker-reported delays in MGNREGS payments. This is
based on very few workers, so needs to be taken with some caution. However, as compared
to an average delay of 72 days in the control, workers employed during the first phase
of the intervention (Sep-Dec 2012) in treatment blocks waited an extra 50 days for their
payment. The effect is large, and statistically significant. We observed significant but
smaller payment delays during the second phase of the intervention (27 days). These
results suggest that the intervention slowed down the disbursement of funds to GPs, and
delayed payments to workers, especially during the first phase of the intervention.21
    The increase in payment delays is a significant downside of the intervention, at least
initially. The program objective was to speed up payments by reducing steps in the fund
flow, but it seemed to have had the opposite effect. We can identify two implementation-
related reasons: first, in the early days of the intervention the bank handling CPSMS
payment found itself deluged with small payment requests from the treatment GPs. The
bank’s response was to wait and collect a large batch of invoices before processing them
together, which caused delays. The second was delays by GP level functionaries in enter-
ing data (since it required traveling to the block office).
    The delays could have had an additional negative consequence if GP functionaries
exploited the delays in payment to lend workers money (on work completion) and get
reimbursed when the funds arrive. The interest is collected in advance by paying the
workers less than what they are due. Repayment is enforced by collecting the worker’s
bank/postal passbook, and taking the money out of their bank/postal account in their
name, using pre-signed withdrawal slips in connivance with bank/postal employees. Panel
E of Table 5 suggests that this apparently did not happen: instances of advance payment
were frequent (a quarter to a third of payments in the control group), but were not
increased by the reform. Using our survey, we also compare household consumption
levels in the treatment as compared to control GPs and find no evidence of a long-term
cost on treatment households (Appendix Table A.5).
    To the extent that the increase in payment delays were due to a delay in sending
money from the Central Bank of India to the GP account, the decline in CPSMS we
observe could have been in part due to those delays. However, if this were the case, we
would see an increase in expenditure in treatment GPs after the system was discontinued,
which is not the case.
    Finally, in Table 6 we examine whether the fund flow reform affected the number of
physical assets created. In May 2013, after the end of the intervention, we downloaded
  21
     Qualitatively, this is corroborated by the Mukhiyas (GP elected leaders) whom we interviewed. Table
A.6, Panel E shows that twice as many Mukhiyas either spontaneously offered or agreed with the view
that the CPSMS created delays in fund flow, in treatment (34%) than in control blocks (17%)–note that
this data needs to be taken with a lot of caution, since it is not clear why Mukhiyas in control GPs would
report any delay due to CPSMS!


                                                   22
the list of MGNREGS projects registered in nrega.nic.in. There were on average 14
projects per GP, most of them ongoing, and the numbers are very similar for treatment
and control GPs (Columns 1 and 2). We also sent teams to the villages with a list of 10
projects per GP, sampled from nrega.nic.in. The number of projects found is high (12
per GP, or 86% of registered projects), and similar in the treatment and control GPs for
all projects as well as for just the ongoing ones (Columns 3 and 4).


4.4    Did the reform influence fund leakage and corruption?
The financial data – corroborated by data from the public portal - tell us that there was
a 17% decline in MGNREGS spending in the treatment GPs, relative to control, and a
10-13% reduction in the number of workdays and workers hired. In contrast, while the
public portal data also shows that the entire decline in spending comes from a decline in
number of workers, this is not reflected in the household survey. While the wage data is
too noisy to come to definite conclusion, the employment data allows us to reject at a
95% confidence interval a decline in number of workers and workdays similar to what we
see in the reported database. We also observe no changes in MGNREGA assets - either
in the public portal data or in our asset survey. This is suggestive that the reduction
in reported expenses and workdays are accounted for by a reduction in corruption. This
hypothesis received some support from the GP report: in our survey of GP elected leaders
(Mukhiyas), 47% of Mukhiyas in control GPs thought corruption in the administration
was a main issue in MGNREGS implementation. This number was significantly lower,
by 12 percentage points, among Mukhiyas in treatment GPs (see Table A.6, Panel D).
The evidence is, however, indirect and based on a sample survey, not administrative data
on the universe of our experiment. In this subsection, we present two direct pieces of
evidence on a reduction in corruption.


4.5    Leakages: Direct evidence on ghost workers
Fund leakage could occur in two ways: by reporting “ghost” workers on the database
and siphoning off the associated payment (people who are reported to be paid but are
non-existent, or exist but have never worked) or by reporting “ghost” days (additional
days of reported work by people who actually worked under the scheme but for fewer
days than what is reported).
    The nature of the fund flow reform suggests that the primary accountability impact
should be fewer ghost workers: it is now easier to audit and verify that a particular
person exists and has been employed. However, conditional on having worked, accurate,
verifiable information on how many days someone worked remains as hard to obtain
(since audits rely on recall which tends to imperfect about things like exact numbers,
and villagers can easily be intimidated). Consistent with this hypothesis, Table 4 shows

                                           23
that fewer workers, not fewer days per workers, account for the reduction in reported job
days during the reform. And the lingering negative effect on the number of workers even
after the intervention ends and spending goes back to the same level in treatment and
control GPs could come from the fact that once a ghost is added to the roll, he or she
stays on them.
    We now turn to directly examining the incidence of ghost workers by comparing the
match rate of households listed on job cards with villager names in SECC. For each GP,
we compute the fraction of families where one member has a job card in the MGNREGA
database, and families where two or more members have a job card, for which we find
a match in the SECC census database. For these two variable we then run a GP-level
regression of the form:

                                     Yvd = α + βTv + ηd + εvt                                      (3)

and cluster standard errors at the block level. We run this specification separately for
three different ways of computing the fraction matched variable: first, the match rates
for all job cards in the MGNREGA database (as of 2014), then for all job cards who were
recorded as working during the intervention period, and finally for all job cards who were
in the database and were recorded as working in the post-reform period.
    Table 7 reports the results. In the control group, among single-worker households,
we match 64% of the job cards listed in the same village (or somewhere in the GP
when individual villages could not be matched).22 We observe a significantly higher –
by 1.87 percentage points – match rate in the treatment group (Column 1). Restricting
to individuals who are reported as having worked during the reform period, we find a
match rate of 67% in the control group which increases significantly by 1.81 percentage
points because of the treatment (Column 2). Reassuringly, for individuals reported to
have worked after the reform period, the treatment-induced increase in match rate is
smaller and insignificant (Column 3). Among households with two people or more to
match, we find lower match rates (since it is more difficult to match two people), but a
similar percentage point increase (1.35 percentage points for the entire database, 1.276
for the working job cards).
    The increase in match rate is direct evidence of a reform-induced decline of corruption,
although it only accounts for a fraction of the 17% reduction in expenditure, perhaps
because this exercise only captures pure ghosts (people who do not exist in the village)
  22
     Our survey data is consistent with this number. While the survey did not track people in the
database, we can estimate leakage by applying sampling probability to our household sample to estimate
the number of people who worked during the reform period, and dividing that, in each GP, by the number
of estimated workers according to the MGNREGS database (as in Imbert and Papp (2011)). We find
that our household survey only accounts for 59% of the workdays in the database. This is comparable
to our match-rate of 64%, especially given that some of the ghost workers exist in the village, but are
simply not working for MGNREGS.



                                                  24
not people who exist but are in fact not working for MGNREGS.
   A remaining question is: why did local officials not react to the reform by over-
reporting more on other margins? Possibly, there is some limit on how much over-
reporting of workdays can be done in the name of existing workers, e.g. because of the
limited number of infrastructure projects carried out. Note also that Muralidharan et al.
(2014) do not find an increase in ghost workers when ghost days decline, which suggests
that these are not perfect substitutes.


4.6    Effect on assets of MGNREGS functionaries
Since corruption declined, do we see any evidence of this missing “missing money” in
the pockets of the MGNREGS functionaries? To address this question, we now turn
to self-reported affidavit data on personal assets of MGNREGS functionaries. While we
recognize the limitations of self-reported asset data, we are reassured by previous research
that shows a causal link between politicians getting elected and their self-declared assets
(Fisman et al., 2014). Moreover, we expect any treatment-induced bias to be towards
zero, especially since we are only using the first two years of the affidavit data, which
were used for benchmarking: a heightened fear of scrutiny in the treatment group (due to
the extra transparency) should reduce under-reporting by officials in order to avoid being
caught under-reporting in the future (most prosecutions for “disproportionate assets,”
which are becoming more common over time, are based on rapid accumulation since the
benchmark year, which gives an incentive to overstate assets in the baseline year).
    GP and block functionaries declared personal assets in 2012-13 (a period spanning
our intervention) and 2013-14 (at least six months after the intervention had ended).
Figures 7 and 8 show the CDF of reported asset for the Block and GP functionaries,
taken together. In the year 2012-2013, the asset declaration data are similar in treatment
and control groups. However, in 2013-2014, we observe a leftward shift of the treatment
distribution, relative to the control distribution. A Kolmogorov-Smirnov test of stochastic
dominance presented in Table 8 allows us to reject equality of the distribution at the 5%
level in 2013-2014.
    Columns (1) and (2) of Table 8 show, on average, a 10% reduction in log(wealth)
of Block and GP functionaries (Panel A) in 2013-2014, but this impact is statistically
insignificant. The graph suggests that this reflects the fact that the wealth distribution
is highly skewed with large outliers, and the reform had no impact at the high and low
ends of the distribution. If we focus on the median instead, we find a significant decline
of 13.7% in median wealth (18.9% with control variables). The wealth reduction for
GP and block officials is commensurate to the treatment-induced decline in MGNREGS
expenditure. Using the estimate from Column 8, Panel A of Table 8, a 19% decline
in the median wealth for MGNREGS employees (630,000 INR) scaled up to the whole


                                            25
treatment sample (651 employees) yields a 78 million INR loss, which is equivalent to
about a third of total missing expenditures (224 million INR). Using the mean estimates
(Column 4 of Table 8) yields a higher loss, 110 million or 48% of the missing MGNREGS
expenditure. Since district level officials also presumably lost money (although we do not
have an experiment for them), this order of magnitude seems reasonable.
    Panel B and C split the results by administrative tier. There is some indication of
larger (proportional) effects for GP functionaries, but the results are too noisy to be
conclusive.


5    Conclusion
This paper reports on a large-scale field experiment that evaluated a nine-month reform to
the within-state fund-flow system for MGNREGS – India’s federal workfare program. Our
evaluation covered a population of 33 million in Bihar, one of India’s poorest states. To
identify reform impacts, we combine data from a number of sources: rich administrative
program data; a survey that covers 10,000 households and assets built in over 300 villages;
a set of names matched across the program database and the Indian Socio-economic and
Caste Census; and, finally, affidavit data on wealth of GP officials.
    The reform linked fund flow to incurred expenditures and reduced the number of
intermediaries involved in fund disbursement. It lowered fund leakages in treatment
blocks: MGNREGS expenditures declined by 17 percent with no corresponding change
in real outcomes, as measured by surveys. A match of official records of MGNREGS
workers with a census collected during the same period further demonstrates a reduction
in the number of fake beneficiaries (“ghost workers”).
    To the extent that the expenditure reductions reflect lower program leakage, we would
expect changes in earnings of officials involved in fund flow for MGNREGS. Theory
suggests that the direction of change for GP and block level functionaries is ambiguous
and depends on their ability to benefit from the exclusion of district functionaries by
increasing their own rents. In practice, we estimate a negative effect on the wealth of
block and GP officials: the impact on the mean is noisily estimated, but the impact at
the median is a significant drop of 19 percent.
    This set of results consistent across a number of different sources suggests that cor-
ruption in social programs can be reduced through a program of increased transparency
in invoicing, that facilitates future audits and clarifies the lines of responsibilities.
    On the flip side, contrary to the hypothesis that the red tape induced by corruption
can reduce effectiveness, the reform did not improve the program’s ability to respond to
villager needs– neither employment nor wages received by households rose and payment
delays increased, at least initially. This may well have been due to short-term issues,
which would have been solved over time as implementation became smoother. The tech-

                                            26
nical challenges with managing a computer-based system in areas with frequent electricity
shortages and limited IT help should not be underestimated. In addition, lack of coor-
dination between the central monitoring system and the program’s own database meant
worker details had to be entered twice. Because of these issues, the reform increased
the administrative burden on GP officials in the short-run. As expected, resistance was
widespread and frequently given voice: dismay at the personnel costs, frustration with
lags in infrastructure roll-out, and quiet hostility to reforms that would reduce rents.
State officials in the capital city who heard these complaints, lacked information on
whether the observed decline in expenditure reflected lower rent seeking or a genuine
decline in employment provision, with the result that by the end of the fiscal year, they
were concerned that the reform may have constrained employment under the program.23
    As our experiment was randomized across blocks in a district, we lack direct evidence
on any decline in the wealth of the district officials that the reform may have induced.
However, there is considerable anecdotal evidence of district officer displeasure. For ex-
ample, one of our district monitors reported: “Initially, the POs [Program Officers, block
officials] were apprehensive about the system. The DRDA [District Rural Development
Agency] Accountant had scared the POs at the beginning and had convinced them that
the system was useless. Whenever POs or Mukhiyas would come, the operators and the
accountants would scoff them and tell them that they were stuck with a useless system.
They would tell them: “Look, you were better under us. Now, you won’t get any money
from the state”. Another district monitor reported that most officials were hostile to the
system and that the DRDA fudged the data on IT equipment to show compliance.
    Given the uncertainty on benefits at the time, the district officials were able to effec-
tively lobby the state government to end the intervention, which was rolled back in April
2013. A question we often get is whether MGNREGS employees would have been able to
figure out a way to circumvent the system over time, and if corruption would have gone
back up. Although managing to force a roll back of the system is an extreme approach
to circumventing it, it suggests that district officials could not find another way. In gen-
eral, the MGNREGS experience seems to be one where a series of steps were undertaken
to limit corruption, and where corruption effectively went down over time (nationwide,
estimates suggest that leakage was halved between 2007 and 2012).
    This rollback, however, was not quite the end of the story. Motivated in part by the
results of this experiment, in August 2015, MGNREGS officials put in place a nationwide
system that combined direct payment to beneficiary bank accounts (though not always
based on a smart card) and expenditure-based transfers. The need for better expenditure
management models is not exclusive to MGNREGS: the Government of India spends
approximately Rs. 4.6 trillion ($50 billion) every year on Centrally Sponsored Schemes
for which money is released to implementing agencies in lumpy installments. Many
 23
      The household survey that demonstrated otherwise was conducted starting May.


                                                 27
of these programs have even worse accountability records than MGNREGS, in large
part because of inadequate electronic record keeping. In June 2016, the Ministry of
Finance issued orders to extend the use of the Public Finance Management System (the
successor of the CPSMS, the platform we gained access to) for all Central Sector Schemes
and for central assistance for State Plan Schemes. Their announcement emphasized the
system as a means to facilitate “just-in-time” (i.e. expenditure based) release of funds
and ensure complete monitoring of funds down to the end user. Thus, overall, the advent
of e-governance is heralding very significant reforms for the entire government payment
architecture in India.




                                          28
References
Banerjee, A., R. Chattopadhyay, E. Duflo, D. Keniston, and N. Singh (2012, March). Im-
  proving Police Performance in Rajasthan, India: Experimental Evidence on Incentives,
  Managerial Autonomy and Training. NBER Working Papers 17912, National Bureau
  of Economic Research, Inc.

Banerjee, A., R. Hanna, B. A. Olken, J. Kyle, and S. Sumarto (2016). Tangible Informa-
  tion and Citizen Empowerment: Identification Cards and Food Subsidy Programs in
  Indonesia. Journal of Political Economy, forthcoming.

Banerjee, A., S. Mullainathan, and R. Hanna (2012, April). Corruption. NBER Working
  Papers 17968, National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.

Banerjee, A. V. (1997, November). A Theory of Misgovernance. The Quarterly Journal
  of Economics 112 (4), 1289–1332.

Barnwal, P. (2014, November). Curbing Leakages in Public Programs with Biometric
  Identification Systems: Evidence from India’s Fuel Subsidies. Manuscript.

Bó, E. D., F. Finan, and M. A. Rossi (2013). Strengthening State Capabilities: The
  Role of Financial Incentives in the Call to Public Service. The Quarterly Journal of
  Economics 128 (3), 1169–1218.

Burgess, R., M. Hansen, B. A. Olken, P. Potapov, and S. Sieber (2012). The Political
  Economy of Deforestation in the Tropics. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 127 (4),
  1707–1754.

Duflo, E., M. Greenstone, R. Pande, and N. Ryan (2013). Truth-telling by Third-party
 Auditors and the Response of Polluting Firms: Experimental Evidence from India. The
 Quarterly Journal of Economics 128 (4), 1499–1545.

Duflo, E., M. Greenstone, R. Pande, and N. Ryan (2014, October). The Value of Regula-
 tory Discretion: Estimates from Environmental Inspections in India. NBER Working
 Papers 20590, National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.

Dutta, P., R. Murgai, M. Ravallion, and D. Van de Walle (2012). Does India’s Employ-
 ment Guarantee Scheme Guarantee Employment? Policy Research Discussion Paper
 6003, The World Bank.

Dutta, P., R. Murgai, M. Ravallion, and D. Van de Walle (2014, March). Right to Work?
 Assessing India’s Employment Guarantee Scheme in Bihar. Number 17195 in World
 Bank Publications. The World Bank.



                                         29
Ferraz, C. and F. Finan (2011, June). Electoral Accountability and Corruption: Evidence
  from the Audits of Local Governments. American Economic Review 101 (4), 1274–1311.

Finan, F., B. A. Olken, and R. Pande (2015, December). The Personnel Economics of
  the State. NBER Working Papers 21825, National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.

Fisman, R., F. Schulz, and V. Vig (2014). The Private Returns to Public Office. Journal
  of Political Economy 122 (4), 806 – 862.

Fisman, R., F. Schulz, and V. Vig (2016, June). Financial Disclosure and Political
  Selection: Evidence from India. Manuscript.

IDinsight (2013). Auditing the Auditors. Rapid response Process Evaluation of MGN-
  REGA Divas for Rural Development Department, Government of Bihar.

Imbert, C. and J. Papp (2011). Estimating Leakages in India’s Employment Guarantee.
  In R. Khera (Ed.), Battle for Employment Guarantee, pp. 269–278. Oxford University
  Press.

Imbert, C. and J. Papp (2014). Estimating Leakages in India’s Employment Guarantee:
  An Update. Technical report. Background paper for the Social Protection and Labour
  India Team, World Bank.

Imbert, C. and J. Papp (2015). Labor Market Effects of Social Programs: Evidence
  from India’s Employment Guarantee. American Economic Journal: Applied Eco-
  nomics 7 (2), 233–63.

Klitgaard, R. (1988). Controlling Corruption. Berkeley: University of California Press.

Lewis-Faupel, S., Y. Neggers, B. A. Olken, and R. Pande (2016, August). Can Electronic
  Procurement Improve Infrastructure Provision? Evidence from Public Works in India
  and Indonesia. American Economic Journal: Economic Policy 8 (3), 258–83.

Muralidharan, K., P. Niehaus, and S. Sukhtankar (2014, March). Building State Capacity:
 Evidence from Biometric Smartcards in India. NBER Working Papers 19999, National
 Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.

Niehaus, P. and S. Sukhtankar (2013, November). Corruption Dynamics: The Golden
  Goose Effect. American Economic Journal: Economic Policy 5 (4), 230–69.

Olken, B. A. (2007). Monitoring Corruption: Evidence from a Field Experiment in
  Indonesia. Journal of Political Economy 115, 200–249.

Olken, B. A. and P. Barron (2009, 06). The Simple Economics of Extortion: Evidence
  from Trucking in Aceh. Journal of Political Economy 117 (3), 417–452.

                                          30
Olken, B. A. and R. Pande (2012, 07). Corruption in Developing Countries. Annual
  Review of Economics 4 (1), 479–509.

Peters, G. B. and J. Pierre (2003). Handbook of Public Administration. London: Sage.

Pollitt, C. and G. Bouckaert (2011). Public Management Reform: A Comparative Anal-
  ysis - New Public Management, Governance, and the Neo-Weberian State (3rd ed.).
  Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Rasul, I. and D. Rogger (2016, January). Management of Bureaucrats and Public Service
  Delivery: Evidence from the Nigerian Civil Service. CEPR Discussion Papers 11078,
  C.E.P.R. Discussion Papers.

Reinikka, R. and J. Svensson (2011, August). The Power of Information in Public Ser-
  vices: Evidence from Education in Uganda. Journal of Public Economics 95 (7-8),
  956–966.

Shleifer, A. and R. W. Vishny (1993, August). Corruption. The Quarterly Journal of
  Economics 108 (3), 599–617.

Wallis, M. (1989). Bureaucracy: Its Role in Third World Development. London: Macmil-
 lan.




                                         31
 Figure 1: MGNREGS Fund-flow in Control Blocks




Figure 2: MGNREGS Fund-flow in Treatment Blocks




                      32
Figure 3: GP daily Expenditures on MGNREGS during the Study Period




 Figure 4: Fraction of Treatment GPs which used CPSMS at least once




                                 33
Figure 5: Asset of MGNREGS functionaries: during the intervention




Figure 6: Asset of MGNREGS functionaries: after the intervention




                               34
                                    Table 1: Randomization check




                                                               Control      Treatment
                                                                                           Difference    Observations
                                                               Blocks         Blocks
Panel A: Census 2011
Area (hectares)                                                 1101           1129            28.38         2,936
Number of households                                            1860           1845           ‐15.22         2,936
% SC Population                                                 0.196          0.194        ‐0.00164         2,936
% ST Population                                                0.0112         0.0144         0.00320         2,936
Literacy Rate                                                   0.64           0.639       ‐0.000859         2,936
% With education facility                                       0.992          0.997        0.00529*         2,936
% With medical facility                                         0.668          0.679         0.0114          2,936
% With post office                                             0.0394         0.0357        ‐0.00367         2,936
% With bank branch                                              0.352          0.402        0.0496**         2,936
% With electricity supply                                       0.426          0.46          0.0344          2,936
% Land Irrigated                                                0.53           0.523        ‐0.00639         2,936

Panel B: Household Survey
% Hindu                                                         0.92           0.89        ‐0.0268**          390
% Scheduled Castes                                              0.26           0.24          ‐0.0188          390
% Other Backward Castes                                         0.59           0.60           0.0162          390
% House without a solid roof                                    0.38           0.41           0.0246          390
% Owns Land                                                     0.58           0.57          ‐0.0139          390
% Male Head                                                     0.78           0.76          ‐0.0129          390
% Literate Head                                                 0.56           0.55         ‐0.00884          390
Household Size                                                  6.52           6.44          ‐0.0836          390
Number of adults in the household                               3.42           3.36          ‐0.0664          390


Panel C: nrega.nic.in reports (April 2011‐ March 2012)
MGNREGS beneficiary households                                  187            196           9.283           2,950
MGNREGS work days provided                                      6290           6673          383.7           2,950
MGNREGS labor expenditures (lakhs)                              7.69           8.68         0.996**          2,950
MGNREGS material expenditures (lakhs)                           6.57           7.07          0.508           2,950

Panel D: CPSMS reports (Sept 2011‐ March 2012)
MGNREGS funds spent (CPSMS)                                    9.00            8.73          ‐0.272          3,025
MGNREGS funds received (CPSMS)                                 9.52            9.59          0.0645          3,025
Note: The unit of observation is a Gram Panchayat (GP). Out of 3067 GP from our sample list, we match 2936 GP
with census 2011 data (Panel A), we surveyed 390 GP (Panel B), we match 2950 GP with nrega.nic.in data (Panel C)
and 3025 GP with CPSMS data (Panel D). The difference between control and treatment blocks is estimated using a
regression of each GP characteristic on a dummy equal to one for treatment blocks and district fixed effects.
Standard errors are clustered to take into account correlation at the block level. Stars denote signicance levels. *, **
and *** denote significant differences at the 10%, 5% and 1% levels respectively.




                                                          35
Table 2: Impact of the reform on MGNREGS Expenditure: Evidence from CPSMS data




                                                                    Before         Set up              Intervention Period                 After
                                                                 Sept 2011 -        July-        Sept-Dec Jan - Mar      Whole           Apr 2013 -
                                                                  June 2012        August          2012       2013       Period          Jan 2014
                                                                                    2012
                                                                      (1)            (2)             (3)          (4)         (5)             (6)

         Panel A: Total Debit from GP Accounts
         Treatment                                                   -0.502        0.0472        -1.039*** -1.267*** -2.259***             -0.345
                                                                    (0.729)        (0.291)         (0.315)   (0.280)   (0.759)            (0.895)
         Observations                                                3,025          3,025           3,025     3,025     3,025               3,025
         Mean in Control                                             14.37          4.122           5.394     4.146     13.66               16.03

         Panel B: Closing Balance in GP Accounts
         Treatment                                                 -0.0843          0.191        -1.007*** -1.277*** -1.277***             -0.117
                                                                   (0.245)         (0.220)         (0.240)   (0.244)   (0.244)            (0.235)
         Observations                                               3,025           3,025           3,025     3,025     3,025               3,025
         Mean in Control                                            4.147           4.407           4.099     4.274     4.274               4.236

         Panel C: Total Credit to GP Accounts
         Treatment                                                   -0.179           0.251        -2.192*** -1.249*** -3.190***           0.896
                                                                    (0.830)          (0.338)         (0.367)    (0.335)     (0.781)       (0.883)
         Observations                                                3,025            3,025           3,025      3,025       3,025         3,025
         Mean in Control                                             15.27            4.282           5.146      4.006       13.43         15.97
         Note: The unit of observation is a Gram Panchayat (GP). In Panel A the dependent variable is the sum of debits from the savings
         account of each GP for each period (in lakhs Rupees). In Panel B the dependent variable is the closing balance on the savings
         account of each GP at the end of each period (in lakhs Rupees). In Panel C the dependent variable is the sum of credits made to
         the savings account of each Panchayat for each period (in lakhs Rupees). Treatment is a dummy which is equal to one for the
         blocks selected for the intervention. All specifications include district fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered at the block level.




Table 3: Impact of the reform on MGNREGS Expenditure: Evidence from nrega.nic.in



                                                                                               Pre-           Set up and            Post-
                                                                                          intervention       intervention       intervention
                                                                                          Apr 2011-Mar       Apr 2012-Mar       Apr 2013-Mar
                                                                                              2012               2013               2014
                                                                                                (1)               (2)                (3)
                 Panel A: GP Expenditures on labor from nrega.nic.in
                 Treatment                                                                   0.996**           -2.270***             -0.271
                                                                                             (0.495)             (0.760)            (0.729)
                 Observations                                                                 2,950               2,947               2,954
                 Mean in Control                                                              7.551               13.83              13.66

                 Panel B: GP Expenditures on material from nrega.nic.in
                 Treatment                                                               0.508           -1.077**      0.315
                                                                                        (0.432)           (0.526)     (0.534)
                 Observations                                                            2,950             2,947       2,954
                 Mean in Control                                                         6.504             7.717       8.377
                 Note: The unit of observation is a Gram Panchayat (GP) The dependent variables are expenditures from MIS
                 reports for financial years 2011-12, 2012-13, 2013-14 (in lakhs Rupees). Data was downloaded from the
                 MGNREGS website (nrega.nic.in) in November 2014. The intervention started in September 2012 and ended
                 on March 31st, 2013. Treatment is a dummy which is equal to one for the blocks selected for the intervention.
                 All specifications include district fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered at the block level.




                                                                               36
Table 4: Impact of the reform on MGNREGS Employment: Evidence from official reports
(nrega.nic.in)



                                   Pre intervention         Set up                   Intervention Period               Post intervention
                                   April 2011 - June      July-August        Sept-Dec     Jan - Mar      Whole         Apr 2013 - March
                                         2012                 2012             2012         2013         Period               2014
                                          (1)                  (2)              (3)          (4)           (5)                 (6)
 Panel A: Days worked (nrega.nic.in)
 Treatment                               91.88               -130.3          -404.6*       -267.8        -672.4*            -859.5
                                        (530.3)             (111.5)          (227.6)       (163.3)       (363.6)            (542.7)
 Observations                            2,959                2,959           2,959         2,959         2,959              2,959
 Mean in Control                         10313                1058            2759          2269          5028               10603

 Panel B: Days per working household (nrega.nic.in)
 Treatment                             -0.0269               -0.712           -0.286        0.187       -0.00410            -0.308
                                       (1.010)              (0.605)          (0.805)       (0.701)       (0.930)            (0.838)
 Observations                           2,952                 2,514           2,728         2,717         2,868              2,945
 Mean in Control                        36.85                 17.35           29.14         25.14         33.65              39.54

 Panel C: Number of working households (nrega.nic.in)
 Treatment                                    2.988           -3.132         -10.02        -8.342         -13.60*            -15.03
                                             (12.49)         (5.151)        (6.233)       (5.700)         (8.150)            (10.33)
 Observations                                 2,959            2,959         2,959          2,959          2,959              2,959
 Mean in Control                              273.6            59.92         91.68          90.37          140.2              257.2
 Note: The unit of observation is a Gram Panchayat (GP). In Panel A the dependent variable is the total number of days provided. In panel
 B the dependent variable is the total number of days provided to households reported to have worked. In panel C the dependent
 variable is the number of households reported to have worked. In panel D the dependent variable is the number of days worked by
 households who could not be matched with survey households. In Panel E the dependent variable is the number of days worked by
 households matched with survey households. The data was extracted from Job card information on the nrega.nic.in server. It covers the
 period from July 2011 to Sept 2013. Treatment is a dummy which is equal to one for the blocks selected for the intervention. All
 specifications include district fixed effects.




                                                                        37
Table 5: Impact of the reform on MGNREGS Employment: Evidence from household
survey




                                                                                                                Post-
                                               Set up                      Intervention Period
                                                                                                            Intervention
                                              Jul - Aug        Sept - Dec       Jan - Mar        Whole        Apr - Jun
                                                2012             2012             2013           Period         2013
                                                 (1)              (2)              (3)            (4)            (5)
      Panel A: MGNREGS Participation
      Treatment                             -0.00863***         0.00306         0.00379       0.00699          0.00101
                                              (0.00282)        (0.00321)       (0.00331)     (0.00445)        (0.00474)
      Observations                              9,436            9,436           9,436         9,436            9,436
      Mean in Control                          0.0122           0.0168          0.0226        0.0378           0.0390

      Panel B: Number of days worked
      Treatment                              -0.163***           0.0639           0.246           0.310         0.154
                                              (0.0560)           (0.114)         (0.165)         (0.207)       (0.477)
      Observations                              9,436             9,436           9,436           9,436         9,436
      Mean in Control                           0.231             0.470           0.688           1.158         1.821

      Panel C: Wages received for MGNREGS employment
      Treatment                         -17.95**                 -1.955           13.91           11.96        -19.75
                                         (7.073)                 (12.95)         (13.33)         (20.01)       (24.64)
      Observations                        9,436                   9,436           9,436           9,436         9,436
      Mean in Control                     24.19                   43.29           55.89           99.18         104.7

      Panel D: Average delays in payment (days)
      Treatment                             -32.96             53.04***         25.66**      36.48***           2.344
                                           (25.39)              (18.68)         (10.28)       (11.18)          (9.395)
      Observations                           112                  154             214           355              361
      Mean in Control                       73.49                71.03           51.14         60.15            38.22

      Panel E: Illegal advance payments
      Treatment                                 0.0512            -0.0656         0.0876         -0.0197           0.0100
                                                (0.149)           (0.0831)       (0.0812)        (0.0621)         (0.0621)
      Observations                                 96                128            170             289              234
      Mean in Control                            0.376              0.281          0.299           0.295            0.386
      Note: The unit of observation is a household. In Panel A the dependent variables is a dummy variable which is
      equal to one if any household member participated to MGNREGS. In Panel B the dependent variable is the total
      number of weeks worked by household members under MGNREGS. In Panel C the dependent variable is total
      wage payments received by each household for MGNREGS employment. In Panel D the dependent variable is the
      average number of days between the time of work spells and the time of each payment. When payments have
      not been made at the time of the survey, the delay is set equal to the time between the work spell and the
      survey date. It is missing for households who did not work for MGNREGS. In Panel E the dependent variable is a
      binary variable which is equal to one if any household member has received a payment for MGNREGS work in
      cash within 15 days of the work spell. It is missing when no MGNREGS payment has been made at the time of the
      survey. The data was collected by a representative survey of 10,036 households in May-July 2013. Households
      were asked about work spells from July 2012 to the time of the survey. Treatment is a dummy which is equal to
      one for the blocks selected for the intervention. All specifications include district fixed effects and household
      controls. Household controls include sets of dummies for religion, caste, type of housing, land ownership, gender
      and literacy of the household head, household size and number of adults.




                                                              38
 Table 6: Impact of the reform on MGNREGS projects: Evidence from asset survey


                                                                         Number Registered              Number found
                                                                      All Projects Ongoing All Projects Ongoing
                                                                           (1)          (2)            (3)         (4)
                         Treatment                                      0.0494        -0.210          0.309      0.0271
                                                                        (0.263)       (0.413)        (0.239)     (0.267)
                         Observations                                      390          390            385         385
                         Mean in Control                                  13.80        11.69          11.79       9.819
                         Note: the unit of observation is a Gram Panchayat (GP). The dependent variables are the
                         number of projects registered in the public data portal (nrega.nic.in) on May 15, 2013 (1), the
                         number of projects declared as ongoing in nrega.nic.in (2), the number of registered (3) and
                         ongoing (4) projects found by surveyors in June-July 2013. Out of 5390 projects registered in
                         nrega.nic.in for the 390 GP of the survey sample, a random sample of 3900 projects were
                         surveyed (10 per GP). The number of projects found in the survey is scaled up using the
                         number of registered projects divided by the number of sampled projects rate. 5 GP (28
                         projects) could not be surveyed. All specifications include district fixed effects.




Table 7: Impact of the reform on fake beneficiaries: Evidence from matching of
nrega.nic.in job cards with SECC census



                                                                                         Job cards with at least one working
                                                             All job cards
                                                                                                       member
                                                                                      Intervention period     Post intervention
                                                           (as of April 2014)           July 2012-March       Apr 2013 - March
                                                                                              2013                  2014
                                                             (1)                               (2)                    (3)
            Panel A: Match Rate for job cards with one member only
            Treatment                                    0.0187**                            0.0181**                  0.0107
                                                         (0.00741)                           (0.00766)                (0.00696)
            Observations                                   3,095                               2,868                    2,922
            Mean in Control                                0.644                               0.673                    0.698

            Panel B: Match Rate for job cards with two members or more
            Treatment                                    0.0135**                             0.0126                   0.0104
                                                         (0.00613)                           (0.00764)                (0.00732)
            Observations                                   3,093                               2,836                    2,906
            Mean in Control                                0.243                               0.282                    0.286

            Note: The unit of observation is a GP. The dependent variable is the fraction of job cards from nrega.nic.in
            matched by name with households from the SECC census. A job card with two members or more is matched
            when at least to members have been matched by name with a census household. The nrega.nic.in data was
            extracted from the nrega.nic.in server, it covers the period from July 2011 to March 2014. Treatment is a
            dummy which is equal to one for the blocks selected for the intervention. All specifications include district
            fixed effects.




                                                                      39
Table 8: Impact of the reform on assets of MGNREGS functionaries: Evidence from
affidavit data




                                            Average Effect (OLS)                  Effect at the Median (Quantile Regression)
                                        2012‐13              2013‐14                  2012‐13                 2013‐14
                                      (1)      (2)        (3)       (4)             (5)        (6)        (7)         (8)
   Panel A: GP and Block
   Treatment                        ‐0.0754   ‐0.0659      ‐0.102     ‐0.114      ‐0.117     0.005       ‐0.137*    ‐0.189***
                                    (0.130)   (0.128)     (0.103)    (0.102)     (0.073)    (0.068)      (0.074)      (0.069)
   0bservations                      2,455     2,455       1,737      1,737       2,455      2,455        1,737        1,737
   Kolmogorov Smirnov p‐value                                                      0.105                  0.057
   (for stochastic dominance)
   Panel B: GP
   Treatment                        ‐0.0611   ‐0.0456     ‐0.102     ‐0.114       ‐0.004     0.038      ‐0.199**     ‐0.19**
                                    (0.144)   (0.143)     (0.124)    (0.121)      (0.08)    (0.079)      (0.081)     (0.083)
   Observations                      1,698     1,698       1,251      1,251        1,698     1,698        1,251       1,251
   Kolmogorov Smirnov p‐value                                                      0.344                  0.135
   (for stochastic dominance)
   Panel C: Block
   Treatment                        ‐0.128    ‐0.0832     ‐0.159     ‐0.154       ‐0.185     ‐0.07        ‐0.059      ‐0.115
                                    (0.143)   (0.136)     (0.130)    (0.126)     (0.119)    (0.113)      (0.132)     (0.126)
   0bservations                       757       757         486        486         757        757          486         486
   Kolmogorov Smirnov p‐value                                                     0.212                    0.29
   (for stochastic dominance)
   Declarations 2012‐13 were made from August 2012 to June 2013. Declarations 2013‐14 were made from July 2013 to
   September 2014. The intervention period was September 2012 to April 2013. GP level functionaries are Panchayat
   Rozgar Sewak. Block level functionaries Program Officers, Accountants, Computer Operators, Junior Engineers, Program
   Technical Assistants, and Executive Assistants. Functionary Controls include the age, the square of age, and dummies
   for gender and designation of the functionaries as well as a dummy for whether the functionary is posted in the district
   she was born in. In Panel A, B and C ll specifications include district fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered at the
   block level.




                                                                    40
APPENDIX: FOR ONLINE PUBLICATION ONLY

Data Appendix
In this appendix, we describe the different sources of information we use in the analysis.
We first present the official data on expenditures and employment, then turn to the sur-
veys we implemented to assess actual MGNREGS implementation, and finally describe
three additional sources we use to measure corruption.

We use two sources of official reports on MGNREGS expenditures and employment:
CPSMS and nrega.nic.in.
    CPSMS: In July 2014, we were granted access to detailed information MGNREGS
expenditures via the Central Planning Scheme Monitoring (CPSMS) Portal. Both treat-
ment and control GPs were monitored in the system from July 2011 onward, and we could
observe all credit and debit transactions from GP savings account. We use this informa-
tion to compute MGNREGS spending per GP for the different periods of interests: from
July 2011 to the start of the intervention in September 2012, from September 2012 to
December 2012, from Januaray 2013 to March 2013 and from the end of the intervention
in April 2013 until July 2014.
    NREGA.NIC.IN: The government website nrega.nic.in provides publicly available
information on MGNREGS expenditures per GP for every financial year (a financial year
start on April 1st). In July 2014, using a newly available facility called the Public Data
Portal (jointly produced by the Ministry of Rural Development and Evidence for Policy
Design) we downloaded data on GP spending on labor and material for the financial years
2011-12, 2012-13 and 2013-14.
Labor expenditures figures in nrega.nic.in are aggregates of work and payment details of
MGNREGS workers which are also entered on the website and made publicly available
in the form of job cards. This online jobcard mimics the physical job card delivered to
all households who register for MGNREGS work: the rule of one job card per household
is not always followed in practice, so that members of a given households may appear on
different job cards. We requested access to job card information from the Ministry of Ru-
ral Development and were provided with the details of 4,197,904 job cards and 6,292,307
workers in our sample districts for the financial years 2011-12, 2012-13 and 2013-14.

In order to provide independent measures of MGNREGS implementation, we carried out
our own survey in the 12 sample districts between May and July 2013. Within each
district, we visited every block – in total, we had 69 treatment blocks and 126 control
blocks, 195 blocks in total. We surveyed 2 randomly sampled GPs in each block – this
gave us a total of 390 GPs. The survey consisted of three main surveys: a household


                                           41
survey, a survey of MGNREGS assets and a survey of GP head (or Mukhiya).
     Household Survey: We conducted a household survey covering 10,036 households.
In each GP, we covered at least 25 households. These households were sampled from
the list of households obtained from the District Rural Development Authority (DRDA).
These lists were initially compiled in 2002 for the purpose of identifying BPL households,
so each household was given a poverty score, based on various criteria. From these lists,
we sampled 72 per cent of households below the median poverty score and 28 per cent
households from above the score. In the case a sampled household had left the village or
all its members were defunct, surveyors were asked to interview a replacement household
who had been randomly chosen from the initial list. Because the sampling lists were
10 years old and many areas had high migration rates, the proportion of households
interviewed as replacents was also high, about 30%.
     Asset Survey: We sampled 10 infrastructure projects from each GP. These were
randomly sampled from the MIS (www.nrega.nic.in). In total, we sampled a total of
4165 infrastructure projects.
     Mukhiya Survey: We attempted to interview the Mukhiya of every single GP we
visited. We managed to locate and interview a total of 358 Mukhiyas. Unlike the other
two surveys, the Mukhiya survey was conducted on paper and was both quantitative and
qualitative in nature.

We use three additional sources of administrative data to provide evidence on corruption
in MGNREGS implementation: the Socio-Economic Caste Census, affidavit data and
audits data.
    SECC and name matching: In order to measure the extent of possible “ghost
workers,” we attempt to determine for each working household reported on an nrega.nic.in
job card whether or not there is a matched household within the SECC data. The 2011
Socio-Economic Caste Census (SECC) is a national survey of all persons and households
in rural and urban India. It is based on the National Population Register from the 2011
Population Census, but was conducted mostly in 2012 due to various implementation
issues. The SECC data includes the name, father’s name (or husband’s name for married
women), gender, education, and other information for each member of the household and
the household overall. In the 12 districts of our sample (inclusive of rural villages only),
the SECC data covers 16,480 villages, five million households, and 34 million individuals.
The job cards data covers 18,513 villages, 4,197,904 working households, and 6,292,307
working household members.
    We proceed in two steps: In the first step, we pair villages in the job cards with corre-
sponding villages in the SECC data to impose the restriction that we search for matching
households only within the same village. In the second step, we match households from
the job cards data to the SECC data within village pairs based on similarity of name,

                                             42
gender, and household composition. To calculate the closeness of village names in the
first step and individuals’ names in the second step, we use a modified levenshtein algo-
rithm (Paul Novosad’s lev.py downloaded from http://www.dartmouth.edu/~novosad/
code.html) as the building block on top of which we add additional alterations that
take into consideration alternative spellings, missing/additional portions of names, and
abbreviations to quantify the closeness of reported names.
    In the first step, we take the following approach to determine village pairs. While
the job cards data contains information on block, GP, and village name, the SECC data
contains corresponding information for block and village name only. We attempt to
match by name each of the 18,513 unique villages in the job cards data within block
with a corresponding SECC village. We are able to match 84% of the job cards villages
(containing 88% of households). For 16% the job card villages (12% of households), we
match them to all SECC villages which are matched with job card villages belonging to
the same GP. For about 0.5% of villages (0.7% of households), we are unable to do either
and match them with all the villages in the block.
    In the second step, we attempt to find a match for each of the job cards from within
the paired village or list of villages. We declare a household with one working member
listed on the job card as matched if a single matching individual in the SECC data is
found, and we declare a household with two or more members listed on the job card as
matched if at least two individuals within the same SECC household are matched. The
matching rate is thus mechanically lower for household with two working members (37%
of households, of which 25% are matched) than for households with one working member
(63% of households, of which 64% are matched). Individuals are matched based on two
primary criteria: gender, which must match exactly, and name, which must be sufficiently
close based on the algorithm described above. Note that once a suitable household match
is found according to this process for one or more members, all other members of the
job cards household are declared as coming from a matched household. In contrast,
the matched SECC household is not removed from the pool of potential matches as the
algorithm moves on.
    Our outcome of interest is the match rate, separately for people reported to have
worked during the period of the intervention and people reported to have worked after
the intervention: the idea is that a name or household who is supposed to have a job-card
in the MGNREGS data but is not found the SECC database is more likely to be a “ghost”
than those who are found in both. This exercise is therefore a population-level version
of the forensic method pioneered by Niehaus and Sukhtankar (2013), using exclusively
administrative data. We recognize that the data bases are both imperfect. There are
surely errors in both directions (individuals might be omitted from the SECC census for
example, or the matching could have failed because the names are spelled too differently
to match, or someone could be matched to someone else with the same name), but there

                                           43
is no reason why these errors would be different in treatment and control groups.
    Affidavit data: We also collected affidavits of MGNREGS employees. In the fi-
nancial years 2012-13 and 2013-14, the Ministry of Rural Development of Bihar made it
mandatory for all its employees to declare their personal assets, including cash, movable
and immovable assets owned by them or a member of their household. The affidavits
were scanned and the pdf files were made available online on the website of each district.
Compliance was not perfect, in total we collected 2,463 affidavits for the financial year
2012-13 and 1,741 for the financial year 2013-14. Our measure of MGNREGS employ-
ees’ personal wealth is constructed by adding the value of movable (cash, bank deposits,
bonds, jewellery, other financial assets, vehicles) and immovable assets (land, buildings,
other immovables) of the employee and his or her spouse. When the value of the jew-
ellery is missing but the weight of gold or silver owned is given, we impute the value using
international prices from http://www.bullion-rates.com.
    Audits data: Finally, we use reports on MGNREGS audits carried out by the admin-
istration of each district between May 2012 and June 2013. These reports were compiled
in July 2013 by the Rural Development Department to inform the process evaluation of
MGNREGS audits by IDinsight (2013). The data include the date of each audit, the
name of the block and GP, the number of MGNREGS projects audited and the number
of irregularities found. We aggregate this information and compute the number of audits,
the number of projects audited, the number of irregularities found and the number of
irregularities per project audited in each block for three periods: May to August 2012
(pre-intervention), September 2012 to March 2013 (intervention period) and April to June
2013 (post-intervention). The completion date of each project audited is not recorded,
but the Rural Development Department letter no.120078 (September 1st, 2012) instructs
audit teams to select projects undertaken in the financial years 2011-12 and 2012-13.
Since the financial year 2012-13 ended in March 2013, projects audited in April to June
2013 had been undertaken during the intervention period.




                                            44
Figure A.1: Map of Sample Districts




                45
                  Table A.1: Infrastructure availability




                                   July '12    Jan '13    Apr '13    Required
Infrastructure                   T         C      T     T        C
Computers (Number)             1.32       1.06  2.48 2.06       1.61      3
Operators (number)             1.22       0.86  2.20 1.75       1.27      3
Generator (1=Yes 0=No)         0.67       0.56  0.97 0.90       0.85      1
Internet (1=Yes 0=No)          0.38       0.33  0.85 0.71       0.60      1
Scanner (1=Yes 0=No)           0.57       0.37  0.73 0.81       0.65      1
Printer (1=Yes 0=No)           0.59       0.43  0.71 0.83       0.76      1
Sampled Blocks                  69        126    66     69      123
Source: Phone surveys of Block Level MGNREGS functionaries (Program
officers). The intervention started in September 2012 and ended in April 2013.
"T" denotes treatment blocks and "C" denotes control blocks.




                                     46
Table A.2: MGNREGS Spending levels from different data sources




Panel A                          Control    Treatment Difference       Pvalue
Debit in CPSMS
                       2012‐13 19.27           16.84        ‐2.43        0.11
                       2013‐14 16.99           16.32        ‐0.67        0.65
Total Expenditures in MIS
                       2012‐13 21.66           18.27        ‐3.38        0.05
                       2013‐14 21.48           21.27        ‐0.21        0.90
Difference CPSMS‐MIS
                       2012‐13    ‐2.39        ‐1.44        0.95         0.15
                       2013‐14    ‐4.49        ‐4.95        ‐0.46        0.63
Panel B                          Control Treatment Difference Pvalue
Payments in Job Cards
                       2011‐12     8.30         9.26        0.96         0.24
                       2012‐13 15.74           14.25        ‐1.49        0.29
                       2013‐14 16.27           14.61        ‐1.66        0.26
Labor Expenditures in MIS
                       2011‐12     7.59         9.04        1.45         0.08
                       2012‐13 13.91           11.66        ‐2.26        0.06
                       2013‐14 13.23           12.83        ‐0.41        0.71
Difference Job Cards‐MIS
                       2011‐12     0.71         0.22        ‐0.49        0.21
                       2012‐13     1.82         2.59         0.77        0.03
                       2013‐14     3.03         1.78        ‐1.25        0.02
Source: CPSMS Credit Debit Data, MIS Financial Reports (nrega.nic.in), Job
Cards (nrega.nic.in). All amounts are annual panchayat averages in lakhs.
CPSMS data is not available for the whole financial year 2011‐12. p‐values
take into account correlation of errors at the block level. Years are financial
years (Apr 1st‐Mar 31st).




                                      47
   Table A.3: Treatment Effect on MGNREGS audits




                                                        Intervention          Post-
                                        Before
                                                           Period         Intervention
                                    Jan 2011 - Aug       Sep 2012 -
                                                                         Apr - Jun 2013
                                         2012             Mar 2013
                                          (1)                (2)               (5)
Panel A: Number of Audits
Treatment                               0.148             -0.0751            -0.109
                                       (0.631)            (0.482)            (0.240)
Observations                             195                195                195
Mean in Control                         2.627              6.548              2.167

Panel B: Number of Works Audited
Treatment                               1.268             -0.378              0.580
                                       (4.877)            (2.944)            (1.097)
Observations                             195                195                195
Mean in Control                         18.13              33.12              9.556

Panel C: Number of Works where irregularities were found
Treatment                            -0.930            -0.0637                0.290
                                     (1.777)            (0.816)              (0.194)
Observations                           195                195                  195
Mean in Control                       4.460              3.222                0.476

Panel D: Share of Works where irregularities were found
Treatment                                -0.0577            0.00848            0.0500**
                                        (0.0491)            (0.0194)           (0.0252)
Observations                               119                 188                148
Mean in Control                           0.215              0.0884             0.0514
Source: Rural Development Department, Government of Bihar. The unit of observation is
a block. The dependant variables are the number of audits in each period (Panel A), the
number of works audite (Panel B) the number of works were irregularities were found
(Panel C), and the share of works where irregularities were found (Panel D). Each column
present results from a separate regression using data for a different time period. There
are missing observations in Panel D for blocks which had no works audited in a given
period. Standard errors are clustered at the block level.




                                          48
Table A.4: Treatment Effect on household MGNREGS participation (household survey)




                                                                        Household Participation in MGNREGS
                                                                       Anytime before         Since July 2012
                                                                               (1)                   (2)
         Treatment                                                          ‐0.0161              0.000842
                                                                           (0.0136)              (0.00861)
         Observations                                                       10,018                 10,007
         Mean in Control                                                      0.288                0.0936
         Effect as % of Control Mean                                         ‐5.608                 0.899
         Note: The unit of observation is a household. In Column one the outcome is a binary variable equal
         to one if any member of the household worked for MGNREGS in the past. In Column Two the
         outcome is a binary variable equal to one if any member of the household did MGNREGS worked
         since July 2012. The data was collected by a representative survey of 10,036 households in May‐July
         2013. Treatment is a dummy which is equal to one for the blocks selected for the intervention. All
         specifications include district fixed effects and household controls. Household controls include sets of
         dummies for religion, caste, type of housing, land ownership, gender and literacy of the household
         head, household size and number of adults.




     Table A.5: Treatment effect on household consumption (household survey)




                                                                          Log Monthly Consumption
                                                                            Frequent       Recurrent           Rare
                                                              All
                                                                         expenditures expenditures expenditures
                                                              (1)              (2)             (3)              (4)
        Treatment                                          ‐0.00764         ‐0.00788        ‐0.0400          0.00104
                                                           (0.0212)         (0.0163)        (0.0261)        (0.0393)
        Observations                                        10,033           10,032          10,016           10,009
        Note: The dependent variable are the log of household monthly expenditures for different categories of
        expenditures. Frequent expenditures are expenditures reported every week. Recurrent expenditures are
        reported every month. Rare expenditures are reported over the past five months. The data was collected
        by a representative survey of 10,036 households in May‐July 2013. Treatment is a dummy which is equal
        to one for the blocks selected for the intervention. All specifications include district fixed effects and
        household controls. Household controls include sets of dummies for religion, caste, type of housing, land
        ownership, gender and literacy of the household head, household size and number of adults.




                                                            49
Table A.6: Impact of the reform on MGNREGS implementation issues: Evidence from
GP head (Mukhiya) survey



       Panel A: Lack of demand for MGNREGS work
       Treatment                                                                      0.0228
                                                                                     (0.0545)
       Observations                                                                     346
       Mean in Control                                                                 0.379

       Panel B: Mandated price of material lower than market price
       Treatment                                                                      0.0279
                                                                                     (0.0386)
       Observations                                                                     346
       Mean in Control                                                                 0.833

       Panel C: Lack of funds from the government
       Treatment                                                                    -0.000833
                                                                                     (0.0498)
       Observations                                                                     346
       Mean in Control                                                                 0.718

       Panel D: Corruption in the administration
       Treatment                                                                     -0.121**
                                                                                     (0.0572)
       Observations                                                                     346
       Mean in Control                                                                 0.471

       Panel E: CPSMS fund-flow creates delays
       Treatment                                                                         0.185***
                                                                                         (0.0539)
       Observations                                                                         346
       Mean in Control                                                                     0.167
       Note: The unit of observation is a Mukhiya (head of GP). The dependent variables are the
       fractions of Mukhiya who declared that the lack of demand for MGNREGS work (Panel A),
       the mandated price of material lower than the market price (Panel B), the lack of funds from
       the government (panel C) corruption in the administration (panel D) and delays in fund-flow
       created by CPSMS (panel E) were important issues in MGNREGS implementation. The data
       was collected from a representative sample of 354 Mukhiya from treatment and control
       blocks in May-July 2013. Treatment is a dummy which is equal to one for the blocks selected
       for the intervention. All specifications include district fixed effects and Mukhiya controls.
       Mukhiya controls include sets of dummies for Mukhiya's Religion, caste, gender, education,
       age, whether any member of the family was elected Mukhiya in 2001 and 2006.




                                                        50
                       Table A.7: OLS and IV estimates of the main results




                                                 OLS                IV                                                      OLS               IV
                                                 (1)                (2)                                                     (3)               (4)
Table 2                                                                         Table 5
Panel A: Total Credit to GP Accounts                                            Panel A: MGNREGS Participation
Treatment/use system                         ‐3.194***           ‐4.871***      Treatment/use system                     ‐0.00273          0.00286
                                               (0.790)             (1.261)                                               (0.00518)        (0.00729)
Observations                                    2,920               2,920       Observations                               9,841            9,764
Mean in Control                                 13.33               13.33       Mean in Control                           0.0387             0.03
Panel B: Average Balance in GP Accounts
Treatment/use system                           ‐0.242*            ‐0.369*       Panel B: Wages received for MGNREGS employment
                                               (0.129)            (0.195)       Treatment/use system                  ‐14.75               ‐23.67
Observations                                    2,920              2,920                                              (21.08)              (30.07)
Mean in Control                                 1.999              1.999        Observations                           9,841                9,764
Panel C: Total Debit from GP Accounts                                           Mean in Control                        127.8                128.1
Treatment/use system                         ‐2.236***           ‐3.411***
                                               (0.771)             (1.208)      Panel C: Average delays in payment (days)
Observations                                    2,920               2,920       Treatment/use system                    22.98**            32.12*
Mean in Control                                 13.57               13.57                                               (11.56)            (16.81)
                                                                                Observations                               463               459
Table 3                                                                         Mean in Control                           63.15             63.31
Panel A: GP Expenditures on labor from nrega.nic.in
Treatment/use system                       ‐2.270***             ‐3.562***
                                             (0.760)               (1.197)      Table 6 Fraction of Assets found
Observations                                  2,947                 2,919       Treatment/use system                       0.0176           0.0254
Mean in Control                               13.83                 13.90                                                 (0.0176)         (0.0244)
Panel B: GP Expenditures on material from nrega.nic.in                          Observations                               4,165             4,135
Treatment/use system                        ‐1.077**             ‐1.684**       Mean in Control                            0.855            0.854
                                             (0.526)              (0.806)
Observations                                  2,947                2,919
Mean in Control                               7.717                7.737        Table 7
                                                                                Panel A: Match rate of job cards with one person
Table 4                                                                         Treatment/use system                    0.0187**          0.0246**
Panel A: Days worked (nrega.nic.in)                                                                                     (0.00741)         (0.0110)
Treatment                                       ‐827.7*            ‐1,296*      Observations                              3,095             2,897
                                                (448.5)            (699.9)      Mean in Control                           0.252             0.262
Observations                                     2,941              2,918
Mean in Control                                  6100               6115        Panel B: Match rate of job cards with two or more
Panel B: Days per working household (nrega.nic.in)                              Treatment/use system                        0.0135**         0.0161*
Treatment                                      ‐0.0101             ‐0.0202                                                  (0.00613)       (0.00944)
                                               (0.0785)            (0.119)      Observations                                  3,093           2,897
Observations                                     2,887              2,868       Mean in Control                               0.063           0.064
Mean in Control                                  6.240              6.241
Panel C: Number of working households (nrega.nic.in)
Treatment                                       ‐138.0*            ‐215.7*
                                                (72.51)            (113.3)
Observations                                     2,941              2,918
Mean in Control                                  992.6              994.8
Note: Column 1 presents the treatment effect for the whole set‐up and intervention period estimated with OLS. Column 2 presents the treatment
effect for the whole set‐up and intervention period estimated using treatment as an instrument for the use of CPSMS system. The panels correspond
to the main tables of the paper. The unit of observation is the Gram Panchayat for Table 2, 3, 4, 6 and 7. For Table 5 the unit of observation is a
household. The data sources are CPSMS financial data (Table 2), official reports from nrega.nic.in (Table 3 and 4), our own survey data (Table 5 and 6)
and the match between nrega.nic.in reports and socio‐economic and caste census data (Table 7).




                                                                          51
