                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




     THE COMPOSITIONAL EFFECT OF RIGOROUS TEACHER EVALUATION ON
                         WORKFORCE QUALITY

                                       Julie Berry Cullen
                                          Cory Koedel
                                          Eric Parsons

                                      Working Paper 22805
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w22805


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                           November 2016, Revised July 2017




Cullen is in the Department of Economics at the University of California, San Diego. Koedel is in
the Department of Economics and Truman School of Public Affairs, and Parsons is in the
Department of Economics, at the University of Missouri, Columbia. The authors gratefully
acknowledge financial support from the Laura and John Arnold Foundation and the National
Center for Analysis of Longitudinal Data in Education Research (CALDER) funded through
grant #R305C120008 to American Institutes for Research from the Institute of Education
Sciences, U.S. Department of Education; research support from the Houston Education Research
Consortium, in particular Shauna Dunn, Holly Heard, Dara Shifrer, and Ruth Turley; and
research assistance from Li Tan. The authors also thank Tom Dee and seminar participants at the
Center for Education Policy Analysis at Stanford University for helpful comments. The views
expressed here are those of the authors and should not be attributed to their institutions, data
providers, the funders, or the National Bureau of Economic Research. Any and all errors are
attributable to the authors.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2016 by Julie Berry Cullen, Cory Koedel, and Eric Parsons. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that
full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Compositional Effect of Rigorous Teacher Evaluation on Workforce Quality
Julie Berry Cullen, Cory Koedel, and Eric Parsons
NBER Working Paper No. 22805
November 2016, Revised July 2017
JEL No. H75,I28,J45

                                         ABSTRACT

Improving public sector workforce quality is challenging in sectors such as education where
worker productivity is difficult to assess and manager incentives are muted by political and
bureaucratic constraints. In this paper, we study how providing improved information to
principals about teacher effectiveness and encouraging them to use the information in personnel
decisions affects the composition of teacher turnovers. Our setting is the Houston Independent
School District, which recently implemented a rigorous teacher evaluation system. Prior to the
new system, teacher effectiveness was negatively correlated with district exit and we show that
the policy significantly strengthened this relationship, primarily by increasing the relative
likelihood of exit for teachers in the bottom quintile of the quality distribution. Low-performing
teachers working in low-achieving schools were especially likely to leave. However, despite the
success, the implied change to the quality of the workforce overall is too small to have a
detectable impact on student achievement.

Julie Berry Cullen                              Eric Parsons
Department of Economics - 0508                  Dept. of Economics
University of California, San Diego             University of Missouri
9500 Gilman Drive                               231 Professional Building
La Jolla, CA 92093-0508                         Columbia, Missouri 65211
and NBER                                        parsonses@missouri.edu
jbcullen@ucsd.edu

Cory Koedel
Dept. of Economics
University of Missouri
118 Professional Building
Columbia, MO 65211
koedelc@missouri.edu
1. Introduction

       Government agencies that provide services, such as education and health, are settings

where it is difficult to observe both inputs and outputs. These are also sectors where there are

ongoing concerns about efficiency and equity. In elementary and secondary education, efforts to

improve the effectiveness of schools have ranged from increases in resources via school finance

reforms, to increased competition via school choice, to performance standards via school

accountability. The success of any of these depends on the quality and commitment of the

workforce.

       Recent research provides powerful evidence confirming that high-quality teachers are of

great value to students (Chetty, Friedman, and Rockoff, 2014a/b; Hanushek, 2011; Hanushek and

Rivkin, 2010; Jackson, forthcoming). A challenge facing school administrators in managing the

teacher workforce is that teacher effectiveness is not easy to measure and is not strongly

correlated with observable characteristics. In this type of setting, improved information about

quality can lead to more productive personnel policies. Given the two-sided nature of matches,

better information may also have equity implications because low-achieving schools struggle to

attract and retain good teachers (Bates, 2016; Clotfelter et al., 2006).

       In this paper, we study the impact of introducing a rigorous teacher evaluation system on

the level and distribution of teacher quality. The context for our study is the Houston

Independent School District (HISD), which is the seventh largest school district in the United

States. The new evaluation system was phased in from 2011 to 2013 and is centered on a

standardized method for annually evaluating teachers. The objective is to generate

comprehensive teacher performance measures and empower principals to exit ineffective and

retain effective teachers at higher rates, as well as improve ongoing skill development.




                                                  1
Recognizing that teacher hiring and development also play a role in overall policy efficacy, we

focus on how the policy impacted patterns of attrition by teacher effectiveness.

       The empirical analyses rely on administrative data tracking teachers for three years

before to three years after the reform. For the subset of teachers in tested grades and subjects we

begin by classifying teachers by quality using proxies we construct and validate for value added

to student achievement. Then, using difference-in-differences and event-study analyses, we show

that the relationships between teacher quality and both school and district exit became more

negative in the post-policy period. The key driver is an increase in the relative likelihood of exit

from the district of teachers in the bottom quintile of the quality distribution, concentrated in

low-achieving schools.

       As far as impacts on student achievement through the turnover channel, there are two

important issues to consider. First, overall turnover increased after the reform, though a portion

of this level shift is likely attributable to the economic recovery as turnover returned to pre-

recession levels statewide. Second, the reform had only moderate impacts on quality per turnover

and the associated improvements in workforce quality are too small to have a detectable impact

on student achievement. We demonstrate this point in illustrative models that relate observed

school-by-grade teacher exits to student achievement gains and simulations that cumulate the

impacts over time.

       Our study contributes in a number of ways to the few existing studies of policies that are

designed to improve workforce quality by providing better information on teacher effectiveness.

In contrast to the rigid rules that characterize the high-profile IMPACT program in Washington

DC, which is studied by Dee and Wyckoff (2015), principals in HISD have flexibility in how to




                                                  2
act on the performance information.1 The presumption is that they know their own schools best

and can leverage their local knowledge.2 One way to view the HISD system is as a scaled up

version of the experimental pilot interventions studied by Sartain and Steinberg (2016) and

Rockoff et al. (2012), with the added feature of a district-wide emphasis on tying personnel

decisions more closely to quality.3 Beyond differences in the setting in terms of discretion and

scale, we also examine the distributional impacts that can arise when an entire school system is

treated.

2. Policy background

           HISD has implemented several policies designed to raise staff quality and effort over the

past decade. First, a merit pay program (ASPIRE) was introduced in 2006-07 to reward teachers

and administrators for raising student achievement. Then, four years later, the district began

phased development and implementation of the Effective Teachers Initiative (ETI). This

comprehensive reform effort is designed to improve teacher quality through more effective

recruitment at the front end, individualized professional development in the middle, and targeted

retention and exit on the back end. The emphasis on tying personnel decisions more closely to

quality was made explicit in differential retention goals for the least and most effective teachers,

with a particular focus on improving teacher quality for high-need students.4 A notable feature of




1
  Using a regression discontinuity design, Dee and Wyckoff (2015) find that dismissal threats associated
with low ratings induce voluntary exit and raise the performance of teachers who remain.
2
  Loeb, Miller, and Wyckoff (2015) study a reform that increased principals’ flexibility in decision-
making in New York City and find that principals are less likely to award tenure to less effective teachers
as measured by value-added and own annual assessments of teacher quality.
3
  In their New York City experiment, Rockoff et al. (2012) find that providing principals with improved
information on teacher performance increases the likelihood of exit for low performing teachers. Sartain
and Steinberg (2016) find similar effects of a Chicago pilot program that evaluated teachers more
rigorously via classroom observations.
4
  See Appendix A for an illustration from the district’s perspective of the complementary levers designed
to shift the distribution of teacher effectiveness.


                                                     3
the new system, which is still in effect today, is that principals are the primary agents of policy

implementation. Further, principals have significant latitude in exiting teachers since, unlike

many districts, teachers at HISD do not have tenure and most teachers are on one-year contracts.

          The cornerstone of the ETI reform is the implementation of a rigorous teacher evaluation

system intended to provide more informative reviews of teacher performance. The new

evaluation system was designed by the district during the 2010-11 school year with input from

stakeholders and formally approved by the school board in spring 2011. The new appraisals

involve three components: instructional practice, professional expectations, and student

performance. Scores on the first two components are based on principal observations and

reviews conducted inside and outside the classroom. For instructional practice, a teacher’s skills

are evaluated using well-defined rubrics that cover setting student expectations, lesson planning,

and classroom management. For the professional expectations component, teachers are evaluated

relative to a set of objective measures of compliance with policies, interactions with colleagues,

and participation in professional development. The student performance scores are based on

estimates of a teacher’s impact on student learning. Teachers are scored on a scale from 1 to 4 on

each component, and these are then averaged to deliver summary ratings of ineffective, needs

improvement, effective, or highly effective.

          The initial step in transitioning to the new system was ensuring that all teachers were

assigned ratings in 2010-11. Prior to that year, ratings for almost one in three teachers were not

recorded with the district. Further, ratings were high and did not meaningfully differentiate

teachers (Weisberg et al., 2009).5 The 2010-11 ratings were based on at least two classroom

observations and, though not formally scored under the new system, these observations were



5
    Under the former appraisal system, 97% of HISD teachers were rated “proficient” or better.


                                                      4
conducted in an environment where differentiating teachers by quality was a leading district

concern and most principals had already received training.6 In the following year, 2011-12,

teachers were scored under the two new observational components: instructional practice and

professional expectations. Due to delays in approving student performance metrics for teachers

in untested subjects and grades, these metrics were not formally incorporated into the ratings

until 2012-13.7

        The phasing of the reform had different implications for the subset of teachers that we

study, who teach in tested subjects and grades, than for other teachers. Student achievement

metrics for these teachers had already been available for many years because the SAS Institute

provided proprietary teacher-level value-added estimates (EVAAS® scores) to HISD as key

inputs to the merit pay system. Thus, the most relevant changes are the addition of the

observational components and the emphasis on differentiating teachers and tying personnel

decisions more closely to quality. While the policy could have affected turnover for all teachers

as early as following the 2010-11 school year, initial impacts were more likely for our subset

because information about efficacy in promoting student learning was already available.8


6
  The superintendent’s message in the district’s 2011 Annual Report conveys this priority: “In 2011, we
took bold steps to transform the way teachers are recruited, trained, evaluated, and retained. […] HISD is
committed to recognizing and rewarding top teachers. And teachers whose students consistently
demonstrate weak academic growth are asked to exit the organization.” Further, highlighted in a box on
the first page of the report is: “In 2010-11, 373 teachers exited the organization for performance reasons.
That’s up from 77 in 2009.”
7
  A side effect of the phased implementation is that the official ratings for teachers changed significantly
from 2011-12 to 2012-13. When only the observational components were included, nearly 90% of
teachers were labeled effective or highly effective, with 0.5% ineffective, 10.0% needing improvement,
57.6% effective, and 31.9% highly effective. Once student performance was explicitly factored in, these
shares changed to 6.0%, 27.7%, 39.7%, and 26.6%, respectively. The downward shift is due to the fact
that the student performance measures are relative, so that some teachers will necessarily be deemed
ineffective, while the other criteria are absolute. Unfortunately we do not have access to personnel
evaluations for earlier years to document any initial shifts.
8
  Others have shown effects of policies in years prior to formal implementation in settings with
structurally similar rollouts. For example, Butcher, McEwan, and Weerapana (2014) show that academic



                                                     5
        We examine how the introduction of ETI has affected teacher turnover in ways that are

related to quality. Though turnover is only one channel through which the new human capital

policies could affect the quality of the workforce, it is arguably the lever that principals can

affect most, particularly in the short run. However, it is important to recognize that any impacts

on turnover reflect both demand-side and supply-side responses to the initiative as a whole,

including supporting interventions bundled with the new evaluation system. Teachers are

provided regular feedback on progress and opportunities for development to address their

specific needs, and new leadership roles have been established for effective teachers to mentor

others. Associated changes in the work environment and career opportunities could alter the

relative attractiveness of teaching in the district and of teaching in more and less advantaged

schools for teachers of differing effectiveness. These types of changes are likely inherent to any

rigorous appraisal system.

        Something that is more unique to the Houston context is that ETI was introduced against

the backdrop of a merit pay system. Under the system, teachers in core subjects can receive

bonuses for student learning gains exhibited in their classrooms and smaller bonuses for campus-

wide performance. Prior to ETI, nearly all core teachers received bonuses, with the average

bonus on the order of $3,600 (or about 7 percent of average base salary). With the onset of ETI,

the standards were made more stringent. Whereas it had been sufficient to be in the top half on at

least one teacher-subject or campus measure, qualifying for an award required being closer to the

top 20 percent in 2011-2012. In 2012-13, once ETI was fully phased in, teachers identified as

ineffective or needing improvement by the appraisal system were also disqualified from



departments at Wellesley began responding to an anti-grade inflation policy during a transition year in
which the policy was discussed, though it was made clear the policy would not be implemented until the
following year.


                                                   6
receiving campus awards. More details on changes to ASPIRE over the course of our study

period are provided in Appendix A.

        The net effect of the post-ETI changes to ASPIRE is that the most effective teachers

maintained similar levels of average awards, while average amounts fell for less effective

teachers (shown in Appendix A). Teachers experienced these changes with a significant lag,

since award details are not available until the spring of the academic year and the awards are

announced and paid in the following year (regardless of whether the individual is still an

employee). The first post-ETI year can be viewed as providing insights about effects in a less

discriminating merit pay regime, while the next two years embed the increasing alignment of the

merit pay program with ETI to the extent that the change was perceived by teachers.9 For

districts that have merit pay programs, such realignment would be expected in response to

changes to how teachers are evaluated.

3. Data and summary statistics

        We have access to detailed school, teacher, and student administrative data files for

school years 2007-08 through 2013-14. These data allow us to measure teacher turnover through

2012-13 (where 2013-14 data are used to measure turnover for 2012-13 teachers), leaving us

with a six-year panel centered around 2010-11, which is the first year the human capital policies

began to take force.

3.1 Measuring school disadvantage and selecting analysis schools

        We begin with a sample of 201 traditional public schools in HISD that were operational

during our sample period and serve students in grades 3 to 8, which are the grade levels for


9
  The evidence on how ASPIRE incentives affect teacher behavior in HISD is mixed. Imberman and
Lovenheim (2015) find that high school teachers increased effort in response to team incentives under
ASPIRE, but Brehm, Imberman, and Lovenheim (2017) do not find any evidence of strategic effort
responses to individual incentives among teachers in lower grades.


                                                   7
which we are able to construct measures of teacher quality consistently over the course of our

data panel. As a summary measure of each school’s context we use the achievement level, which

is defined as the average of students’ math and reading scores on statewide exams, standardized

within grade and year, and taken over the pre-policy years. We divide schools into three groups

based on pre-policy achievement levels: low (bottom quintile), middle (quintiles 2-4), and high

(top quintile).

          After classifying schools by achievement, we exclude an additional set of schools due to

a concurrent intervention conducted in HISD as described by Fryer (2014). Fryer (2014) led an

intervention starting in 2010-11 that introduced a bundle of best practices from effective charter

schools in 15 traditional elementary and middle schools. The onset of the intervention included

changes to teaching and leadership personnel. To avoid contamination, we drop the schools

where Fryer intervened from our analytic sample.10 Consistent with his description, all but one of

these schools are in the bottom quintile of achievement. We assign schools to quintiles prior to

dropping the Fryer schools so that our school groupings are unconditional. This allows for

straightforward interpretation, with the practical consequence that our sample size of bottom

quintile schools is reduced.

          Table 1 shows summary statistics for the schools included in our analysis, broken down

by achievement group. The top panel shows differences in the characteristics of the student

bodies served across these schools. Beyond the construct-driven differences in achievement,

low-achieving schools serve a disproportionate share of black students and students with English

as a second language, while high-achieving schools serve markedly fewer economically

disadvantaged students.



10
     In Appendix D, we show that our main findings are qualitatively similar if we include these schools.


                                                       8
3.2 Measuring teacher quality and selecting analysis teachers

       Critical to our analysis is being able to measure teacher effectiveness in a comparable

way over the full sample period. While teacher experience and education levels might be

candidates, the literature has consistently shown that these observable characteristics explain

little of the variation in student learning and are not consistently linked to teacher quality

(Aaronson, Barrow, and Sander, 2007; Hanushek and Rivkin, 2006; Harris and Sass, 2011). We

also have scores from principal appraisals for the components that were part of the official

evaluation system in 2011-12 and 2012-13, but not only are these unavailable in prior years, the

observational components are difficult to compare across campuses with differentially

challenging environments and map more weakly to student learning (Kane et al., 2011, 2013;

Steinberg and Garrett, 2016; Whitehurst, Chingos, and Lindquist, 2014).

       For these reasons, we construct quality measures derived from the value-added estimates

that have been provided to principals for teachers in tested grades and subjects for many years at

HISD. These teacher-specific EVAAS® scores are single-year measures of student test score

growth produced using a propriety method developed by the SAS Institute. Although the

technical estimation details differ from standard value-added models, conceptually they are

similar (Ballou, Sanders, and Wright, 2004). Teachers’ EVAAS® scores are estimated from

regressions of student achievement on a set of indicators for each teacher the student had in the

current and prior two years, as well as indicators for subject, grade, and year. These scores are

available to us back to the 2006-07 school year, and we restrict our analysis to teachers in grades

3-8 who have been assigned math or reading EVAAS® scores.

       Because the single-year estimates are quite noisy, we construct a more informative

measure of teacher effectiveness by combining multiple years of teachers’ scores per the




                                                  9
following regression based on Chetty, Friedman, and Rockoff (2014a):

Vikt  0  Vikt-δ1 ikt                                                                 (1)

In equation (1), Vikt is teacher i’s EVAAS® score in subject k and year t, Vikt- is a vector of

teacher i’s EVAAS® scores in the same subject in years prior to year t, and  ikt is an

idiosyncratic error term. The EVAAS® scores are normalized by subject and year. The fitted

values from the regression, Vˆikt  ˆ0  Vikt-δˆ 1 , are jackknifed quality measures where a value of

one, for example, implies that the teacher is one standard deviation above average in the true

distribution for teachers in the district.11 Because not all teachers have a complete panel of prior

scores to be used in the estimation of equation (1), separate regression models are estimated for

all possible combinations as in Chetty, Friedman, and Rockoff (2014a). We do require, though,

that the teacher have a time t EVAAS® score to be included in the sample, which ensures the

individual is teaching the relevant subject contemporaneously. An implication of including only

scores from years prior to t as explanatory variables in equation (1) is that first-year teachers are

necessarily excluded from the sample. However, our reliance only on prior-year performance

guards against introducing survivor bias to our turnover analysis, since otherwise teachers who

persist would be more likely to have quality measures available and thus be overrepresented in

our sample.12 Another implication of our strategy is that teacher effectiveness is allowed to drift




11
   The jackknifed quality measures are not renormalized to have a standard deviation of one, and in fact
have a standard deviation less than one. Theoretically, a one-unit change in the jackknifed measures
corresponds to a one standard deviation change in the distribution of teacher quality (see, e.g., Chetty,
Friedman, and Rockoff, 2014b).
12
   Our jackknifed measures rely on more observations for teachers in later years of our panel, so it may
seem that a relative reduction in noise could confound our estimated relationships over time. Not only
have we empirically confirmed that our results are robust to restricting the backward-looking windows to
be comparable across years, but the implicit shrinkage is also a theoretical argument against this concern
(Jacob and Lefgren, 2008).


                                                    10
over time, consistent with the slow-moving process documented by Chetty, Friedman, and

Rockoff (2014a).

           It is important to demonstrate that our measures meaningfully capture teacher

effectiveness in raising student achievement. Recent studies show that conceptually similar

jackknifed measures based on value-added are forecast-unbiased estimates of teacher quality in

other contexts (Bacher-Hicks, Kane, and Staiger, 2014; Chetty, Friedman, and Rockoff, 2014a).

Adopting their methods, we test whether our measures have the same property by examining

whether changes in teacher quality at the school-by-grade level caused by staffing changes

accurately predict changes in student test scores, as would be expected if the measures are

unbiased. For example, if a teacher with high measured effectiveness moves to a new school

and/or a different grade, test scores for students in the new school-by-grade combination should

increase in the year after the change. Moreover, if the quality metric is properly scaled, the

magnitude of the change in teacher quality should predict the magnitude of the change in student

achievement.

           With the caveat that our tests are less powerful than in previous studies that exploit larger

datasets, our findings are consistent with the jackknifed quality measures being forecast unbiased

predictors of future student achievement, as shown in Appendix B. The reading-based teacher

quality estimates appear to be less informative (i.e., noisier), however, which is consistent with

findings in previous research (Backes et al., 2016; Lefgren and Sims, 2012). Thus, we choose to

present results restricted to teachers for whom we can observe effectiveness in teaching math.13

Across our sample years, one-fifth of the teachers in our schools are teaching math in a tested

grade, and one-fifth of these have no available prior math scores to calculate our jackknifed



13
     That said, Appendix D shows that results for reading teachers are qualitatively similar.


                                                       11
measure. Thus, in the end, our analysis sample represents 16.4 percent of teachers in our

schools.14

        The middle panel of Table 1 shows how math teacher quality is distributed across schools

grouped by achievement level in the pre-policy period. In addition to our measure of

effectiveness, where the numbers reported are in standard deviations of the teacher distribution,

we also include other observable teacher characteristics. Based on our measure, Table 1 shows

that teacher quality is not evenly distributed across the district. More low-quality teachers and

fewer high-quality teachers are found at low-achieving schools. Low-achieving schools also

employ teachers with less experience and more education, but we place little emphasis on these

differences in observed qualifications because a simple regression of our jackknifed quality

measure in math on teacher experience and indicators for education levels yields an R-squared of

just 0.01.

        Finally, we note that our quality measure is not directly available to school principals.

Instead, principals have access to year-by-year EVAAS® scores and post-policy observational

assessments, in addition to other indicators of quality that we do not observe. In 2012-13, the

first year that all components of the assessment were formally scored, our measure of quality

explains 24 percent of the variation in overall appraisal ratings among our sample of teachers. It

explains 13, 4, and 23 percent of the instructional practice, professionalism, and student

performance components, respectively. One reason that the correlation with the classroom-

observation component is not higher may be that scores on these types of best-practices metrics

have been shown to be sensitive to the composition of students in the classroom (Steinberg and


14
  Teachers who are not responsible for math instruction in a tested grade primarily teach students below
grade 3 or students in other subjects (particularly in middle schools), or are non-classroom teachers who
focus on special populations such as special needs students and English language learners (ELLs). The
share of ELL teachers is especially large at HISD.


                                                    12
Garrett, 2016; Whitehurst, Chingos, and Lindquist, 2014). That said, both across and within

schools, our jack-knifed quality measures are more predictive than single-year EVAAS® scores

of the non-test-based evaluation components.15 Thus, in addition to being an informative

measure of how decisions under the new system are likely to affect student achievement, our

measures are also better aligned than single-year EVAAS® scores with the other formal

evaluation criteria in the system.

3.3 Measuring teacher turnover

        In addition to measuring school exits, we decompose school exits into exits from the

district and transfers to other schools within the district. A complication we face is that the

staffing data provided to us in 2013-14 include only teachers. In all previous years the staffing

data include all positions. For consistency, throughout our analysis we identify a teacher as

having exited the school at the conclusion of year t if the teacher is not observed teaching in the

school in year t+1. Thus, we code switches to non-teaching positions (e.g., school leadership) as

exits. We have confirmed that our results are substantively the same if we exclude the last year

of data and code position changes as non-exits.16

        We define teacher turnover by looking forward in the data one year. A benefit of using a

single-year measure instead of a multi-year measure is that we can calculate turnover for more

years. That said, the limitation of the single-year exit measures is that they are noisy and

overstate exit rates. It has been well documented that teachers – particularly young teachers –

move in and out of the workforce (Grissom and Reininger, 2012). We therefore test robustness to

using alternative two-year definitions for campus and district exit, where a teacher is classified as


15
   For example, our measures explain 10-20 percent more of the across- and within-school variance in
2012-13 teachers’ instructional practice scores than single-year EVAAS® scores.
16
   While the overall annual exit rates decline slightly (1-2 percentage points) if we recode position
changes as non-exits, the across-year differences are hardly affected. See Appendix D.


                                                   13
having exited if she is also not present in year t+2.

        The bottom panel of Table 1 shows single-year turnover rates for math teachers in grades

3-8 in the pre-policy period. Pre-policy turnover is 13.7 percent at low- and middle-achieving

schools, versus 12.1 percent at high-achieving schools. The difference is driven primarily by a

lower rate of within-district transfer from high-achieving schools. Unsurprisingly, two-year exit

rates (not shown) indicate marginally lower turnover by approximately 0.4 percentage points, or

3 percent.17

4. Empirical strategy

        To estimate effects on turnover, we begin with difference-in-differences models of the

following form, specified as linear probability models:

Yist  0  1Postt  2Qit  3 Postt  Qit  Xstβ  s   ist                                       (2)

In equation (2), Yist is a binary variable indicating whether teacher i at school s exits the school

(or exits the district or transfers to another school) at the conclusion of year t, Postt is an

indicator set to one for 2010-11 and later years, and Qit is our measure of teacher quality.18 In

some variants of the model, we replace the continuous measure of teacher quality with a vector

of indicator variables for the bottom, middle-three, and top quality quintiles. While these variants

have the advantage of allowing for nonlinear effects, we lead with the more parametric model

since it has the advantage of parsimony and nicely summarizes whether the link between quality

and turnover strengthened on average following the reform. The X-vector contains teacher



17
   The pre-policy turnover statistics in Table 1 are similar to turnover statistics provided for grade 4 to 5
teachers in New York City by Ronfeldt, Loeb, and Wyckoff (2013).
18
   Shrinkage is implicit in the jackknifing procedure and thus our estimates will not be affected by
attenuation bias from using a generated regressor as would be the case with a standard linear predictor
(Jacob and Lefgren, 2008).


                                                      14
characteristics that might have independent effects on turnover, such as race, gender, experience,

and education. Our findings are not sensitive to which subset of these characteristics we include

in the regressions, nor are they sensitive to omitting the X-vector entirely. Finally,  s is a school

fixed effect to allow for fixed school attributes that affect teacher attrition rates, and  ist is an

error term. Throughout we report standard errors clustered at the school level.

        The objective of the model is to identify shifts in the relationship between teacher quality

and exit over time, embodied by  3 . We also report estimates of  1 to give a sense of how the

overall teacher exit rate changes over time. To the extent that the change can be attributed to

policy implementation, it is indicative of impact on the extensive margin. Of course, it is difficult

to rule out that other time-varying factors are at play when estimating these simple differences.

Thus, we emphasize estimates of  3 , which is the coefficient on the interaction between the post-

reform indicator and teacher quality. This parameter provides an indication of the policy impact

on the intensive margin – that is, on a per-exit basis it provides a measure of how workforce

quality is changing due to push and pull factors associated with the reform. Since a primary goal

of the policy was to increase exit of ineffective teachers and increase retention of effective

teachers, we would expect to find a negative coefficient on the interaction.

        A necessary condition for identifying the policy impact on relative exit rates is that pre-

policy trends in exit rates between teachers of different levels of quality are the same. To explore

the validity of the design, as well as to provide evidence on the time pattern of any responses, we

also estimate event time models. For these time-disaggregated models, we include a full set of

year effects and year effects interacted with teacher quality.

        Beyond estimating average impacts, we also study heterogeneity across schools to shed

light on distributional effects. For these models, we add interactions between the time and quality


                                                   15
variables with indicators for schools that are low (bottom-quintile) and high (top-quintile)

achieving based on pre-period achievement. Improving teacher quality at schools serving high-

need students was a priority under ETI, and principals at these schools might also benefit more

from the information provided by the new system. However, they may also have less capacity to

respond because demand for effective teachers likely increased system-wide, opening up the

possibility for the best teachers to trade-up in terms of school environment and making retention

tougher at the bottom (Bates, 2016).

5. Effects of the reform on turnover

5.1 Descriptive analysis

        We begin by visually documenting trends in exit and turnover rates in Figure 1. The

figure shows district-wide trends for our three different mobility measures: school exit, district

exit, and school transfer. The former is the sum of the two latter measures. School years in the

figure, and in all figures and tables to follow, are identified by the spring year – e.g., the 2010-11

school year is labeled as 2011.

        The figure shows that turnover by all three measures began to rise at the conclusion of the

2010-11 school year. Of total school exits, roughly half of the observed increase is due to an

increase in district exits, and half is due to an increase in within-district school transfers. It is

difficult to determine how much of the increase in overall turnover is attributable to the policy

change. This six-year period spans the Great Recession. Unemployment peaked in 2009 and

gradually declined over the next several years. In Appendix C, using panel data on teachers from

neighboring and other large Texas districts, we show a consistent U-shaped pattern in turnover

over this period, with turnover returning to initial levels by the final year. Thus, much of the

post-reform increase appears to be unique to HISD, suggesting the policy played at least some




                                                   16
role.

        Figure 2 provides similar information to Figure 1 but divides teachers into groups based

on our measure of quality. Teachers are assigned to the following groups based on their

placement in the quality distribution: bottom quintile (least effective), middle quintiles (quintiles

2-3-4), and top quintile (most effective). The three panels report the rates of school exit, district

exit, and school transfer for the three teacher quality groups. It is visually apparent that the

school exit rate increased more quickly in the post-policy period for the least effective teachers

relative to other teachers, driven primarily by district exits. Although instances of school

transfers are higher in the post-policy years overall, no systematic change in the relationship

between teacher quality and school switching is apparent in Figure 2.

        One might worry that the economic recovery also confounds our ability to attribute the

differential changes in exit by quality to the reform. That is, more effective teachers might

respond differently to secular changes in outside options. Here, the existing literature does not

offer much guidance. The only paper that we are aware of that considers the role of the economy

on teachers transitions by quality studies effects on selection at entry, finding that teachers who

enter during a recession are more effective on average (Nagler, Piopiunik, and West, 2015). It is

difficult to extrapolate this finding to the exit decision, and unfortunately we do not have access

to teacher quality measures for other Texas districts to offer a counterfactual. It is reassuring,

though, that turnover was trending similarly across teacher quality groups for the three years

prior to the reform despite the changing economic conditions (Figure 2). In the empirical

analyses, we more formally address this point by testing for differential pre-trends and for

sensitivity to a teacher’s level of experience.




                                                  17
5.2 Estimation results

        We estimate the models described in Section 4 to assess the significance and robustness

of the patterns illustrated in Figures 1 and 2. First, Table 2 shows results from equation (2) where

we enter the teacher-quality measure into the regressions linearly. We report results for the full

specification, which is our preferred model, but in unreported results our estimates are very

similar if we use sparser variants of the model that exclude teacher characteristics and even

school fixed effects. For each turnover outcome, we present models that aggregate the pre- and

post-policy time periods and models that fully disaggregate years. All control variables except

for the post-period indicator (or year indicators) are mean-centered in the regressions, including

the school indicator variables, so that the intercept can be interpreted as the exit rate at the mean

values of all covariates.19

        The general patterns from Figures 1 and 2 are reflected in the model estimates and

confirmed to be statistically significant in Table 2. For example, in the model of district exits,

our estimate in column (2a) implies that a teacher who is one standard deviation above average

in the quality distribution is an additional 6.3 percentage points less likely to exit the district

during the post-policy relative to the pre-policy period. The estimated impact is attenuated for

the inclusive school exit outcome in column (1a) since, as suggested by Figure 2 and shown in

column (3a), there is no change in the relationship between school switching and teacher quality.

Though we do not emphasize the pre-policy patterns in exit by quality, we find that less effective

teachers were more likely to exit the district and less likely to transfer to a new school within the




19
  The mean-centering does not affect model fit or the coefficients on the key parameters interacting time
with teacher quality. It is used only to improve interpretability of the results with regard to the overall exit
rate (Dalal and Zickar, 2012).



                                                      18
district prior to policy implementation.20

        The event time models in the table are useful for two reasons. First, they document that

there were no pre-trends in turnover by quality (i.e., the coefficients on the interactions between

teacher quality and the 2009 and 2010 indicators, which are estimated relative to the holdout year

2008, are small and statistically insignificant). Moreover, though the causal impact on overall

turnover rates is not well identified by our model, the pre-period trend is in the opposite direction

of what we see in the post period. A second benefit of the disaggregated models is that, in

principle, they allow us to test how impacts evolve over time. We do tend to find the largest and

most statistically significant impacts in the final year, but are unfortunately not sufficiently

powered to differentiate these from the estimates for the other reform years.

        Next, in Table 3 we show results from models where we replace the linear quality

measures in equation (2) with indicators for teachers’ quality-quintile groups. The indicator

identifying teachers in the middle quintiles (2-3-4) is omitted for comparison. We do not show

the intercept coefficients and interactions to preserve space. Consistent with what we show in

Figure 2, Table 3 confirms that the post-policy period is marked by a large and statistically

significant increase in the likelihood of school and district exit for low-performing teachers

relative to middle and high performing teachers. Between these two latter groups there is no

divergence in exit rates.

        Table 4 reports on the robustness of our findings to two adjustments to the analysis. First,

in the left panel, we consider the sensitivity of our results to using a 2-year exit measure for

school and district exits. That is, rather than coding exits based on looking forward just one year


20
  Studies of teacher mobility in Florida (Feng and Sass, 2017; West and Chingos, 2009) and North
Carolina (Goldhaber, Gross, and Player, 2010) find less effective teachers are more likely to exit the
school for any reason. Within HISD we find less effective teachers are no more or less likely to stay in the
same school, since the higher rate of district exit is offset by a lower rate of school transfer within HISD.


                                                     19
in the data, we look forward two years to determine whether the exiting teacher remained either

(a) out of the school or (b) out of the district. When we make this definitional change, we are no

longer able to examine outcomes for the 2013 teacher cohort. Thus, we report results from

models covering the 2008-2012 cohorts using the one-year and two-year exit definitions, which

are otherwise comparable to the results we show in Table 2. Although the overall levels of exit

are slightly lower with the two-year definition, the patterns in our estimates are very similar

across the two definitions.

       In the right panel of Table 4 we return to using our full dataset and single-year exit

measures and replicate the analysis in Table 2 (columns 1a, 2a, and 3a) after restricting the

models to include only schools that did not experience a principal change. Changes in leadership

are one mechanism by which the new evaluation system could influence the workforce.

Approximately 38 percent of schools in our analytic sample retained the same principal over the

course of the full data panel (this number is in line with data on principal tenure in Texas as

reported by Branch, Hanushek, and Rivkin, 2012). The results are generally similar to what we

report in Table 3, which suggests that principal changes are not a critical mediator of our

findings.

       Table 5 shows results from models run separately for teachers by experience level. We

divide teachers into three groups based on experience: ≤ 5 years, 6-20 years, and more than 20

years, and run the model for each turnover outcome separately for each group. Overall exit rates

increased for all experience groups and although noisily estimated, the pre-post change in the

relationship between quality and exit/transfer is similar across experience groups. The

consistency by experience is surely facilitated in part by the absence of tenure at HISD and the

fact that teachers are primarily on 1-year contracts. This result would be unlikely to generalize to




                                                 20
districts with strong tenure protections (Sartain and Steinberg, 2016).

        Finally, in Table 6 we estimate models that are otherwise the same as those shown in

Table 2, but we replace our jackknifed teacher quality measures with single-year EVAAS®

scores. The results clearly show that turnover in the post period aligns much more strongly with

our jackknifed quality measures – which are unobserved by principals and district officials, at

least directly – than with the noisier current-year EVAAS® scores, which are observed. This

result is consistent with the interpretation that personnel decisions under the reform are being

made based on more comprehensive evidence than the current-year scores.

6. Heterogeneity in effects across schools

6.1 Descriptive analysis

        In Figure 3, we replicate the information shown in Figure 1, but separately for each

school type. Recall that we divide schools into three groups based on their pre-policy location in

the distribution of average achievement in math and reading: bottom quintile (low-achieving),

middle quintiles (quintiles 2-3-4), and top quintile (high-achieving). The figure shows that while

exit rates increased across all three groups in the post-policy period, there has been a

disproportionate increase at the lowest-achieving schools.21

        Figure 4 further divides teachers by quality within the same school groups. Reading

across a row in Figure 4 holds the school-achievement group fixed, and reading down a column

holds the teacher quality group fixed. Although the graphs in the figure cut the data thinly, and

therefore noise is an issue, they suggest several interesting patterns. For instance, the first row of

graphs shows school-exit, district-exit, and school-transfer patterns at low-achieving schools, by



21
  Appendix C shows that though the U-shaped pattern in exits across years is more pronounced for
disadvantaged schools in neighboring and other large districts, the levels also return only to initial levels
and do not exceed these.


                                                      21
teacher type. The clear bars across the first row illustrate that low-performing teachers at low-

achieving schools were much more likely to exit the district in the post-policy period relative to

the pre-policy period. However, when looking at rates of school exit (black bars), the pre-post

change relative to other teachers at these schools shrinks because school-transfer rates (gray

bars) climb for middle- and high-performing teachers. Bates (2016) suggests a potential

mechanism – namely, more effective teachers under the new system have more prominent

signals of their ability than had previously been the case and can leverage these signals into more

desirable teaching positions. In the absence of true compensating wage differentials, as is typical

in the public education context, teachers will prefer positions that are more desirable along non-

pecuniary dimensions (Greenberg and McCall, 1974).22

        Turning to middle-achieving schools, there is also a more pronounced increase in district

exit rates for low-performing teachers. In this case, there is not an offsetting school-changer

effect. For high-achieving schools, school changing is relatively stable across years for all

teacher quality groups, and the difference in the pre-post increases in district exits between low-

and high-performing teachers is muted.

6.2 Estimation results

        We add interaction terms to equation (2) to test whether the patterns suggested by Figures

3 and 4 are statistically significant in our difference-in-differences specification. Table 7 presents

results from models that use the linear quality measures, like in Table 2, but with the added

interactions for school type.23 The heterogeneity parameters of interest interact the post-policy


22
   Teachers may prefer higher-achieving schools for a variety of reasons. Survey evidence suggests that
while teachers do prefer to work with higher-SES students, perhaps because this requires less effort,
simple non-pecuniary benefits that are correlated with student SES, like better administrative support and
shorter commute times, are more important in pushing teachers toward high-SES schools (Horng, 2009).
23
   Models that use teacher quintile groups in place of the linear quality measure, akin to what we show
visually in Figure 4, yield estimates that are too imprecise to be informative.


                                                    22
indicator with teacher quality and school type, where bottom- and top-quintile schools are

included in the model and compared to the holdout group of middle-quintile schools. The bottom

two rows of Table 7 show coefficient estimates and standard errors for these triple interactions.

        To interpret the findings in Table 7, first note that the post-policy effect on the

relationship between each measure of turnover and teacher quality for middle-achieving schools

is shown in row 4. By virtue of their omission from the model as the holdout group, the double

interaction of quality and the post-period indicator is the effect for these schools. The estimates

in Table 7 for middle-quintile schools are similar to the analogous global estimates shown in

Table 2. For bottom quintile schools, the triple interaction coefficients in the second-to-last row

indicate the quality effect at these schools relative to middle quintile schools. Although the

estimates are noisy and merely suggestive, they imply that some of the benefits arising from a

more negative relationship between quality and district exit (column 2) is dulled by a more

positive relationship between quality and school transfer (column 3). For top-quintile schools,

the triple-interaction estimates indicate that the net effect of the reform is essentially null. That

is, the triple-interaction terms in the final row of Table 7 offset the baseline effects in row 4.

7. Discussion and interpretation

        Given that we measure teacher quality in terms of effectiveness and validate the

predictive power of our measures over student achievement, it is reasonable to expect that gains

in student learning would align with the change in the quality composition of exiters. However,

whether or not gains are realized also depends on any impacts on the quality of teacher entrants

and on effort among teachers who remain (Rothstein, 2015). Inference is further clouded by the

high turnover rate among teachers in our sample post-ETI. Since turnover increases as much as it

does, to the extent that this turnover is attributable to the policy and adversely affects




                                                  23
achievement, it could imply net losses for students.

        In order to gauge how the turnover aspects of the policy might be expected to affect

student achievement, we estimate models of changes in school-by-grade math achievement of

the following form:

Asgt  0  ΔXsgt β1  TOsgt 2  [ BQsgt 3  MQsgt  4  TQsgt 5  UK sgt 6 ]   s   t  usgt   (3)

In equation (3), Asgt is the difference in average test scores across student cohorts in school s

and grade g from period t-1 to t.24 The focal explanatory variables are the change in the level of

math teacher turnover the two cohorts were exposed to, TOsgt , and the share of math teachers

exiting between years by quality group, where teachers are weighted by the number of students

taught. The quality groups are denoted by BQsgt , MQsgt , TQsgt , and UK sgt for bottom-quintile,

middle-quintiles, top-quintile, and unknown teacher quality, respectively. We include the

unknown category to account for math teachers without jackknifed quality measures, which

makes these four categories exhaustive. The vector ΔXsgt captures changes in student

demographic characteristics across cohorts, while  s and  t are school and year fixed effects,

respectively. This model is similar to the model estimated by Adnot et al. (2017) except we

control not only for the level of teacher turnover across cohorts, which captures changes in the

composition of teachers, but also for changes in exposure to turnover, which captures differential

disruption.

        The results are shown in Table 8. While the estimates should be viewed cautiously

because they rely on realized differences in turnover across grades, they seem quite plausible.



24
  Each observation is weighted by time t school-by-grade student enrollment, and standard errors are
clustered at the school-by-grade level.


                                                       24
The estimated coefficients on the exit shares of bottom, middle, and high quality teachers are

0.172, 0.066, and -0.169, respectively. Further supporting the validity of our quality measures,

these align closely with the average jackknifed effectiveness measures for each group, which are

-0.132, 0.012, and 0.175, respectively (converted to student standard deviation units). The

estimated coefficient on the change in turnover implies that there is a disruption effect

(Hanushek, Rivkin and Schiman, 2016; Ronfeldt, Loeb, and Wyckoff, 2013), which we estimate

to be 0.088 student-level standard deviations for a school-by-grade cell that experiences 100

percent turnover. If we attribute all of the observed increase in turnover to the reform, student

achievement would be predicted to fall by 0.012 standard deviations through this channel.

       Setting aside the potential disruption effect, we now use the estimates from Table 3

(columns 1a and 2a) to perform a back-of-the-envelope calculation of the impact of the reform

on student achievement through the changing quality of leavers. Figure 5 suitably repackages the

estimates, using them to calculate the implied shares of leavers falling into each teacher quality

quintile group before and after the reform. Specifically, we use the estimated coefficients on the

quality and time indicators, and their interactions, to predict the exit rate for each quality group

by period. We then multiply these rates by the group shares to calculate the overall exit rate and

the group exit shares. Combined with our estimates of group-specific differences in teacher

effectiveness, the pre-post shift toward more low-performing teacher exits shown in Figure 5

implies that the effectiveness of school (district) leavers falls by just 0.007 (0.007) student

standard deviations, on average.

       While small, there are three dimensions along which these back-of-the-envelope

magnitudes may be viewed as conservative. First, note that any given percentage-point

difference in the likelihood of exit across teacher groups (per Table 3) will map to a smaller




                                                  25
difference in percent shares of exits the higher is the level of turnover. Thus, the fact that

turnover rose following the reform means that the amount of increased targeting that we estimate

translates into smaller compositional changes than if overall turnover had remained constant.

Had turnover risen by only half as much (which we simulate by cutting the coefficient on the

post-policy indicator in half), the estimated achievement effects increase but remain small, at

around 0.012 (0.013) student standard deviations per turnover.

        Second, ETI was being phased in over our post-reform period, with student achievement

formally incorporated only in the most recent year of our data panel, 2013. Impacts observed in

this year may be most relevant for evaluating the policy under full implementation. If we repeat

our calculations but this time use point estimates for the policy effects from 2013 in place of the

pooled point estimates (columns 1b and 2b in Table 3), the expected average change in

achievement rises to 0.012 and 0.009 student standard deviations per turnover for school and

district exits, respectively.

        The third dimension involves the longer-term effects of the policy on workforce quality

overall. Following the logic of Winters and Cowen (2013) we iterate over 10 years, recognizing

that our estimates of policy impacts become less informative as the workforce evolves. Since we

attempt to isolate the role of the attrition channel, we hold the quality distribution of replacement

teachers fixed to match the initial distribution. The district quality distribution evolves over time

owing to differential attrition and we hold the exit rates by quintile-group fixed. Considering

variants that make alternative assumptions about the district-level turnover rate, we find effects

on average workforce quality over a 10-year horizon on the order of just 0.01 student-level

standard deviations. Note that the average workforce effects are diluted because the per-turnover

effects documented above are spread across all teachers.




                                                  26
        We conclude from these calculations that while the change in the composition of

turnovers induced by the policy is in the right direction, exits are not targeted well enough to

induce meaningful achievement gains. Our results in this regard are smaller than what one might

expect based on simulation studies that examine the potential for improved personnel policies to

raise workforce quality (Staiger and Rockoff, 2010; Winters and Cowen, 2013). One reason for

the smaller on-the-ground effect size is that the policies in the simulation studies are based on

value-added and, while careful to account for inaccuracies in the value-added estimates

themselves, they do not account for the fact that systems that have been put into place in practice

incorporate non-test-based evaluation components are less aligned with how teachers affect

student achievement (Kane et al., 2011). In any evaluation of program efficacy centered on

student achievement, personnel decisions that incorporate information from such measures will

appear to be mis-targeted.25 A second possible reason for the smaller impacts is that we study

just the first few years under the new system at HISD, and the effectiveness of the policy may

improve over time as agents gain experience with the new regime (Ahn and Vigdor, 2014).

8. Conclusion

        We study the effects on workforce composition of the introduction of a new, more-

rigorous teacher evaluation system in the Houston Independent School District. The new system

clearly affected the composition of exiting teachers, primarily by increasing the exit rate among

low performers relative to higher-performing teachers. Policy activity along this dimension has

been concentrated at low-achieving schools within the district; at high-achieving schools, there is



25
  Teacher effects on outcomes other than test scores also vary substantially and are not highly correlated
with teacher effects on test scores (Jackson, forthcoming), which is a rationale for the inclusion of
multiple measures in teacher evaluations. However, to date there is little evidence connecting the non-
test-based measures used in teacher evaluations to teacher effectiveness as measured by non-test student
outcomes.


                                                    27
little indication that the nature of personnel decisions changed in the post-policy years.

       Our analysis illustrates the potential for more rigorous teacher evaluations to improve

student outcomes via better-informed personnel decisions, but also highlights a critical challenge

associated with improving workforce quality via selective attrition. In short, in the system we

study there are simply too many poorly targeted exits in the post-policy period (by middle- and

top-performing teachers) for the net policy effect on achievement to be meaningful. There are

also other ways that the new system is designed to improve instruction and student outcomes

about which our study is silent – notably via recruitment and greater improvement among

incumbent teachers – but on the dimension of selective attrition, the compositional effects have

not been large enough to measurably improve student achievement.

       Stepping back from our narrow policy context, a possible complementary intervention

that might help stem the tide of higher-quality teacher exits would be to offer more competitive

wages that better reflect differences in teacher quality, as argued in Rothstein (2015). Increased

pay for exceptional performance is a key feature of the IMPACT program in Washington DC

(Dee and Wyckoff, 2015). Although HISD has attempted to better align pay with productivity,

its merit pay program has faced challenges and taken only partial steps in that direction (Brehm,

Imberman, and Lovenheim, 2017; Shifrer, Turley, and Heard, 2013).




                                                 28
References

Aaronson, Daniel, Lisa Barrow and William Sander. 2007. Teachers and Student Achievement in
        the Chicago Public High Schools. Journal of Labor Economics 25(1), 95-135.
Adnot, Melinda, Thomas Dee, Veronica Katz and James Wyckoff. 2017. Teacher Turnover,
        Teacher Quality, and Student Achievement in DCPS. Educational Evaluation and Policy
        Analysis 39(1), 54-76.
Ahn, Thomas and Jacob L. Vigdor. 2014. When Incentives Matter Too Much: Explaining
        Significant Responses to Irrelevant Information. NBER Working Paper No. 20321.
Bacher-Hicks, Andrew, Thomas J. Kane and Douglas O. Staiger. 2014. Validating Teacher
        Effect Estimates Using Changes in Teacher Assignments in Los Angeles. NBER
        Working Paper No. 20657.
Backes, Ben, James Cowan, Dan Goldhaber, Cory Koedel, Luke Miller and Zeyu Xu. 2016. The
        Common Core Conundrum: To What Extent Should We Worry that Changes to
        Assessments and Standards Will Affect Test-Based Measures of Teacher Performance.
        CALDER Working Paper No. 152.
Ballou, Dale, William Sanders and Paul Wright. 2004. Controlling for Student Background in
        Value-Added Assessment of Teachers. Journal of Educational and Behavioral Statistics
        29(1), 37-65.
Bates, Michael. 2016. Public and Private Learning in the Market for Teachers: Evidence from
        the Adoption of Value-Added Measures. Unpublished manuscript.
Branch, Gregory F., Eric A. Hanushek and Steven G. Rivkin. 2012. Estimating the Effect of
        Leaders on Public Sector Productivity: The Case of School Principals. NBER Working
        Paper No. 17803.
Brehm, Margaret, Scott A. Imberman and Michael F. Lovenhiem. 2017. Achievement Effects of
        Individual Performance Incentives in a Teacher Merit Pay Tournament. Labour
        Economics 44, 133-150.
Butcher, Kristin, Patrick J. McEwan and Akila Weerapana. 2014. The Effects of an Anti-Grade-
        Inflation Policy at Wellesley College. Journal of Economic Perspectives 28(3), 189-204.
Chetty, Raj, John N. Friedman and Jonah E. Rockoff. 2017. Measuring the impacts of teachers:
        Reply. American Economic Review 107(6), 1685-1717.
Chetty, Raj, John N. Friedman and Jonah E. Rockoff. 2014a. Measuring the Impacts of Teachers
        I: Evaluating Bias in Teacher Value-Added Estimates. American Economic Review
        104(9), 2593-2632.
Chetty, Raj, John N. Friedman and Jonah E. Rockoff. 2014b. Measuring the Impacts of Teachers
        II: Teacher Value-Added and Student Outcomes in Adulthood. American Economic
        Review 104(9), 2633-79.
Clotfelter, Charles T., Helen F. Ladd, Jacob L. Vigdor and Justin Wheeler. 2006. High-poverty
        Schools and the Distribution of Teachers and Principals. North Carolina Law Review 85:
        1345-1379.
Dalal, Dev K., and Michael J. Zickar. 2012. Some Common Myths about Centering Predictor
        Variables in Moderated Multiple Regression and Polynomial Regression. Organizational
        Research and Methods 15(3), 339-362.
Dee, Thomas and James Wyckoff. 2015. Incentives, Selection, and Teacher Performance:
        Evidence from IMPACT. Journal of Policy Analysis and Management 34(2), 267-297.




                                              29
Feng, Li and Tim Sass. 2017. Teacher Quality and Teacher Mobility. Education Finance and
        Policy 12(3), 396-418.
Fryer, Roland G. 2014. Injecting Charter School Best Practices into Traditional Public Schools:
        Evidence from Field Experiments. Quarterly Journal of Economics 129(3), 1355-1407.
Goldhaber, Dan, Bethany Gross and Daniel Player. 2010. Teacher Career Paths, Teacher Quality,
        and Persistence in the Classroom: Are Public Schools Keeping Their Best? Journal of
        Policy Analysis and Management 30(1), 57-87.
Greenberg, David, and John McCall. 1974. Teacher Mobility and Allocation. Journal of Human
        Resources 9(4), 480-502.
Grissom, Jason A. and Michelle Reininger. 2012. Who Comes Back? A Longitudinal Analysis of
        the Re-Entry Behavior of Exiting Teachers. Education Finance and Policy 7(4): 425-454.
Hanushek, Eric A. 2011. The Economic Value of Higher Teacher Quality. Economics of
        Education Review 30(3), 266-479.
Hanushek, Eric A., and Steven G. Rivkin. 2006. "Teacher Quality." In Handbook of the
        Economics of Education Vol. 1, ed. Eric A. Hanushek and Finis Welch, 1051-78.
        Amsterdam: North-Holland.
Hanushek, Eric A. and Steven G. Rivkin. 2010. Generalizations about Using Value-Added
        Measures of Teacher Quality. American Economic Review 100(2), 267-271.
Hanushek, Eric A., Steven G. Rivkin and Jeffrey C. Schiman. 2016. Dynamic Effects of Teacher
        Turnover on the Quality of Instruction. Economics of Education Review 55, 132-148.
Harris, Douglas N. and Tim R. Sass. 2011. Teacher Training, Teacher Quality and Student
        Achievement. Journal of Public Economics 95(7-8), 798-812.
Horng, Eileen Lai. 2009. Teacher Tradeoffs: Disentangling Teachers’ Preferences for Working
        Conditions and Student Demographics. American Educational Research Journal 46(3),
        690-717.
Imberman, Scott A. and Michael F. Lovenheim. 2015. Incentive Strength and Teacher
        Productivity: Evidence from a Group-Based Teacher Incentive Pay System. Review of
        Economics and Statistics 97(2), 364-386.
Jackson, Kirabo. (forthcoming). What do Test Scores Miss? The Importance of Teacher Effects
        on Non-Test Score Outcomes. Journal of Political Economy.
Jacob, Brian and Lars Lefgren. 2008. Can Principals Identify Effective Teachers? Evidence on
        Subjective Performance Evaluation in Education. Journal of Labor Economics 26(1),
        101-136.
Kane, Thomas J., Daniel F. McCaffrey, Trey Miller and Douglas O. Staiger. 2013. Have We
        Identified Effective Teachers? Validating Measures of Effective Teaching Using Random
        Assignment. Seattle, WA: Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation.
Kane, Thomas J., Eric S. Taylor, John H. Tyler and Amy L. Wooten. 2011. Identifying Effective
        Classroom Practices Using Student Achievement Data. Journal of Human Resources
        46(3), 587-613.
Lefgren, Lars and David P. Sims. 2012. Using Subject Test Scores Efficiently to Predict Teacher
        Value-Added. Educational Evaluation and Policy Analysis 34(1), 109-121.
Loeb, Susanna, Luke. C. Miller and James Wyckoff. 2015. Performance Screens for School
        Improvement: The Case of Teacher Tenure Reform in New York City. Educational
        Researcher 44(4), 199-212.
Nagler, Markus, Marc Piopiunik, and Martin R. West. 2015. Weak Markets, Strong Teachers:
        Recession at Career Start and Teacher Effectiveness. NBER Working Paper No. 21393.



                                              30
Rockoff, Jonah E., Douglas O. Staiger, Thomas J. Kane and Eric S. Taylor. 2012. Information
        and Employee Evaluation: Evidence from a Randomized Intervention in Public Schools.
        American Economic Review 102(7), 3184-3213.
Ronfeldt, Matthew, Susanna Loeb and James Wyckoff. 2013. How Teacher Turnover Harms
        Student Achievement. American Educational Research Journal 50(1), 4-36.
Rothstein, Jesse. 2017. Measuring the impacts of teachers: Comment. American Economic
        Review 107(6), 1656-84.
Rothstein, Jesse. 2015. Teacher Quality Policy When Supply Matters. American Economic
        Review 105(1), 100-130.
Sartain, Lauren and Matthew P. Steinberg. 2016. Teachers’ Labor Market Responses to
        Performance Evaluation Reform: Experimental Evidence from Chicago Public Schools.
        Journal of Human Resources 51(3), 615-55.
Shifrer, Dara, Ruth Lopez Turley and Holly Heard. 2013. Houston Independent School District’s
        ASPIRE Program: Estimated Effects of Receiving Financial Awards. Policy Report.
        Houston Educational Research Consortium.
Staiger, Douglas O. and Jonah E. Rockoff. 2010. Searching for Effective Teachers with
        Imperfect Information. Journal of Economic Perspectives 24(3), 97-118.
Steinberg, Matthew P. and Rachel Garret. 2016. Classroom Composition and Measured Teacher
        Performance: What do Teacher Observation Scores Really Measure? Educational
        Evaluation and Policy Analysis 38(2), 293-317.
Weisberg, Daniel, Susan Sexton, Jennifer Mulhern and David Keeling. 2009. The Widget Effect:
        Our National Failure to Acknowledge and Act on Differences in Teacher Effectiveness.
        New York: The New Teacher Project.
West, Martin R. and Mathew W. Chingos. 2009. Teacher Effectiveness, Mobility and Attrition in
        Florida. In Mathew G. Spring, ed., Performance Incentives: Their Growing Impact on
        American K-12 Education, Brookings Institution Press, 251-71.
Whitehurst, Grover J., Matthew M. Chingos, and Katharine M. Lindquist. 2014. Evaluating
        Teachers with Classroom Observations: Lessons Learned in Four Districts. Washington,
        DC: Brown Center on Education Policy at Brookings.
Winters, Marcus A. and Joshua M. Cowen. 2013. Would a Value-Added System of Retention
        Improve the Distribution of Teacher Quality? A Simulation of Alternative Policies.
        Journal of Policy Analysis and Management 32(3), 634-654.




                                             31
Figure 1. School exits, district exits, and school transfers, by year.




Notes: Black bars: school exits; Clear bars: district exits; Gray bars: school transfers.
School exits are the sum of district exits and school transfers.




                                                           32
Figure 2. School exits, district exits, and school transfers, by year and teacher-quality group.




Notes: Black bars: school exits; Clear bars: district exits; Gray bars: school transfers. School exits are the sum of district exits and school transfers. From left to
right, the graphs show turnovers for bottom-quintile, middle-quintiles (2-3-4), and top-quintile teachers in the quality distribution.




Figure 3. School exits, district exits, and school transfers, by year and pre-policy achievement group of school.




Notes: Black bars: school exits; Clear bars: district exits; Gray bars: school transfers. School exits are the sum of district exits and school transfers. From left to
right, the graphs show turnovers at bottom-quintile, middle-quintiles (2-3-4), and top-quintile schools in the pre-policy (average of reading and math)
achievement distribution.




                                                                                   33
Figure 4. School exits, district exits, and school transfers, by year, pre-policy achievement group of school, and teacher-quality group.




Notes: Black bars: school exits; Clear bars: district exits; Gray bars: school transfers. School exits are the sum of district exits and school transfers. Row 1:
bottom-quintile schools; Row 2: middle-quintiles schools; Row 3: top-quintile schools; Column 1: bottom-quintile teachers; Column 2: middle-quintiles teachers;
Column 3: top-quintile teachers.




                                                                               34
Figure 5. School and district exits, by teacher-quality group in the pre- and post-policy periods.

 School exits:




                 Pre-policy                                                         Post-policy

 District exits:




                 Pre-policy                                                         Post-policy

Notes: Black: bottom-quintile teachers; Clear: middle-quintiles teachers (quintiles 2-3-4); Gray: top-quintile
teachers. The figures are derived from model-based estimates of the proportions of exiting teachers by quality-
quintile group in the pre- and post-policy periods, for school and district exiters, taking the pre- and post-policy total
exit rates as given.




                                                           35
Table 1. Summary statistics for pre-policy years 2007-08 through 2009-10.
                                                     Schools by achievement level
                                              Low              Middle                                   High
Student characteristics
Average achievement z-scores                 -0.295             -0.061                                  0.484
Percent free lunch                           55.3%              57.6%                                  33.4%
Percent reduced price lunch                   8.8%              11.0%                                  11.0%
Percent black                                40.8%              20.7%                                  20.1%
Percent Hispanic                             56.9%              75.3%                                  47.2%
Percent ESL                                  16.7%               8.1%                                   4.8%
Number of grade 3-8 students tested          25,125             86,628                                 44,560
Math teacher characteristics
Jackknifed quality measure                   -0.012              0.047                                 0.098
Percent bottom quintile                      21.5%              21.4%                                  14.5%
Percent top quintile                         14.1%              21.2%                                  21.0%
Years of experience                            9.9                10.7                                  12.0
Percent with 1 to 5 years experience         34.6%              33.5%                                  30.6%
Percent with master’s degree                 34.6%              30.5%                                  28.5%
Percent with doctoral degree                  2.5%               1.4%                                   1.3%
Number of teacher-years                        483               2508                                    970
Math teacher turnover
Exited the school in t+1                     13.7%              13.7%                                  12.1%
Exited the district in t+1                    8.5%               9.0%                                   8.8%
Transferred to another school in t+1          5.2%               4.7%                                   3.3%
Notes: The columns present summary statistics for analysis schools divided into three groups based on pre-policy
achievement levels, averaged across reading and math: bottom quintile, middle three quintiles, and top quintile. The
bottom-quintile sample is smaller because treated schools in Fryer’s 2014 study are omitted and also because low-
achieving schools have lower enrollment on average. School exits are the sum of district exits and school transfers.
As described in the text, our analytic dataset excludes first-year teachers and correspondingly these teachers are also
excluded from the teacher summary statistics.




                                                          36
Table 2. Impacts of the new evaluation system on turnover, by linear math teacher quality.
                                                         Dependent variable is an indicator for:
                                        School exit                  District exit                 School transfer
                                     (1a)         (1b)           (2a)            (2b)            (3a)          (3b)

 Intercept                          0.125          0.148           0.085        0.105          0.040          0.043
                                  (0.006)**      (0.011)**       (0.004)**    (0.009)**      (0.004)**      (0.007)**
 Intercept*POST                     0.137                          0.083                       0.054
                                  (0.012)**                      (0.008)**                   (0.008)**
              Intercept*2009                       -0.031                       -0.035                         0.003
                                                 (0.015)**                    (0.012)**                      (0.011)
              Intercept*2010                       -0.035                       -0.026                        -0.009
                                                 (0.015)**                    (0.012)**                      (0.009)
              Intercept*2011                        0.062                        0.025                         0.037
                                                 (0.019)**                     (0.014)*                     (0.013)**
              Intercept*2012                        0.119                        0.050                         0.069
                                                 (0.018)**                    (0.013)**                     (0.013)**
              Intercept*2013                        0.172                        0.123                         0.049
                                                 (0.019)**                    (0.017)**                     (0.012)**

 Teacher quality                    -0.008         -0.025          -0.034        -0.029        0.026          0.004
                                   (0.015)        (0.032)        (0.012)**      (0.027)      (0.009)**       (0.017)
 Teacher quality*POST               -0.061                         -0.063                      0.002
                                  (0.021)**                      (0.019)**                    (0.016)
       Teacher quality*2009                         0.024                       -0.009                        0.033
                                                  (0.036)                      (0.030)                       (0.024)
       Teacher quality*2010                         0.024                       -0.002                        0.027
                                                  (0.037)                      (0.031)                       (0.023)
       Teacher quality*2011                        -0.001                       -0.042                        0.040
                                                  (0.039)                      (0.034)                       (0.028)
       Teacher quality*2012                        -0.020                       -0.047                        0.027
                                                  (0.044)                      (0.038)                       (0.032)
       Teacher quality*2013                        -0.074                       -0.090                        0.016
                                                 (0.043)*                     (0.038)**                      (0.022)
 Teacher characteristics              X              X              X              X             X              X
 School fixed effects                 X              X              X              X             X              X
  R-squared                          0.101          0.108          0.081           0.089          0.078         0.080
  N (Teacher-year)                   7800            7800          7800            7800            7800          7800
Notes: ** Denotes statistical significance at the 5 percent level; * Denotes statistical significance at the 10 percent
level. Standard errors clustered by school are reported in parentheses. Observations for teachers during the 2011,
2012, and 2013 school years are coded as “POST” in columns 1a, 2a, and 3a. In these columns, the parameters for
the variables interacted with POST are estimated relative to the pre-period years. In columns 1b, 2b, and 3b, the
year-specific parameters are estimated relative to 2008, which is the first year of our data panel. All variables in the
regressions other than the post indicator (or year indicators) are mean-centered so the intercept can be interpreted as
the exit rate at the mean values of all covariates. The coefficients for all variables other than the teacher quality
measures and the intercept, both interacted with time, are excluded for brevity.




                                                            37
Table 3. Impacts of the new evaluation system on turnover, by math teacher quality quintile.
                                                      Dependent variable is an indicator for:
                                        School exit               District exit                 School transfer
                                     (1a)         (1b)        (2a)            (2b)            (3a)          (3b)

 Bottom quintile                    0.012           0.012           0.027      0.033          -0.015        -0.021
                                   (0.015)          0.030        (0.013)**    (0.024)       (0.008)*       (0.017)
 Top quintile                       0.006          -0.012          -0.009      0.010           0.015        -0.023
                                   (0.015)        (0.025)         (0.011)     (0.023)        (0.010)       (0.015)

 Bottom quintile*POST                0.076                         0.089                      -0.013
                                  (0.023)**                      (0.022)**                   (0.013)
 Top quintile*POST                  -0.007                         0.003                      -0.010
                                   (0.023)                        (0.020)                    (0.016)

 Bottom quintile*2009                             0.000                         -0.010                       0.010
                                                 (0.038)                       (0.032)                     (0.022)
 Bottom quintile*2010                             0.000                         -0.007                       0.007
                                                 (0.037)                       (0.032)                     (0.020)
 Bottom quintile*2011                             0.050                          0.068                      -0.018
                                                 (0.038)                     (0.034)**                     (0.022)
 Bottom quintile*2012                             0.074                          0.070                       0.004
                                                 (0.045)                      (0.039)*                     (0.028)
 Bottom quintile*2013                             0.109                          0.114                      -0.005
                                                (0.051)**                    (0.047)**                     (0.025)

 Top quintile*2009                                  0.032                      -0.030                       0.062
                                                  (0.036)                     (0.027)                     (0.026)**
 Top quintile*2010                                  0.023                      -0.026                       0.049
                                                  (0.033)                     (0.028)                     (0.022)**
 Top quintile*2011                                  0.023                      -0.006                       0.029
                                                  (0.036)                     (0.032)                      (0.025)
 Top quintile*2012                                  0.028                      -0.010                       0.038
                                                  (0.036)                     (0.033)                      (0.027)
 Top quintile*2013                                 -0.014                      -0.032                       0.018
                                                  (0.045)                     (0.041)                      (0.027)
 Teacher characteristics              X             X               X            X             X              X
 School fixed effects                 X             X               X            X             X              X
 R-squared                           0.102         0.110          0.083          0.092          0.078        0.081
 N (Teacher-year)                    7800          7800           7800           7800           7800          7800
Notes: The specifications are the same as in Table 2, other than that indicators for the top and bottom quintiles
replace the continuous quality variable. The omitted group includes teachers in quality quintiles 2, 3, and 4. See
notes to Table 2.




                                                            38
Table 4. Tests for robustness of impacts of the new evaluation system on turnover, by linear math teacher quality.
                                                                                                                           No principal change
                                        1-year exit definition                2-year exit definition
                                                                                                                           1-year exit definition
                                         2008-2012 cohorts                     2008-2012 cohorts
                                                                                                                            2008-2013 cohorts
                                    School exit       District exit       School exit       District exit      School exit     District exit School transfer
                                       (1a)               (2a)               (1b)               (2b)              (3)              (4)            (5)

 Intercept                            0.128              0.086              0.124              0.079              0.104             0.077              0.027
                                    (0.005)**          (0.003)**          (0.005)**          (0.003)**          (0.006)**         (0.005)**          (0.005)**
 Intercept*POST                       0.113              0.058              0.112              0.051              0.102             0.064              0.038
                                    (0.013)**          (0.009)**          (0.013)**          (0.008)**          (0.013)**         (0.010)**          (0.010)**

 Teacher quality                      -0.008             -0.031             -0.011             -0.031             -0.004            -0.033              0.029
                                      (0.015)          (0.012)**            (0.015)          (0.012)**           (0.021)           (0.018)*          (0.011)**
 Teacher quality* POST                -0.037             -0.046             -0.034             -0.041             -0.069            -0.048             -0.021
                                      (0.024)          (0.020)**            (0.024)          (0.019)**          (0.028)**         (0.023)**           (0.021)
 Teacher characteristics                 X                  X                  X                  X                  X                 X                  X
 School fixed effects                    X                  X                  X                  X                  X                 X                  X
 R-squared                             0.097              0.078              0.098              0.077              0.085             0.073              0.067
 N (Teacher-year)                      6656               6656               6656               6656               3054              3054               3054
Notes: The estimates in this table are comparable to estimates in Table 2 and the notes to Table 2 apply. In the left panel, we examine teacher cohorts in 2008-12
only, for whom we can define exits looking forward both 1 and 2 years in the data, to examine the sensitivity of our findings to the exit definition holding all else
equal. In the right panel, we return to using our primary single-year exit definition and 2008-13 cohorts, but restrict the sample to include only schools in which
there was not a principal change over the course of the data panel.




                                                                                 39
Table 5. Impacts of the new evaluation system on turnover by teacher experience and linear math teacher quality.
                                                School exit                                District exit                             School transfer
                                   Exp ≤ 5      5< Exp≤20       Exp>20         Exp≤ 5      5<Exp≤20         Exp>20        Exp≤ 5       5< Exp≤20       Exp>20
                                    (1a)           (1b)          (1c)           (2a)           (2b)          (2c)          (3a)           (3b)          (3c)

 Intercept                          0.187          0.102         0.084          0.133         0.062          0.074         0.054          0.040           0.010
                                  (0.009)**      (0.007)**     (0.013)**      (0.008)**     (0.005)**      (0.012)**     (0.007)**      (0.005)**       (0.006)*
 Intercept*POST                     0.136          0.132         0.158          0.081         0.072          0.115         0.054          0.060           0.043
                                  (0.021)**      (0.013)**     (0.027)**      (0.017)**     (0.010)**      (0.025)**     (0.015)**      (0.010)**      (0.012)**

 Teacher quality                     -0.008        -0.012          0.045        -0.039        -0.043          0.042          0.031        0.031          0.004
                                    (0.030)       (0.020)        (0.034)       (0.025)      (0.014)**       (0.034)       (0.019)*      (0.014)**       (0.017)
 Teacher quality*POST                -0.077        -0.054         -0.101        -0.065        -0.054         -0.109         -0.012        0.000          0.008
                                    (0.050)      (0.029)*       (0.056)*       (0.042)      (0.023)**      (0.055)**       (0.032)       (0.023)        (0.023)
 Teacher characteristics              X              X             X              X             X              X             X              X             X
 School fixed effects                 X              X             X              X             X              X             X              X             X
 R-squared                            0.153        0.118          0.246          0.138         0.093         0.208         0.116          0.110          0.279
 N (Teacher-year)                     2409          4174           1217          2409           4174          1217          2409          4174           1217
Notes: The estimates in this table are comparable to estimates in Table 2 and the notes to Table 2 apply. Each column reports results from a separate regression
estimated for teachers by experience group, where teachers are divided into three groups: ≤ 5 years, 6-20 years, and more than 20 years experience.




                                                                               40
Table 6. Impacts of the new evaluation system on turnover, by linear math teacher quality and
using current-year EVAAS® scores in place of jackknifed measures.
                                           School exit       District exit     School transfer
                                              (1)                 (2)                (3)

 Intercept                                           0.125                  0.085                  0.040
                                                   (0.006)**              (0.004)**              (0.004)**
 Intercept*POST                                      0.136                  0.082                  0.054
                                                   (0.011)**              (0.008)**              (0.008)**

 Current-year EVAAS                                  -0.015                 -0.015                 0.000
                                                   (0.006)**              (0.005)**               (0.004)
 Current-year EVAAS*POST                             -0.021                 -0.023                 0.002
                                                   (0.010)**              (0.008)**               (0.006)
 Teacher characteristics                                X                      X                      X
 School fixed effects                                   X                      X                      X
 R-squared                                            0.103                 0.079                  0.077
 N (Teacher-year)                                     7800                  7800                   7800
Notes: The estimates in this table are comparable to estimates in Table 2 and the notes to Table 2 apply. The
specification is the same as in Table 2 but replaces the jackknifed quality measure with the current-year EVAAS®
score.




                                                       41
Table 7. Heterogeneous impacts of the new evaluation system on turnover by school type and
linear math teacher quality.
                                                       School exit          District exit         School transfer
                                                          (1)                   (2)                    (3)

 Intercept                                                 0.126                0.085                    0.041
                                                        (0.005)**            (0.004)**                (0.004)**
 Quality                                                  -0.006               -0.035                    0.029
                                                         (0.018)             (0.014)**                (0.011)**
 Intercept*POST                                            0.138                0.083                    0.054
                                                        (0.011)**            (0.008)**                (0.007)**
 Quality*POST                                             -0.081               -0.078                   -0.003
                                                        (0.026)**            (0.022)**                  (0.021)
 Bottom quintile school *POST                              0.094                0.051                    0.043
                                                        (0.035)**            (0.026)**                 (0.025)*
 Top quintile school*POST                                 -0.070               -0.020                   -0.050
                                                        (0.023)**             (0.018)                 (0.014)**
 Bottom quintile school*Teacher quality                    0.003               -0.014                    0.017
                                                         (0.046)              (0.033)                   (0.031)
 Top quintile school*Teacher quality                      -0.025                0.010                   -0.035
                                                         (0.037)              (0.029)                  (0.020)*
 Bottom quintile school*quality* POST                     -0.029               -0.076                    0.047
                                                         (0.056)              (0.066)                   (0.057)
 Top quintile school*quality* POST                         0.127                0.094                    0.034
                                                        (0.051)**            (0.044)**                  (0.033)
 Teacher characteristics                                    X                     X                       X
 School fixed effects                                       X                     X                       X
 R-squared                                                0.105                 0.084                   0.082
 N (Teacher year)                                         7800                  7800                    7800
Notes: ** Denotes statistical significance at the 5 percent level; * Denotes statistical significance at the 10 percent
level. Standard errors clustered by school are reported in parentheses. The omitted school type is from the middle
quintiles (2-3-4) of the achievement distribution. Observations for teachers during the 2011, 2012, and 2013 school
years are coded as “POST.”




                                                          42
Table 8. Estimated effects of turnover on student achievement.
                                         Dependent variable: Difference in average test scores
                                                 across cohorts within a school-grade

 ΔTurnover                                                                      -0.088
                                                                              (0.025)**
 Share bottom-quintile exit                                                      0.172
                                                                              (0.055)**
 Share middle-quintiles exit                                                     0.066
                                                                               (0.035)*
 Share top-quintile exit                                                        -0.169
                                                                              (0.061)**
 Share unknown-quality exit                                                      0.137
                                                                              (0.056)**
 School-grade characteristics                                                      X
 School fixed effects                                                              X
 R-squared                                                                      0.093
 N (School-grade-year)                                                          2824
Notes: ** Denotes statistical significance at the 5 percent level; * Denotes statistical significance at the 10 percent
level. Standard errors clustered at the school-by-grade level are reported in parentheses. The turnover shares are
scaled by teachers’ instructional percentages in the given subject prior to exit. The quality groupings, inclusive of
the unknown quality group (i.e., teachers without jackknifed quality measures), are exhaustive.




                                                           43
Appendix A. Additional background on HISD policies

The teacher evaluation reform: ETI

       One of the priorities of the ETI reform was to encourage retention of more effective

educators and exit of less effective educators. Combined with hiring better teachers and offering

individualized training to existing teachers, the hope was to shift the distribution of teacher

effectiveness in the district. Figure A1 is taken from “Teacher appraisal systems: how one urban

school district is linking effective teaching to student achievement,” presented by Superintendent

Grier at the American Association of School Administrators meeting on February 17, 2012. It

nicely illustrates the role of the three complementary levers.

       Selective retention/exit has continued to be an important focus in HISD. For example, the

retention rate of highly effective teachers and exit rate of ineffective teachers are among the set

of key indicators of progress reported in the annual Facts and Figures brief released by HISD to

the public. These indicators were first included in the 2012-13 brief and, in that year, statistics

were reported for differential turnover following the 2010-11 and 2011-12 school years.



The merit pay system: ASPIRE

       The merit pay system was first introduced in 2006-07. In Table A1, we show the

evolution of the provisions that are relevant to teachers of core subjects in grades 3-8 over our

study period. As far as generosity of the awards for recipients, amounts were increased in 2008-

09 and then reduced in 2011-12, before another increase in 2012-13. The share of teachers

receiving any award fell slightly in 2010-11, due to the introduction of a teacher attendance

requirement and minimum threshold for student growth. There were more dramatic falls in the

share in 2011-12, when performance targets jumped, and 2012-13, when low student growth




                                                  44
precluded teachers from receiving campus awards. Teachers experienced these changes with a

lag, since awards are announced and paid the following year (regardless of whether the teacher is

still an employee).

       Figure A2 shows the implications for the math teachers who are the subject of our

empirical analyses. In the figure teachers are assigned to quality quintiles using the jackknife

method described in the main text. The first graph shows that award receipt was nearly universal

in the pre-period. The share receiving awards fell steadily across years after the reform, with

greater drops for the lower quality groups. The fluctuations in average award amounts across

years in the middle graph primarily reflect statutory changes to the generosity of the maximums

(Table A1), with the cut in 2011-12 and the increase in 2012-13. Finally, the last graph shows

average award amounts unconditional on receipt. Here it is clear that the changes to provisions in

2010-11 had minimal effects, while the subsequent changes ultimately lowered average awards

for bottom quintile teachers by more than two-thirds and for middle-quintile teachers by almost

one-third. The top quintile was more or less held harmless on this dimension.




                                                 45
Figure A1. Overview of the ETI reform.




                                         46
Figure A2. ASPIRE Awards, by year and teacher-quality group.




Notes: Black bars: bottom-quintile teachers; Clear bars: middle-quintile teachers; Gray bars: top-quintile teachers in the quality distribution. From left to right,
the graphs show the share of teachers receiving awards, the average award per recipient, and the average award per teacher unconditional on receipt.




                                                                                  47
Table A1. ASPIRE program details.
                  Campus Performance             Individual Performance
                         Awards                           Awards                                           Awards
                                                                               Ineligible      Award
                 Distributional    Award         Distributional   Award                                   Announced
                                                                               Teachers         Max
                    Targets          Max            Targets        Max                                         /
                                                                                                             Paid
 2007-08      Top 50% in campus        $2,600    Top 50% in       $5,000         None          $7,600      Nov-08/
             growth within HISD,                    student                                                 Jan-09
              plus bonuses for top               growth, pro-
             50% in growth within                  rated per
               comparable Texas                    subject if
                schools and for                     teaches
                attaining a state               multiple tested
              accountability rating                 subjects
               above Acceptable
 2008-09       Same as prior year      $3,100    Same as prior    $7,000         None          $10,100     Nov-09/
                                                    year                                                   Jan-10
 2009-10       Same as prior year      $3,100    Same as prior    $7,000         None          $10,100     Nov-10/
                                                    year                                                   Jan-11
 2010-11       Same as prior year      $3,100    Same as prior    $7,000     Those missing     $10,100     Nov-11/
                                                    year                       >10 days or                 Jan-12
                                                                                with low
                                                                             student growth
 2011-12       Top 20% in campus       $2,000     Top 15% in      $7,000      Same as prior    $9,000      Nov-12/
              growth within HISD,               student growth                    year                     Jan-13
              plus bonuses for high
             growth or achievement
             in shares scoring above
               national medians in
               reading and/or math
 2012-13        Same as prior year     $3,000    Same as prior    $10,000       In addition,    $13,000    Nov-13/
                                                    year                        those rated                Jan-14
                                                                                   below
                                                                                 effective
Notes: Table constructed by the authors using various sources of information published by HISD.




                                                       48
Appendix B. Validating our teacher quality measures

        In order to validate our teacher quality measures, we test whether changes in teacher

quality at the school-by-grade level caused by staffing changes accurately predict changes in

student test scores, as would be expected if our quality measures are unbiased (Chetty, Friedman

and Rockoff, 2014a).26 We implement the forecasting test by estimating the following regression

model, weighted by time t school-by-grade enrollment:

Asgkt   0  Vˆsgkt
                     1  ΔXsgt γ 2  t   sgkt                                                         (B1)

The dependent variable, Asgkt , is the change in the average test score on the statewide exam

(standardized by grade and year) between years t and t-1 for school s and grade g in subject k.

Only students taught by a teacher with an available effectiveness measure at time t are included

in the regression and used to calculate Asgkt . In addition to year effects, the control set includes


Vˆsgkt
     , which is the change in average measured teacher quality, and ΔXsgt , which captures the

change in student demographics between years t and t-1.

        For the purposes of the validation exercise, we make adjustments to the way teacher

quality is measured, which is why the variable is denoted with a prime in equation (B1). First, we

rescale teachers’ EVAAS® scores to student exam score units. This permits one-to-one

forecasting between the teacher quality metrics and the dependent variable. Then, we calculate

leave-two-year-out jackknife estimates, where neither the time t nor the t-1 teacher scores are




26
  There is an ongoing debate between Chetty, Friedman, and Rockoff (2017) and Rothstein (2017) about the
informational value of this test. Rothstein (2017) implements various parametric solutions to potential problems and
concludes that the necessary assumptions do not hold. Chetty, Friedman, and Rockoff (2017) argue that his
parametric approaches likely generate biases themselves, and that non-parametric tests do not indicate any problems
with the methodology. They further note that even Rothstein’s estimates of forecast bias range from just 5-15
percent across specifications, which still implies that these are meaningful measures of effectiveness.


                                                         49
included in Vikt- (from equation 1 in the main text). This is important to remove the influence of

the mechanical correlation between the change in average student test scores between those two

periods and the estimation error in the annual teacher scores. We conduct the test for both purely

backward looking quality measures and, to increase precision, for measures that also allow post-

period performance data to inform the current-year quality measure (as in Chetty, Friedman, and

Rockoff, 2014a). Jackknifing based on pre- and post-period data is not a problem for this

exercise because internally valid estimates of forecasting bias can still be obtained even if

survivors are over-sampled.

        We test the null hypothesis  1  1 separately for math and reading and report the results

in Table B1. We cannot reject that the coefficient on the change in teacher quality is unity in any

of the models. The larger standard errors in the reading regressions leave open the possibility of

non-negligible bias and suggest more individual-level prediction errors, leading to our focus on

math in the main text (though we provide comparable results for reading in Appendix D).


Table B1. Test for bias in jackknifed teacher quality measures.
                                                              P-value                       Number of school-
                                             ˆ1
                                                             (H0: γ1=1)                      grade-year cells
                                            (1)                  (2)                               (3)
 Backward looking
  Grades 4-8, math                         0.833                0.12                                2612
                                          (0.106)
  Grades 4-8, reading                      0.946                0.74                                2630
                                          (0.163)
 Backward and forward looking
  Grades 4-8, math                         0.999                0.99                                3413
                                          (0.077)
  Grades 4-8, reading                      0.974                0.85                                3423
                                          (0.131)
Notes: Coefficients and standard errors as estimated by equation (B1) are reported in column (1). Column (2) reports
p-values from tests of the null hypothesis of forecast-unbiasedness, and column (3) reports the number of school-by-
grade-by-year cells used in the regressions. The backward-looking measures include only teacher scores from year t-
2 and earlier. The backward and forward-looking measures also include scores from year t+1 and later.




                                                        50
Appendix C. Statewide trends in teacher turnover

        The period we study is one where economic conditions were not stable. With

unemployment rates peaking in September 2009, and then steadily declining after, our post-

policy period overlaps with an economic recovery. To explore how the level of teacher turnover

varied with economic conditions in Texas, we compiled a statewide panel of personnel and

campus data.

        The personnel files are from the Texas Public Education Information Management

System (PEIMS) and include all full-FTE teachers in traditional public schools that cover any

grade 3-8. In order to classify schools by achievement levels comparably to our analysis of

HISD, we combine TAKS pass rate data for three springs (2007-08, 2008-09 and 2009-10). The

pass rate is the average across math and reading for all grades. Consistent with our analysis of

HISD data, we divide schools into three groups based on their placement in their respective

districts’ pass rate distributions: bottom quintile, middle quintiles, and top quintile.

        In Figure C1 we show trends in the three measures of turnover we focus on in our

analysis of HISD – school exits, district exits, and school changes (within district) – across three

samples of Texas school districts: (a) all districts other than HISD, (b) the five largest districts

excluding HISD, and (c) districts adjacent to HISD. The state data also allow us to track exits

from Texas, which we additionally include in the charts. Across all three samples, there is

evidence of a U-shaped pattern in turnovers. Notably, though turnover rates rise smoothly over

the last years of the period, they tend to return to the levels in the initial year. This differs from

the case for HISD shown in Figure 1, where rates jump up in 2011 and are well above the pre-

policy baseline by 2013.




                                                   51
       Figures C2a, C2b and C2c are comparable to Figure 3. Each figure shows turnover rates

broken down by school achievement group (within district) for one of the three district samples,

as indicated by the letter (a, b or c). As in HISD, the U-shape is more marked for lower achieving

schools. However, once again, turnover rates return only to initial levels by the end of the period

whereas in HISD they far exceed them, with the most striking increase at low-achieving HISD

schools.




                                                52
Figure C1. School exits, district exits, state exits, and school transfers, by year and Texas district subsample.




Notes: Black bars: school exits; Clear bars: district exits; Dark gray bars: state exits; Light gray bars: school transfers (within district). School exits are the sum of
district exits and school transfers. From left to right, the graphs show turnovers at all Texas school districts other than HISD, at the five-largest school districts
excluding HISD (Dallas, Cypress-Fairbanks, Northside, Austin, and Fort Worth), and at districts adjacent to HISD (Cypress-Fairbanks, Spring Branch, Katy,
Alief, Stafford, Fort Bend, Alvin, Pearland, Pasadena, Galena Park, Sheldon, Humble, Aldine). The turnover rates are teacher-weighted so they can be interpreted
as the likelihood of exit for the typical teacher in each sample of districts.




Figure C2a. School exits, district exits, state exits, and school transfers, by year and school achievement group, for all Texas
school districts excluding HISD.




Notes: Black bars: school exits; Clear bars: district exits; Dark gray bars: state exits; Light gray bars: school transfers (within district). School exits are the sum of
district exits and school transfers. From left to right, the graphs show turnovers at bottom-quintile, middle-quintiles (2-3-4), and top-quintile schools. Districts
included: all Texas districts other than HISD. The turnover rates are teacher-weighted so they can be interpreted as the likelihood of exit for the typical teacher in
the sample of districts.




                                                                                   53
Figure C2b. School exits, district exits, state exits, and school transfers, by year and school achievement group, five largest
school districts in Texas excluding HISD.




Notes: Black bars: school exits; Clear bars: district exits; Dark gray bars: state exits; Light gray bars: school transfers (within district). School exits are the sum of
district exits and school transfers. From left to right, the graphs show turnovers at bottom-quintile, middle-quintiles (2-3-4), and top-quintile schools. Districts
included: Dallas, Cypress-Fairbanks, Northside, Austin, and Fort Worth. The turnover rates are teacher-weighted so they can be interpreted as the likelihood of
exit for the typical teacher in the sample of districts.



Figure C2c. School exits, district exits, state exits, and school transfers, by year and school achievement group, school districts
in Texas adjacent to HISD.




Notes: Black bars: school exits; Clear bars: district exits; Dark gray bars: state exits; Light gray bars: school transfers (within district). School exits are the sum of
district exits and school transfers. From left to right, the graphs show turnovers at bottom-quintile, middle-quintiles (2-3-4), and top-quintile schools. Districts
included: Cypress-Fairbanks, Spring Branch, Katy, Alief, Stafford, Fort Bend, Alvin, Pearland, Pasadena, Galena Park, Sheldon, Humble, and Aldine. The
turnover rates are teacher-weighted so they can be interpreted as the likelihood of exit for the typical teacher in the sample of districts.




                                                                                   54
Appendix D. Supplementary tables

         Because of the data limitation described in the text, for the 2013 cohort we must code

moves to non-teaching positions as exits. For consistency in the analysis in the main text, we

code moves to non-teaching positions as exits in all years. Table D1 shows results comparable to

our main results in Table 2 but restricted to data from teacher cohorts between 2008 and 2012.

For these cohorts we can estimate models of exit where (a) moves to non-teaching positions are

treated as exits and (b) moves to non-teaching positions are not treated as exits.

         Table D1 shows that this data limitation has no bearing on our findings, as results using

both coding schemes are very similar for the 2008-2012 cohorts. This can be seen by comparing

the (a) and (b) columns for each type of turnover. Note that the overall quality coefficients for

the post-policy period are lower than in Table 2 because the policy impacts were highest in 2013,

which is excluded from these models.

Table D1. Turnover models with linear math teacher quality. Standard versus alternative exit
definitions for teachers in 2008-2012.
                                                          Dependent variable is an indicator for:
                                         School exit                 District exit                 School transfer
                                      (1a)         (1b)           (2a)           (2b)            (3a)          (3b)

 Intercept                           0.125          0.119           0.085         0.071          0.040          0.047
                                   (0.005)**      (0.005)**       (0.004)**     (0.003)**      (0.004)**      (0.004)**
 Intercept*POST                      0.113          0.110           0.058         0.050          0.055          0.063
                                   (0.013)**      (0.013)**       (0.009)**     (0.008)**      (0.009)**      (0.010)**

 Teacher quality                     -0.008         -0.005          -0.031        -0.032         0.024          0.025
                                    (0.015)        (0.015)        (0.012)**     (0.011)**      (0.009)**      (0.010)**
 Teacher quality*POST                -0.037         -0.034          -0.046        -0.047         0.010          0.011
                                    (0.024)        (0.024)        (0.020)**     (0.019)**       (0.018)        (0.018)

 Alternative exit definition                          X                             X                              X
 Teacher characteristics               X              X              X              X              X               X
 School fixed effects                  X              X              X              X              X               X

 R-Squared                            0.097           0.099        0.078          0.084          0.089           0.088
 N (Teacher-year)                     6656            6656          6656           6656           6656            6656
Notes: Standard errors clustered by school are reported in parentheses. Observations for teachers during the 2011
and 2012 school years are coded as “POST”. Parameters for the variables interacted with POST are estimated
relative to the pre-period years. All variables in the regressions other than the post indicator are mean-centered so
the intercept can be interpreted as the exit rate at the mean values of all covariates. The coefficients for all variables
other than the teacher quality measures and the intercept, both interacted with time, are excluded for brevity.


                                                             55
         Table D2 replicates our main findings from Table 2 but using teacher quality measures

based on student test-score growth in reading instead of math. The results are qualitatively

similar to what we show for math. Note that there is substantial overlap in the reading and math

teacher samples (that is, there are many teachers who are responsible for student instruction in

math and reading – e.g., self-contained elementary teachers).


Table D2. Impacts of the new evaluation system on turnover, by linear reading teacher quality.
                                                        Dependent variable is an indicator for:
                                       School exit                  District exit                 School transfer
                                    (1a)         (1b)           (2a)            (2b)            (3a)          (3b)

 Intercept                         0.124         0.146            0.087        0.108          0.040           0.037
                                 (0.005)**     (0.010)**        (0.004)**    (0.009)**      (0.004)**       (0.007)**
 Intercept*POST                    0.127                          0.079                       0.048
                                 (0.011)**                      (0.008)**                   (0.007)**
              Intercept*2009                     -0.015                        -0.029                           0.014
                                                (0.015)                      (0.012)**                        (0.010)
              Intercept*2010                     -0.049                        -0.034                          -0.015
                                               (0.014)**                     (0.012)**                       (0.008)*
              Intercept*2011                      0.051                         0.028                           0.024
                                               (0.018)**                     (0.013)**                       (0.012)*
              Intercept*2012                      0.106                         0.038                           0.068
                                               (0.018)**                     (0.014)**                      (0.013)**
              Intercept*2013                      0.176                         0.119                           0.057
                                               (0.020)**                     (0.017)**                      (0.011)**

 Teacher quality                    0.013         0.039            0.001        0.042         0.012           -0.003
                                  (0.018)        (0.042)         (0.015)       (0.032)       (0.011)         (0.023)
 Teacher quality*POST              -0.080                         -0.109                      0.029
                                 (0.030)**                      (0.027)**                    (0.018)
       Teacher quality*2009                      -0.029                        -0.059                         0.030
                                                (0.052)                       (0.037)                        (0.033)
       Teacher quality*2010                      -0.027                        -0.043                         0.015
                                                (0.048)                       (0.039)                        (0.028)
       Teacher quality*2011                      -0.075                        -0.115                         0.040
                                                (0.055)                      (0.044)**                       (0.027)
       Teacher quality*2012                      -0.059                        -0.119                         0.060
                                                (0.063)                      (0.050)**                       (0.045)
       Teacher quality*2013                      -0.163                        -0.223                         0.060
                                               (0.063)**                     (0.053)**                      (0.036)*
 Teacher characteristics             X             X               X             X              X              X
 School fixed effects                X             X               X             X              X              X
 R-squared                          0.096        0.106           0.076         0.088         0.080           0.084
 N (Teacher-year)                   7863          7863           7863          7863           7863           7863
Notes: The estimates in this table are comparable to estimates in Table 2 and the notes to Table 2 apply.




                                                           56
         Table D3 replicates our main results in Table 3 but using teacher quality measures based

on student growth in reading instead of math. The results are qualitatively similar, although in

the reading models there is some evidence that top-quintile teacher exit rates declined post-

policy. Note that there is substantial overlap in the reading and math teacher samples (that is,

many teachers are responsible for student instruction in math and reading – e.g., self-contained

elementary teachers).

Table D3. Impacts of the new evaluation system on turnover, by reading teacher quality quintile.
                                        School exit                   District exit             School transfer
                                     (1a)         (1b)             (2a)           (2b)        (3a)          (3b)

 Bottom quintile                    -0.021         -0.043          -0.018        -0.039      -0.003          -0.004
                                   (0.015)       (0.025)*         (0.014)      (0.021)*     (0.008)         (0.015)
 Top quintile                        0.014         -0.002          -0.005        -0.003       0.020           0.001
                                   (0.015)        (0.031)         (0.011)       (0.024)    (0.008)**        (0.014)

 Bottom quintile*POST                0.054                          0.073                     -0.019
                                  (0.026)**                      (0.024)**                   (0.015)
 Top quintile*POST                  -0.039                         -0.046                      0.008
                                   (0.024)                       (0.019)**                   (0.015)

 Bottom quintile*2009                              0.043                        0.042                         0.001
                                                  (0.037)                      (0.030)                      (0.022)
 Bottom quintile*2010                              0.023                        0.021                         0.002
                                                  (0.030)                      (0.027)                      (0.015)
 Bottom quintile*2011                              0.060                        0.075                        -0.015
                                                  (0.040)                     (0.037)**                     (0.021)
 Bottom quintile*2012                              0.072                        0.108                        -0.036
                                                 (0.040)*                     (0.036)**                     (0.024)
 Bottom quintile*2013                              0.099                        0.100                        -0.001
                                                (0.045)**                     (0.041)**                     (0.028)

 Top quintile*2009                                  0.045                        0.014                        0.031
                                                  (0.044)                      (0.031)                       (0.023)
 Top quintile*2010                                  0.006                       -0.019                        0.025
                                                  (0.034)                      (0.029)                       (0.020)
 Top quintile*2011                                 -0.018                       -0.036                        0.018
                                                  (0.041)                      (0.032)                       (0.023)
 Top quintile*2012                                  0.001                       -0.020                        0.021
                                                  (0.044)                      (0.035)                       (0.027)
 Top quintile*2013                                 -0.052                       -0.098                        0.046
                                                  (0.049)                     (0.037)**                     (0.028)*
 Teacher characteristics              X              X              X             X            X               X
 School fixed effects                 X              X              X             X            X               X

 R-squared                           0.096         0.106          0.080         0.089         0.081          0.085
 N (Teacher-year)                     7863         7863           7863          7863          7863           7863
Notes: The estimates in this table are comparable to estimates in Table 3 and the notes to Table 3 apply.


                                                            57
         Table D4 replicates our main findings from Table 2 for math but adds the schools where

Fryer (2014) intervened back into the sample. The results are very similar to what we report in

Table 2, which is expected because the Fryer schools make up a small fraction of district schools.


Table D4. Impacts of the new evaluation system on turnover, by linear math teacher quality,
including Fryer schools.
                                                        Dependent variable is an indicator for:
                                       School exit                  District exit                 School transfer
                                    (1a)         (1b)           (2a)            (2b)            (3a)          (3b)

 Intercept                         0.127         0.144            0.085        0.102          0.043           0.042
                                 (0.006)**     (0.011)**        (0.004)**    (0.009)**      (0.004)**       (0.007)**
 Intercept*POST                    0.147                          0.092                       0.055
                                 (0.011)**                      (0.008)**                   (0.008)**
              Intercept*2009                     -0.029                        -0.033                          0.004
                                               (0.014)**                     (0.011)**                       (0.010)
              Intercept*2010                     -0.021                        -0.019                         -0.002
                                                (0.015)                       (0.012)                        (0.010)
              Intercept*2011                      0.076                         0.034                          0.042
                                               (0.019)**                     (0.013)**                      (0.013)**
              Intercept*2012                      0.139                         0.067                          0.072
                                               (0.019)**                     (0.014)**                      (0.012)**
              Intercept*2013                      0.186                         0.132                          0.054
                                               (0.019)**                     (0.017)**                      (0.012)**

 Teacher quality                   -0.008         -0.017          -0.031        -0.021        0.023           0.004
                                  (0.015)        (0.032)        (0.011)**      (0.027)      (0.009)**        (0.017)
 Teacher quality*POST              -0.056                         -0.070                      0.014
                                 (0.021)**                      (0.018)**                    (0.016)
       Teacher quality*2009                        0.013                        -0.016                        0.029
                                                 (0.035)                       (0.029)                       (0.023)
       Teacher quality*2010                        0.011                        -0.009                        0.020
                                                 (0.041)                       (0.032)                       (0.023)
       Teacher quality*2011                       -0.024                        -0.061                        0.037
                                                 (0.039)                      (0.033)*                       (0.027)
       Teacher quality*2012                       -0.020                        -0.057                        0.037
                                                 (0.043)                       (0.036)                       (0.031)
       Teacher quality*2013                       -0.069                        -0.101                        0.032
                                                 (0.042)                     (0.037)**                       (0.023)

 Teacher characteristics             X             X               X             X              X              X
 School fixed effects                X             X               X             X              X              X

 R-squared                          0.108        0.114           0.086         0.094         0.082           0.083
 N (Teacher-year)                   8335          8335           8335          8335           8335           8335
Notes: The estimates in this table are comparable to estimates in Table 2 and the notes to Table 2 apply.




                                                           58
