                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                     THE LONG SHADOW OF A FISCAL EXPANSION

                                        Chong-En Bai
                                       Chang-Tai Hsieh
                                      Zheng Michael Song

                                      Working Paper 22801
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w22801


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   November 2016




We thank the editors of the Brookings Papers, Maury Obstfeld, and Linda Tesar for extremely
helpful comments. We also thank Xueting Wen for excellent research assistance. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2016 by Chong-En Bai, Chang-Tai Hsieh, and Zheng Michael Song. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Long Shadow of a Fiscal Expansion
Chong-En Bai, Chang-Tai Hsieh, and Zheng Michael Song
NBER Working Paper No. 22801
November 2016
JEL No. E0

                                         ABSTRACT

In 2009 and 2010, China undertook a 4 trillion Yuan fiscal stimulus, roughly equivalent to 12
percent of annual GDP. The "fiscal" stimulus was largely financed by off-balance sheet
companies (local financing vehicles) that borrowed and spent on behalf of local governments.
The off-balance sheet financial institutions continued to grow after the stimulus program ended at
the end of 2010. After the end of the stimulus program, spending by these off-balance sheet
companies accounted for roughly 10% of GDP each year, with an increasing share used for what
are essentially private commercial projects. The off-balance spending by local governments is
likely responsible for a 5 percentage-point increase in the aggregate investment rate and part of
the 7 to 8 percentage-point decline in current account surplus since 2008. Finally, we argue that
local governments used their new access to financial resources to facilitate access to capital to
favored private firms, which potentially worsens the overall efficiency of capital allocation. The
long run effect of off-balance sheet spending by local governments may be a permanent decline
in the growth rate of aggregate productivity and GDP.

Chong-En Bai                                    Zheng Michael Song
Tsinghua University                             Department of Economics
Beijing 100084, China                           Chinese University of Hong Kong
baichn@sem.tsinghua.edu.cn                      Shatin, N.T., Hong Kong
                                                zheng.michael.song@gmail.com
Chang-Tai Hsieh
Booth School of Business
University of Chicago
5807 S Woodlawn Ave
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
chsieh@chicagoBooth.edu




A data appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w22801
1. Introduction
        In November 2008, in the depths of the world financial crisis, China announced to great
fanfare a 4 trillion Yuan fiscal stimulus to be spent by 2010. Dominique Strauss-Kahn, then
the managing director of the International Monetary Fund, said in response to the
announcement of the stimulus plan that "it will have an influence not only on the world
economy in supporting demand but also a lot of influence on the Chinese economy itself, and I
think it is good news for correcting imbalances."1 These funds, amounting to about 12 percent
of annual Chinese GDP, were mostly to be spent on infrastructure projects in 2009 and 2010.
Many people viewed the fiscal stimulus as playing an important role in preventing the world
recession from getting worse. Paul Krugman wrote in 2010 that China had engaged in “much
more aggressive stimulus than any Western nation – and it has worked out well.”2
        The goal of this paper is two-fold. First, we analyze the institutional details on how the
fiscal stimulus was financed. We show that the fiscal stimulus was implemented by local
governments and mostly financed by the relaxation of financial constraints facing local
governments. Specifically, local governments were legally prohibited from borrowing or
running deficits. To circumvent these legal restrictions, local governments were allowed to
create off-balance sheet companies known as local financial vehicles in 2009 and 2010 to fund
the stimulus spending. A typical arrangement would be that local governments would transfer
ownership of land to the local financing vehicle, and the land would be used as collateral to
borrow from banks and shadow banks (trust products) as well as to issue bonds.
        Figure 1 plots the investment rate and the budget deficit with vertical lines drawn at the
beginning and end of the stimulus. As can be seen, the investment rate increased by about 4
percent of GDP in 2009 and 2010, suggesting that much of the fiscal stimulus was spent on
public infrastructure projects as planned. However, it can also be seen there was much smaller
increase in the (official) budget deficit of the Chinese government.3 We show that the gap
between the increase in the investment rate and the budget deficit was bridged by off-balance
sheet spending via the new local financing vehicles.
        Second, we assess the consequences of this financing choice after the end of the
stimulus program in 2010. We argue that throughout this period local governments were
actively providing “special deals” to favored private business, but could not borrow or
influence the lending decisions of state owned banks. The effect was that the assistance

1
  New York Times, November 9, 2008, “China plans $586 billion economic stimulus.”
2
  http://krugman.blogs.nytimes.com/2010/07/24/keynes-in-asia/
3
  The figure shows the combined budget deficit of the central and local governments.

                                                      1
provided by local governments to favored private firms largely consisted of exemptions to a
thicket of rules and regulations, but they could not provide preferential access to capital to the
private firms they were trying to assist. These two institutional features -- high powered
incentives to provide special deals along with restrictions on access to capital -- explain how
China was able to grow rapidly despite seemingly low quality institutions.
       We show the off-balance sheet financial institutions created to fund the fiscal stimulus
changed the nature of the special deals regime. Specifically, we show the off-balance sheet
financial institutions continued to grow even after the stimulus program was over, as local
governments found themselves with powerful new tool to provide support for favored private
firms. As partial evidence, Figure 1 shows that the investment rate remained higher (compared
to 2008) even after the end of the fiscal stimulus in 2010. By 2014, the investment rate stood
at 48 percent of GDP, which is probably the highest investment rate of any country in the
world. The increase in the investment rate since 2008 reflects spending by local governments
financed through the local financing vehicles, and is a direct consequence of the financing
choices made in 2009 and 2010.
       In short, the fiscal stimulus was really partial financial liberalization. It is partial
because financial constraints were lifted only for local governments, and not for private
financial institutions or for state owned banks. This might have had positive effects on welfare
and growth if local governments used these resources for high social return projects previously
starved of resources. However, we provide evidence that in addition to funding infrastructure
projects, the relaxation of financial constraints also made it possible for local governments to
channel financial resources towards commercial projects favoring certain private firms. In
2014 and 2015 we estimate that the off-balance sheet spending by local governments
accounted for about 11% of GDP, with 2.4% of GDP spent on local infrastructure projects and
8.6% of GDP on what are essentially private commercial projects. The aggregate effect is that
the overall efficiency in the allocation of capital worsened which, ceteris paribus, lowers the
aggregate growth rate.
       The net effect is that despite the increase in the investment rate after 2008, aggregate
growth rates have declined significantly (Figure 2). There are clearly many other forces behind
the slowdown in Chinese growth, and we do not attempt to parse these out in this paper, but the
long shadow of the Chinese fiscal stimulus driven by the behavior of local governments is
likely an important force. Moreover, we document that despite numerous attempts by the
Chinese Central Government to roll back the off-balance borrowing by the local financing
vehicles, it has so far proven to be very difficult to do so. We conclude that if changes are not
                                                  2
made, this does not augur well for future Chinese growth, with potentially large spillover
effects on growth in other regions of the world.
       The paper proceeds as follows. We first describe the key institutional features behind
China's growth in the two decades prior to the fiscal stimulus. We then lay out the key facts
about the fiscal stimulus, before describing the growth of the off-balance sheet financial
institution. We then use data from a sample of these off-balance sheet financial institutions as
well as firm level data from the Chinese industrial survey to provide micro-economic evidence
on the effect of the institutions created by the fiscal stimulus.




                                                  3
2. Growth under Special Deals and Financial Constraints

           To understand the long run effects of the fiscal stimulus, it is useful to take a step back
to analyze the institutional foundations of China's growth. A conventional narrative of China’s
growth is that this growth reflects the gradual improvement of Chinese institutions.
Specifically, growth took off when China removed constraints faced by farmers, opened up to
the world, regularized economic and political institutions after the turmoil of the Cultural
Revolution, and generally introduced pro-market institutions. While this narrative is probably
an important part of the story of what happened in the 1980s, it is probably not the right
explanation for what happened after 1989. Huang (2008) for example, documents that many of
the pro-market policies adopted in the 1980s were reversed after 1989. Another piece of
evidence is provided by the World Bank's Doing Business indicators, which is a widely used
measure of the friendliness of the institutional environment faced by the private sector.
According to these indictors, China ranks 151 in the world in terms of the “ease of entry” of a
private firm. This is roughly on par with the Congo and significantly below Iran (rank 87) and
Pakistan (rank 98).4
           However, if institutions supporting private firms are as bad as suggested by the
narrative evidence and the World Bank’s Doing Business Indicators, what explains the
explosive growth in the private sector in China in the last 20 years? In a companion paper
(Bai, Hsieh, and Song, 2016), we argue that the key to China’s growth is the development of an
informal regime of “special deals” combined with strict financial constraints over local
governments. We argue that a sine qua non of successful private firms in China is that they
need to have the political support of a local Communist Party boss. This is because, as
suggested by the World Bank's Doing Business indicators, formal institutions for private firms
are very bad in China. In this environment, the only way for a private firm to succeed is that
they manage to enter into a relationship with a political leader that allows them to circumvent
the formal rules.      This is common in countries with weak formal institutions and we argue
that China is no different.
           Yet the outcome, in terms of the growth of private firm and aggregate growth more
generally, appears to be different in China compared to other countries with seemingly similar
regimes. Why is China different? For the purposes of this paper, a key feature of the Chinese
system is that local governments (at the level of counties and prefectures) have enormous

4
    The rankings are from 2013.

                                                    4
power, and have largely used this power in the last 20 years to support a subset of private
firms, but they did not have access to financial resources. This was important in forcing local
governments to support favored private firms by improving the institutional environment
facing the favored firms. Their support for private firms primarily took the form of exemption
to official rules and lobbying the central government for special exemptions to the rules for
their favored private firms. They could not provide financial support to favored private firms.
The severe budget constraints also meant that there was little that could be directly stolen from
the public budget.
        There were three key institutional reforms in the 1990s that created the severe budget
constraints faced by local governments. In the early 1990s, taxes were largely under the
control of local governments. In 1994 for example, almost 80 percent of all tax revenues were
collected and spent by local governments (see Figure 3). Under this system, known as the
“fiscal contract responsibility system," local governments had to make fixed or regressive
payments to the central government but could keep the remainder of local taxes.5
        The “tax sharing reform” in 1994 removed control of local governments over the
allocation of local tax revenues. As can be seen in Figure 3, the tax share of local governments
fell from about 80 percent to 40 to 50 percent in 1994. The central government made fiscal
transfers to local governments but tied these transfers to specific spending projects, at least for
wealthier local governments. For wealthier localities, more than 80 percent of the transfers
from the central government were earmarked for specific projects, particularly social security
and welfare programs. Specifically, almost 80 percent of all fiscal transfers were designated
for specific projects or transfers from wealthier to poorer localities.6
        To be sure, local governments responded by looking for other sources of revenues.
Many local governments began to impose penalties for legal violations and fees for access to
“public” services. More importantly, many local governments seized land from farmers and
urban residents and resold the land to private firms and developers. Land sales have become
an important source of local revenue, but land is a fixed resource and revenues from land sales
mostly leveled off by 2014. Furthermore, there were controls over what revenues from land
sales could be used for.



5
  There are five contractual arrangements for the tax sharing between the central and provincial governments.
Most of the contracts imply that local fiscal revenue outgrow remittance to the central government. Only three
provinces remit a fixed share of local revenue to the central government. See Jiang (2008) and Jin, Qian and
Weingast (2005) for more institutional details.
6
  See Wong and Bird (2008) for a review on the tax-sharing reform.

                                                        5
         A second important change is the 1994 budget law that made it illegal for local
governments to run budget deficits. This is not to say that there wasn’t some wiggle room. It
was possible for local governments to implicitly run deficits by establishing locally controlled
state-owned companies -- the original local financing vehicles -- with the explicit purpose of
borrowing for public spending. Prior to 2009 these types of companies were severely
restricted. Only two types of local financing vehicles were allowed. These are (i) companies
specialized in road and bridge construction and (ii) investment companies specialized in urban
development.7      Nonetheless, only a small number of local governments were able to obtain
access to resources via this channel. For example, there were only 17 local financing vehicles
that issued bonds in 2006.8 In addition, as we will document in detail later, the implicit local
government debt was less than 6 trillion Yuan in 2008, or about 20% of China’s GDP in that
year.
         The third change that came in the late 1990s was the reorganization of state banks
implemented by Premier Zhu Rongji. Before the late 1990s, Zhou Xiaochuan, the President of
People’s Bank of China, described the incentives of local banking officials as follows:9

    Loan allocation, like administrative jurisdiction, seems to be decentralized by province,
    prefecture, city and county. Local branches at each level may exhibit the phenomenon of
    ‘three eyes’ – i.e., they watch headquarter, local government and local PBoC with ‘three
    eyes’.

The consequence of the "three-eyed" system was that local officials exercised their political
influence over the banks by allocating loans towards their pet projects. In 1997 and 1998,
using the Asian financial crisis was an excuse, the central government pushed through a new
“vertical management system” for the state banks. Specifically, the provincial branches of the
state owned banks were dismantled and replaced with nine branches that crossed several
provinces. Importantly, the power of local Communist Party officials over the appointments of
local bank officers was removed and centralized by the People’s Bank of China. This power
was further centralized in 2003 when the China’s Banking Regulatory Commission (CBRC)
was established.10
         As a result, the banking sector became more competitive (see Hachem and Song, 2016).
The non-performing loan rate, which reached a record high of 30% in the late 1990s and early
2000s, declined to below 3% in 2008. The reformed banking sector managed to resist

7 Bai and Qian (2010) provide case studies about these companies.
8
  This information is from the WIND database, which we describe later in the paper.
9
  The quote is from Zhou (2005).
10
   Zhu (2015), pp. 475-491.

                                                       6
mounting pressure from local governments that had been desperately looking for external
financing since the tax-sharing reform. One example is the effort made by CBRC to prohibit
local government from providing guarantees on loans except for those approved by the State
Council (Document No. 27, CBRC, 2006).



3. The “Four Trillion” Fiscal Stimulus
         The Chinese economy was hit hard by the 2008 crisis. GDP growth fell to 7.1% in the
fourth quarter of 2008, down from 13.9% in 2007 (in the same quarter) (See Figure 2). The
unemployment rate among registered urban households increases by 2 percentage points in
2008, which almost certainly understates the increase in the unemployment rate among non-
registered urban households.11 In response, the Chinese authorities rolled out a package of
stimulus policies in November 2008, of which the most important was a four trillion Yuan
fiscal stimulus to be spent by 2010.12
         Table 1 (first column) summarizes projected spending under the stimulus package in
seven broad categories. According to the plan, about half of the stimulus (1.87 trillion Yuan)
was to be spent on public infrastructure projects and one quarter on infrastructure repairs in
response to the 2008 Wenchuan earthquake. The second and third columns in Table 1 present
the information from the published budgets of local and central governments in “roughly” the
same seven categories in 2009 and 2010. We use the word “roughly” because the
classification of spending in the published budgets do not line up perfectly with the spending
categories in the stimulus package. For clarity Table 1 lists the spending categories in the
published budget that we match to the categories in the stimulus package. We call this “on-
budget” spending. In the absence of a fiscal stimulus, we assume that realized spending in the
seven spending categories would have remained constant as a share of GDP. We then estimate
the effect of the fiscal stimulus as the difference between on-budget spending in 2009 and 2010
and the “no-stimulus” counterfactual.
         The second and third columns in Table 1 present the on-budget public spending due to
the fiscal stimulus under this counterfactual. The second column presents the estimated
spending of the consolidated government (local and central) and the third column presents


11
  These numbers are from Feng et. al.’s (2015) tabulations from the Urban Household Survey.
12
  On the monetary policy side, the required reserve ratios was adjusted downwards by three times in the fourth
quarter of 2008, down from 17.5% to 16% and from 16.5% to 13.5% for large and small financial institutions,
respectively. The official benchmark interest rates were cut by four times in that period. The one-year deposit and
loan rates, for instance, dropped from 4.14% and 7.2% to 2.25% and 5.31%, respectively.

                                                        7
spending of local governments “due” to the fiscal stimulus. From comparing the second and
third columns, it can be seen that the additional spending due to the fiscal stimulus was mostly
local government spending – there was very little additional spending by the central
government. Furthermore, the magnitude of the on-budget spending is much smaller than the
projected spending. The additional on-budget spending we attribute to the fiscal stimulus is
only slightly more than one trillion Yuan, which is 3 trillion Yuan short of the projected
spending under the stimulus plan.          The discrepancy between the planned spending and on-
budget spending is largest for "railway, roads, airports, water conservancy, and urban power
grids" (1.5 trillion vs. 0.27 trillion) and “post-disaster reconstruction” (the Wenchuan
earthquake).
        Another way to see the discrepancy between the planned spending and the actual “on-
budget” spending that took place is to look at the budget deficit. Figure 1 shows that the
combined budget deficit (local and central governments) increased from an average of 1.4% of
GDP in 2000-2008 to an average 2% of GDP in 2009-10. If we assume that the budget deficit
would have remained at 1.4% of GDP in the absence of the fiscal stimulus, then the on-budget
spending due to the stimulus increased the budget deficit by 0.6% of annual GDP in 2009 and
2010. We remind the reader the plan was for stimulus spending equivalent to 2.7% of annual
GDP in 2009 and 2010.
        While this evidence may suggest that the fiscal stimulus may not have been fully
implemented, the evidence on aggregate investment from the national accounts indicates
otherwise. The justification for looking at aggregate investment is that about 72 percent of the
projected stimulus spending in Table 1 should have been classified as investment in the
national accounts.13 Figure 1, which plots aggregate investment as a share of GDP, shows that
the aggregate investment rate increased by roughly 5 percentage points in 2009 and 2010.
Note that a 5 percentage point increase in the investment rate in 2009 and 2010 is about 80
percent of 4 trillion Yuan. This evidence is not conclusive of course because we do not know
what the investment rate would have been in the absence of the stimulus package.
        Figure 4, which plots aggregate investment in infrastructure and non-residential
structures (“non-residential structures”), housing, and other (mostly machinery and equipment)




13
   The 72% number assumes that spending on “rural livelihood and infrastructure” (0.37 trillion), “railway, road,
airport, water conservancy and urban power grids” (1.5 trillion), and “post-disaster reconstruction” are
investment, whereas the other spending categories in Table 1 are not. The sum of planned spending in the three
“investment” categories is 2.87 trillion, which is roughly 72% of 4 trillion.

                                                        8
as a share of GDP, provides another piece of evidence.14 Note that the investment rate in “non-
residential structures” includes public investment in infrastructure and private investment in
non-residential structures. (The Chinese national account does not separately provide numbers
on public infrastructure spending and private spending on non-residential structures.) Figure 4
shows that the investment rate in “non-residential structures” increased from 16% of GDP in
2008 to 18% of GDP in 2009 and 20% of GDP in 2010. There is no change in the investment
rate in “other” (mostly machinery and equipment) and a small increase in the investment rate in
housing structures in 2009 and 2010. Remember that the stimulus plan called for
infrastructure spending equivalent to about 7.7% of GDP (72 percent of 4 trillion Yuan) in
2009 and 2010. Assuming that the increase in the investment rate in “non-residential
structures” in 2009 and 2010 is only driven by infrastructure investment, this suggests that
more than three-quarters of the planned infrastructure spending in the stimulus program was
finished by 2010.
        In summary, we do not know for sure whether the stimulus plan was fully
implemented. The increase in the aggregate investment rate by 5 percentage points of GDP in
2009 and 2010, as well as the increase in the investment rate in “non-residential structures” in
the same two years, suggests that it mostly was. Even so, only a quarter of the stimulus
spending shows up on the government’s balance sheet, and three quarters of the spending was
conducted by entities that were off the balance sheet of local governments. What exactly these
off-balance entities are, and how much they matter is what we turn to next.


4. Financial Deregulation

        In the previous section, we showed that the 4 billion Yuan stimulus only generated a 1
billion Yuan increase in spending that appeared on the balance sheet of the public sector in
2009 and 2010. Yet the evidence from the national accounts suggests that much more than 1
trillion Yuan was spent. Since only a quarter of the spending was on the balance sheet of local
governments, the remaining three-quarter must have been undertaken by entities that were off
the balance sheet of local governments. In this section, we document the institutional changes
that facilitated the growth of the off-balance sheet institutions. In addition, we discuss the
limited data available on the quantitative importance of this off-balance sheet spending.


14
 We measure investment in Figures 1 and 4 by the annual “gross fixed capital formation” series provided by
China’s National Bureau of Statistics (NBS).

                                                      9
       As we described earlier, local governments were prohibited from running budget
deficits. However, the decision in November 2008 was that local governments would be in
charge of the stimulus spending. How could this be done if the 1995 budget law and numerous
regulations made it illegal for local governments to borrow? One possibility was for the
central government to borrow on behalf of local governments and transfer the necessary funds
to local governments, but this would obviously increase the central government’s debt.
Furthermore, any spending plan of the central government had to be approved by the National
People’s Congress. Instead, the decision was to circumvent the 1994 budget law by allowing
local governments to use off-balance sheet companies known as local financing vehicles. In
this way, the debt would not show up on the balance sheet of the central government, and there
would be no technical violation of the 1994 budget law.
       In March 2009, the CBRC made this decision public (although the rules had already
been informally relaxed before the public announcement):


  “Encourage local governments to attract and to incentivize banking and financial
  institutions to increase their lending to the investment projects set up by the central
  government. This can be done by a variety of ways including increasing local fiscal subsidy
  to interest payment, improving rewarding mechanism for loans and establishing government
  investment and financing platforms compliant with regulations.”

                                             Document No. 92, CBRC, March 18, 2009.

Another important regulatory support, orchestrated by the central government, came from the
Ministry of Finance. Despite the existing regulations on the use of local government revenue
and the budget law that prohibits local government borrowing, the Ministry of Finance issued a
regulation that allowed local government to finance investment projects using all sources of
funds, including budgetary revenue, land revenue and fund borrowed by local financing
vehicles.


   “Allowing local government to finance the investment projects by essentially all sources of
  funds, including budgetary revenue, land revenue and fund borrowed by local financing
  vehicles.”

       Document 631, Department of Construction, Ministry of Finance, October 12, 2009.

The last regulatory change worth emphasizing is that local government were encouraged to
borrow from financial institutions, which was not allowed by the Budget Law and many
regulations issued before 2008. Although the new regulation says explicitly that external
                                              10
financing should only be used for investment projects set up by central government, the
loophole is that the new regulation does not apply to local financing vehicles. By using these
off balance sheet institutions, local government can raise funds without violating the Budget
Law.
        There are two sources of publicly available information on the activities of these off
balance sheet companies. First, local financing vehicles that issue bonds have to provide annual
financial statements. LFVs that do not issue bonds do not have to provide such information.
These financial statements are compiled by a company called WIND.15 In addition to the
identity of each LFV, the key data we use from the financial statements is the total debt of each
LFV. There is, however, no information on the composition of the liabilities or assets of the
LFVs.
        A second source of information is from audits of all LFVs, including those that do not
issue bonds, by China’s National Audit Office in 2011 and 2013. The reports of this audit
publish the total stock of debt of all LFV in each year from 2006 to 2013. The reports also
provide limited information on the composition of the liabilities and assets of the LFVs. The
reports only present aggregated information: no individual data or decomposition into different
types of LFVs is available.
        There are two important differences between the data provided by WIND and the Audit
Office. First, the data in the Audit Office covers all local financing vehicles, whereas the
WIND database only includes local financing vehicles that issue bonds. Second, the data on
the Audit Office only covers "official" debt of the LGVs, which the Audit Office defines as
"the debt that government has responsibility to repay or the debt to which the government
would fulfill the responsibility of guarantee or for bailout when the debtor encounters difficulty
in repayment." (National Audit Office, 2011) “Official" debt is only a subset of total debt of
the LFVs. This is because although LGVs were originally set up to finance local infrastructure
projects, many of them have since ventured into commercial projects. In contrast, the debt in
the WIND database covers all LGV debt, including the debt used to finance the LGV's
commercial projects.
        It perhaps useful to describe the activities of two LFVs we are familiar with to illustrate
the difference between the two measures of debt. One such LFV is the Beijing Capital Group
Company ("Capital Group") owned by the local government of Beijing. The Capital Group


15
  WIND defines a local financing vehicle as a company whose business covers "infrastructure and utilities" and
whose major shareholder is a local government or a subsidiary of a local government. See Appendix A2 for more
details of the LFVs in the WIND dataset.

                                                      11
owns the Beijing subway, two toll highways (from Beijing to Tianjin and from Beijing to
Tongzhou), and a company that specializes in building urban roads and rain and sewage
infrastructure.16 Only the debt used for these public infrastructure projects will be classified as
official local government debt by the Audit Office. The Capital Group also has three
subsidiaries that are essentially real-estate developers and another four financial service
companies.17 Finally, the most recently established companies of the Capital Group are in the
green technology and waste disposal businesses. For example, the Capital Group created the
Beijing Capital Waste Management NZ (in 2014) in New Zealand and ECO Industrial
Environment Engineering (in 2015) in Singapore. These last two companies are in solid-waste
disposal industry.18
        Another LFV is the Beijing State-Owned Assets Management Company ("BSAM").
BSAM is the owner of the main facilities built for the 2008 Beijing Olympics, including the
National Stadium ("Bird's Nest") and the National Aquatics Center ("Water Cube"). BSAM
also has subsidiaries in the financial industry, real-estate development, and manufacturing. For
example, BSAM owns a large stake of the Bank of Beijing and the Beijing Motor Corporation.
The latter company is the primary investor in several car manufacturers, including the joint
venture with Hyundai (Beijing-Hyundai). Only the debt used to build the sports facilities in
Beijing should be counted as "official debt" while the debt in the WIND data includes the debt
incurred by all BSAM's subsidiaries.
        Figure 5 plots the number of bond-issuing LFVs in the WIND database. As can be
seen, there were only a small number of bond-issuing LFVs prior to fiscal stimulus. After the
controls over local financing vehicles were lifted in early 2009, the number of these off-
balance sheet companies doubled by 2010. The number of bond-issuing LFV continued to
increase after the end of the stimulus program, increasing from 1200 in 2010 to about 1700 by
2013. We remind the reader that the data in Figure 5 only includes LFVs that issue bonds.
According to the audit conducted by the National Audit Office, there were a total of 7,170



16
   Beijing Virescence Area Infrastructure Development and Construction Company is the subsidiary that
specializes in urban roads and sewage. The Capital Group operates the Beijing subway and two highways through
the Beijing MTR Corporation (the Beijing subway), the Tianjin Beijing-Tianjin Expressway Corporation, and the
Beijing-Tongzhou Freeway.
17
   The real estate companies are Bejing Capital Land, Capital Jingzhong (Tianjin) Investment, and Beijing Capital
Investment and Development. The financial services companies are Capital Securities, Beijing Capital
Investment and Guarantee, Beijing Agricultural Investment Company, Beijing Agricultural Guarantee Company,
and Beijing Capital Investment Company (a venture capital fund).
18
   The other recently established subsidiaries (Qinghuangdao Capital Star Light Technology and Beijing Capital
Boom-Sound Science and Technology) manufacture pollution control equipment.

                                                      12
LFVs as of June 2013. There were about 1700 bond-issuing LFVs in 2013 which implies that
there were a total of 5,400 LFVs not in the WIND database in that year.
        Figure 6 presents total debt of bond-issuing LFVs in the WIND data and total "official"
debt for all LFVs in the Audit Office reports.19 There is limited data on official debt of all
LFVs after 2013. In a press conference on May 26, 2016, Finance Minister Lou Jiwei said that
the stock of local government debt stood at 16 trillion Yuan by the end of 2015. The number
cited by Lou Jiwei only refers to the debt that local governments are legally obliged to repay
(this is called “direct debt” in China).20 According to the Audit Office, the stock of “direct
debt” was 10.9 trillion Yuan in June 2013. The Ministry of Finance also said that the
government debt GDP ratio would increase from 39.4% to 41.5% if government were
responsible for 20% of the indirect debt. This implies the indirect debt of 7.1 trillion Yuan and
the total local government debt of 23.1 trillion Yuan by the end of 2015. This is the number
we use for total "official" debt of all LFVs in figure 6.
        Remember that the debt in the NAO report refers to "official" debt whereas the WIND
data measures all the debt on the LFV's balance sheet and not just the debt classified as
"official." Furthermore, the LFVs in the WIND data is subset of the LFVs reported in the
Audit Office reports. Total debt as reported by the WIND data understates total debt because
the smaller LFVs (5,400 LFVs in 2013) are not in the WIND data. The debt reported by the
Audit Office reports also understates total debt because it only counts "official" debt and omits
the debt of the commercial ventures of the LFVs. One way to see this last point is that
although the Audit Office reports data from all LFVs, Figure 6 shows that total debt as reported
by the Audit Office is always smaller than total debt of the much smaller sample of bond-
issuing LFVs in the WIND data.
        The data provided by the Audit Office answers the question "how much LGV debt was
used for local infrastructure projects?" While that is an important question, we also want to
know how the fiscal stimulus changed the local government's control over the allocation of
resources. To answer this question, we need to know debt accumulation by LFVs used for
infrastructure and for the commercial projects of the LFVs. We have no data on the latter, but
we can use the firm level records of LFV data in the WIND data to impute the total amount of
LFV debt (official and commercial debt). Specifically, we assume that the true distribution of
19
   The report of the Audit Office only reports the stock of net debt at end of June 2013. We impute the stock of
debt at the end of the year in 2013 by doubling the change in net stock from the end of 2012 to the end of June
2013.
20
   The report of the IMF's 2016 Article IV consultation cites a figure that indicates that government’s debt as a
share of GDP increased from an average of 15% to 16% of GDP in 2011 through 2013 to 38.5% of GDP in 2014.
This number is the "direct" debt and is close to the number of 39.4% for 2015 cited by Lou Jiwei.

                                                       13
total LFV debt (across different LFVs) follows a Pareto distribution and that the WIND data is
a truncated sample of the true distribution. We then estimate the truncated Pareto distribution
from the firm level records in the WIND data and use the estimated parameters of the Pareto
distribution along with the Audit Office’s number on the total number of LFVs to estimate the
total stock of debt of LFVs that are not in the WIND dataset. We estimate the “missing debt”
separately in each year.21
           Figure 6 presents the "true" stock of LFV debt imputed via this method. The gap
between this number and the "official" debt reported by the Audit Office (the dotted line) is the
stock of debt of the commercial subsidiaries of the LFVs. The difference in 2015 is very large.
Official debt stood at 23 trillion Yuan in 2015 while our estimate of the true debt of LFVs is
about 45 trillion Yuan. In turn, the gap between the "true" stock of LFV debt and the debt in
the WIND data is simply due to the fact that the WIND data does not have data on the large
number of small LFVs.
           Figure 7 presents the change in the debt in each year implied by the stock of debt
shown in Figure 6. The change in the debt reported by the Audit Office represents spending
by LFVs on “official” projects, most of which are infrastructure projects. For example, official
borrowing of LFVs increases from 1 trillion Yuan in 2008 to an average of 2.5 trillion Yuan in
2009 and 2010. The bulk of official LFV borrowing in these two years is likely for spending
under the stimulus program. Specifically, assuming that the stock of off-balance sheet debt
would have remained constant as a share of GDP in the absence of the stimulus package, then
local governments borrowed an additional 3.6 trillion Yuan in 2009 and 2010 through off-
balance sheet entities. When we add 3.6 trillion Yuan in off-balance sheet spending to the 1
trillion Yuan in on-balance spending calculated earlier, we get that the fiscal stimulus
generated an additional 4.6 trillion Yuan in spending. Remember that the stimulus plan called
for 4 trillion Yuan in spending.
           Figures 6 and 7 also clearly show that off-balance sheet spending by local governments
did not return to pre-stimulus levels after the stimulus program ended in 2010. This is true
whether one looks at accumulation of "official" debt or the total accumulation of debt we
impute. Debt accumulation for infrastructure projects decreased after 2013. However, this
decline was more than offset by "unofficial" debt accumulation by LFVs. Our estimates are
that debt of LFVs increased by about 7.3 trillion Yuan in 2014 and 2015 (or a total of about
14.6 trillion Yuan in the two years). Put differently, total spending by LFV in 2014 and 2015


21
     We provide the details of the imputation in the appendix.

                                                          14
are almost four times larger than the amount spent on the fiscal stimulus in 2009 and 2010. In
contrast, the official local government debt increased by 3.2 trillion Yuan in the same period. If
local infrastructure investment were only financed by official local government debt, off-
balance sheet spending by local governments would have resulted in spending on local
infrastructure roughly equivalent to 2.4% of GDP in 2014 and 2015. The gap between the
accumulation of official local government debt and our estimates of the total change in off
balance sheet debt suggests that 8.6% of GDP was spent by local governments in 2014 and
2015 on what are essentially private commercial projects.
       We have limited information on the composition of the liabilities of the LFVs. The
earliest information is from a speech in 2009 by the President of CBRC who said that banks
loaned 3.05 trillion Yuan to LFVs in 2009. We assume this number refers to bank loans for
official LFV debt, although we are not sure. According to the data from the National Audit
Office plotted in Figure 7, LFV debt increased by about 3.4 trillion Yuan in 2009. Putting
these two numbers together, we get that 90% of the off-balance sheet spending of local
governments in 2009 was funded by bank loans. The National Audit Office provides a more
complete breakdown of the funding sources of the outstanding debt of official local financing
vehicle debt as of June 2013. This data indicates that 56.6% of the liabilities of official LFV
debt consisted of bank loans, 10.3% were bonds, and 11.6% were loans from trust companies.
This information suggests that the liabilities of the LFVs were predominantly bank loans
during the fiscal stimulus but have shifted away from bank loans since then.
       Turning to the composition of the assets of the LFVs, the Audit Office also provides
information on what official debt has been used for. This is presented in Table 2. One should
interpret these numbers with caution, as it is not clear how carefully this information was
audited. With this caveat in mind, the numbers in the audit report indicate that about 60% of
the off-balance sheet expenditures of local governments were spent on infrastructure
(municipal construction and transportation infrastructure).
       This information also allows us to provide one more check on whether the 4 trillion
stimulus package was carried out. We do not know what the official debt raised in 2009 and
2010 was spent on, but we know the total amount of additional "official" off-balance sheet debt
in these two years totaled 3.6 trillion Yuan. If we assume that share of the debt raised in 2009
and 2010 spent on each item is the same as given in Table 2, then we can estimate the "official"
off-balance sheet expenditures of local governments during the fiscal stimulus in 2009 and
2010. This information is summarized in the fourth column in Table 1. The comparison of
spending categories in the National Audit office report and in the project documents of the
                                               15
fiscal stimulus is not perfect. For example, it is not clear how exactly expenditures for “post-
disaster reconstruction” is classified by the Audit office. Nonetheless, when we add the on-
balance and off-balance sheet expenditures, we get the consistent story that about 60% of the
stimulus was spent on infrastructure projects (broadly defined).
        Table 3 provides more evidence that local governments use LFVs after 2010 to
circumvent budget constraints. We exploit the cross-sectional variation across localities in the
tightness of the official budget constraint and examine whether localities with tighter official
budget constraints make more use of LFVs. In the pre-stimulus period when LFVs were
heavily regulated, we expect to see no correlation between LFV’s borrowing and local fiscal
gap. In contrast, the relaxation of the constraints over off-balance sheet borrowing would lead
to a positive correlation after 2009. Column 1 reports the benchmark fixed-effect regression
between log total debt from LFVs in a locality and the local fiscal gap (measured as the official
budget deficit as share of local GDP). In Column 2, we add an interaction term between the
fiscal gap and a post-2009 dummy that equals one for years after 2009 and zero otherwise.
The interaction term is positive and highly significant. In other words, a faster debt growth of a
LFV is associated with a widening of local fiscal gap only in the post-stimulus period. In
Columns (3) and (4), we add a set of controls including log GDP, log population and GDP
growth, with little change in the results.
        Since the end of the stimulus program, the central government made numerous attempts
to roll back these off-balance sheet financial institutions, with little success so far. The first
attempt came in November 2009, when the Ministry of Finance issued a document that
prohibits local governments from providing loan guarantees and warned local governments
from undertaking more spending on infrastructure spending than stipulated by the stimulus
package. The first formal regulation seeking to restrict off-balance sheet spending by local
governments came from the State Council in June 2010. This regulation issued new rules that
required local governments to seek approval of new investment projects. According to the
rules, banks also had to strictly enforce the minimum share of capital that local governments
had to invest in projects funded via the LFVs.
        In response, local governments found new ways to raise funds for their off-balance
sheet spending. After the State Council issued new rules in June 2010, the most common
method used by local governments to skirt the minimum capital requirements was to transfer
ownership of land to the LFVs. The off-balance companies can then use the land as collateral
to borrow from banks and in this manner circumvent the need to meet the capital requirements
stipulated by the new rules. Another method was to borrow from non-regulated trusts. As
                                                 16
discussed earlier, loans from trusts accounted for 8% of all LFV debt by June 2013. Another
common method was to use build-transfer arrangements where a private company would get a
concession from a local government in exchange for a share of the revenues from the project.
        The central government attempted to limit the ability of local governments to obtain
new funds via their LFVs through these alternative channels of funding. For example, four
different agencies of the central government (the Ministry of Finance, the National
Development and Reform Commission, the Central Bank, and the CBRC) jointly issued a
decree in December 2012 to limit borrowing by LFVs. The most recent attempt by the central
government to stop off-budget borrowing by local governments came in August 2014, when
the 1995 budget law was amended to allow provincial level governments to issue bonds subject
to quotas set by the State Council.22 There are, however, three important restrictions on the
borrowing that local governments could undertake under the August 2014 budget law. First,
annual bond issue cannot exceed the quota set by the state council and approved by the
National People’s Congress. Second, annual bond issue has to be part of the budget proposed
by the provincial government and approved by the provincial People’s Congress, with a plan
for the repayment of the debt. Third, the bond issue can only be used for public capital
expenditure, not for recurring expenditure.
        At the same time, the new budget law prohibits local government and their branches
from borrowing in any other form, and unless otherwise specified by law, from offering any
credit guarantee to any organization or individual. The State Council issued Document
Number 43 in September 2014 to make these rules explicit. This document made it explicit
that LFVs do not have the authorization to borrow on behalf of the local government. If the
only business of an LFV is to borrow on behalf of the government, it should be shut down. If
the LFV provides public services, the document stipulates that the local government needs to
provide pre-specified compensation to cover the cost not covered by the fees the LFV charges
for the services. The document states that financial institutions cannot provide credit to local
governments or request credit guarantees from local governments. The goal, which Chinese
policy makers labeled a “dredging and blocking” strategy, was to entirely eliminate LFVs by
replacing the debt of the LFVs with local government bonds within three years.
        Our limited evidence suggests that debt accumulation backed up by the local
government declined in 2014 and 2015 (see Figure 6 and 7). However, as we've discussed,
debt accumulation by LFV for their commercial ventures increased in 2014 and 2015.

22
   More precisely Article 35 of the new budget law passed in August 2014 allows Provincial level governments to
issue bonds. Guangdong, Shanghai, and Zhejiang have been allowed to issue local government bond since 2011.

                                                      17
Published reports of the government’s debt show that public debt as a share of GDP increased
from an average of 15% to 16% of GDP in 2011 through 2013 to 38.5% of GDP in 2014. The
increase in public debt reflects the recognition of "direct" debt incurred by off-balance sheet
companies on behalf of local governments. However, the amount of "direct" LFV debt
swapped (as of the writing of this paper) for local government bonds is only 3.2 trillion Yuan
(Ministry of Finance Press Conference, May 26, 2016), which is much smaller than the
approximately 22% of GDP suggested by the increase in public debt numbers.
       The reason behind this discrepancy is that less than a year after the new rules were
issued, the central government showed signs of backing off the crackdown on LFVs. Perhaps
in response to the small decline in the investment rate in 2014 and more generally the
slowdown in aggregate growth (see Figures 1 and 2), the State Council issued a new decree in
May 2015 (document 40) that reversed its attempts to crack down on LFV borrowing. In
particular, the May 2015 decree urged financial institutions to continue to lend to LFVs.
       We do not have yet had data on investment spending after 2014, but the NBS provides
a monthly series on “fixed asset investment” that provides more recent information.
Furthermore, in 2015, the NBS released for the first time monthly data on “fixed asset
investment” in infrastructure. The “fixed asset investment” series has two problems. First, it
includes purchases of land and pre-existing structures, as well as expenditures on previously
used machinery. Second, it is based on a survey of large investment projects, which may not
be representative of all investment spending. The gross fixed capital formation series we use
in Figures 1 and 4 fixes these two problems, but is only available at an annual frequency (and
is only available until 2014 at the time of the writing of this paper). With this caveat in mind,
infrastructure investment measured by “fixed asset investment” grew at an annual rate of 17.2%

in 2015, which is higher than the rate of aggregate investment of 10%. In the first seven
months in 2016, “fixed asset investment” in infrastructure grew at an annual rate of 19.6%, 2.4
times as high as the growth rate of aggregate “fixed asset investment”.
       In sum, although the central government made several attempts to curb the LFVs over
the last five years, the most recent evidence suggests that the central government is once again
resorting to the same methods they used in 2009 and 2010. We do not know what will happen
in the future, but the next section turns to an assessment of the aggregate effects of the off-
balance spending undertaken by local governments from the end of the fiscal stimulus in 2010
to 2016.




                                                18
5. Aggregate Effects of Partial Financial Liberalization

        We now turn to an assessment of the aggregate effects of the partial financial
liberalization. A common argument is that the main effect of the off-balance sheet spending by
local governments, primarily on infrastructure investment, is to crowd out investment by
private firms. Huang, Pagano, and Panizza (2016), for example, provide empirical evidence
that the investment rate private industrial firms in localities with large increases in off-balance
sheet spending is lower than the investment rate of similar firms in localities that accumulated
less debt.
        This could be true, but there are several pieces of evidence that challenges this view.
First, note that aggregate investment rate, which includes investment by private firms and
spending by LFVs, increased by 5 percentage points after 2008. For spending by LFVs to
crowd out private investment, it would have to be the case that spending by LFVs that are
classified as investment account for more than 5 percent of GDP. We know that LFVs raised 5
trillion Yuan in 2009-10. Even if all the revenues from the debt were invested in the two years,
they would still account for only 3.3 percent of GDP.
        How can the investment rate increase by so much? Figure 8 shows that there was no
corresponding increase in the savings rate. If anything, there has been a small decline in the
savings rate. The adjustment instead has been entirely on the external balance. China’s current
account shifted from a surplus of about 10% of GDP in 2008 to 2 to 3% of GDP by 2013 and
2014.
        Another way to see this is to look at the asset composition of China’s banking system
(primarily formal banks and trusts). Ideally, we would directly measure the share of loans to
private firms and loans to LFVs in the total assets of the banking system. The published
balance sheets of the Chinese banking system do not provide this information, but we can use
our estimate of total loans from banks and trust to the LFVs to impute this number. Panel A of
Figure 9 presents the share of loans from the banking system to LFVs as a share of total assets
of the banking system, where total assets consist of reserve assets, government and central
government bonds, and loans to non-financial institutions. (We provide more detail on how we
estimate the asset composition of the financial system in the appendix).     The "official
government debt" series measures loans from the banking system to LFVs used for
infrastructure projects ("official debt") while "debt of all LFVs" is our estimate of all the loans
of the financial system to the LFV (not just for the LFV's official debt). This number uses our
estimate of bank and trust loans to LFVs along with published data on total assets of the

                                                19
banking system. Not surprisingly, official LFV debt as a share of total assets increases after
2008. Furthermore, as one would expect from Figure 6, total banking system loans to LFVs
increased by even more, reflecting loans of the banking system to fund the LFVs' commercial
activities.
         Despite the increase in lending to LFVs, Panel B shows that debt of non-financial
institutions (excluding LFVs) as share of total assets of financial institutions increased by 4
percentage points between 2008 and 2014. How can the banking system lend more (as a share
of total assets) to LFVs and at the same time also lend more to non-financial institutions?
Panel C provides the answer. It shows that the banking system’s holdings of central bank
bonds fell by about 7 percentage points (as a share of total banking system assets) over the
same time period. Moreover, the share of reserves and central government bonds drop by 4.5
percentage points. This is about 3.5 percentage points more than the increase in the debt of all
LFVs as a share of total assets. This fact suggests that increasing share of local government
debt on the balance sheet of the banking system was more than offset by the declining share of
central bank bonds, reserves and government bonds. Put differently, the investment that is
crowded out by the spending of LFV are primarily the Central Bank's purchases of US
Treasury bills, and loans to firms have increased as a share of the assets of the financial system.
Viewed from the lenses of the decline in China's current account surplus, the other side of the
decline in central bank bond holdings in the banking system is that the rate at which the central
bank has been sterilizing the banking system's purchases of central bank bonds on the money
supply has declined since 2008.23
         Finally, we can also directly measure the investment rate of private firms vs. state
owned firms. We do not have this information for the aggregate economy, but we can measure
this using the firm-level data from the Chinese industrial surveys. We plot this in Figure 10.
Not surprisingly, the investment rate of state-owned firms exceeds that of private firms in the
industrial sector, reflecting the well documented preferential access of state owned firms to
credit. Here, the investment rate of private industrial firms declines from an average of 15% in
2006-2007 to an average of 12-13% in 2011-2012. However, it is less clear whether this small
decline reflects the crowding out effect of LGV spending, as the investment rate of state owned
industrial firms fell by even more over this period.
         So if aggregate private domestic investment has not suffered from the growth of the
LFV, what are the main effects of the off-balance spending by local governments? Here, it is

23
  See Song et al. (2014) and Chang et al. (2015) for institutional details and for theoretical analysis of China’s
sterilization.

                                                         20
useful to sketch a toy model. The model makes two points. First, partial financial
liberalization (which is what happened in China) may worsen the allocation of resources.
Second, the model also helps us understand why the boost in aggregate investment driven by
financial liberalization will necessarily reduce trade surplus.
             The economy consists of a financial intermediary and two types of firms: “connected”
and “unconnected” firms. There is no heterogeneity within each type. All firms produce a
homogenous good with following production technology:                          , where       is output,
     ∈   ,    , with and     representing the connected and unconnected firms. Here, we consider
     the capital a firm needs to borrow from the financial intermediary.
             The representative connected firm can borrow from the financial intermediary at a
regulated interest rate, denoted by ̅ , subject to a borrowing limit . In Song et al. (2011),
         ∞. For simplicity, we assume          to be a policy parameter that is exogenous to the
connected firm. There is also a market interest rate, denoted by , at which both connected
and unconnected firms can borrow. We will maintain the following assumption throughout:
 ̅                      . The first inequality guarantees that the connected firm will always borrow
up to the limit       at the regulated interest rate. The second inequality, on the other hand, rules
out the possibility that the connected firm will borrow from the market. The representative
unconnected firm can only borrow at the market interest rate,            equal to the marginal product
of capital:                   .
             The financial intermediary can borrow from and lend to the world market at an
                                  ∗
exogenous interest rate of            . The financial intermediary also takes domestic savings at a
                                                                                         ∗
regulated deposit rate. For simplicity, we let the regulated deposit rate equal              . Aggregate
domestic deposits, denoted by , are assumed to be exogenous. The economy has trade surplus
if the aggregate fund demand, denoted by , is smaller than the aggregate domestic savings:


                                                                           .


Trade surplus shows up as foreign assets on the balance sheet of the financial intermediary. So,
the above equation can be rewritten as the balance-sheet constraint:


                                                                 ,


where         denotes foreign assets.

                                                       21
          Finally, we introduce a quadratic lending cost for the financial intermediary. Profits of
the intermediary are:


                                                     ∗        ∗
                                                                                   ,
                                                                    2


where      is a parameter affecting the marginal lending cost. The first and second items in the
profit function are profits of lending to the connected and unconnected firms, respectively.
Maximizing the profits, subject to the balance-sheet constraint, gives the following first-order
condition:


                                                         ∗
                                                                          ,


where we substitute the first-order condition for the unconnected firm for .
          Two results are immediate. First, a financial liberalization for the connected firm that
increases its borrowing limit        will crowd out fund allocated to the unconnected firm by
increasing the marginal lending cost (            0). Such financial liberation will lower the marginal
product of capital among connected firms and raise the marginal product of capital among
unconnected firms. Second, differentiating the above equation with respect to                    shows that
|     /     |   1. That is to say, the financial liberalization will always increase the aggregate
fund demand and, hence, reduce fund inflow or trade surplus.
          With this model in mind, we now turn to the patterns in the data. We first examine the
allocation of capital between listed industrial firms and all industrial firms. As we discuss in
Bai, Hsieh, and Song (2016), the favored firms are almost always the largest firms in a locality.
The data on all firms is from the micro-data of the Chinese Industrial Survey conducted by
China's National Bureau of Statistics.24 The solid line in Panel A of Figure 11 plots the debt
revenue ratio of all the listed firms. The ratio exhibits a downward trend before 2009, falling
from 0.90 in 1998 to 0.67 in 2008, indicating that listed firms were becoming less dependent of
debt financing. 2009 stands out as a turning point. The debt revenue ratio jumps to 0.82, with
revenue roughly unchanged and debt up by 33.9% or 2.3 trillion Yuan. In sharp contrast, NBS
firms show a smaller increase in their debt revenue ratio, up from 0.50 in 2008 to 0.53 in 2009
(see the dashed line in Panel A). In other words, we find a highly asymmetric expansion of

24
 The sample consists of all state-owned industrial firms and private industrial firms with revenue above 5 million
Yuan before 2007 and 20 million Yuan after 2010.

                                                         22
debt between listed firms and NBS firms. The stimulus package, including the monetary
expansionary policies, the four trillion Yuan investment plan and the associated financial
deregulation, seems to favor listed firms in terms of debt financing.
       The more interesting finding is that after scaling back a bit their debt revenue ratio in
2010-11, listed firms continued to expand their debt at a much faster rate relative to their
revenue. In 2015, the debt revenue ratio reaches 1, more than doubling the ratio of NBS firms
in 2014. The divergence of the debt revenue ratio between listed and NBS firms after 2011 is
hard to explain by discrimination embedded in the stimulus package. Rather, we view it as
evidence supporting our story that the financial deregulation opens up a new channel through
which financial resources can be directed towards the connected firms.
       We next conduct the following robustness checks. Listed firms cover all industries,
while NBS firms are all from the industrial sector. To control for the industry heterogeneity,
Panel B uses manufacturing firms only. The results are essentially the same. Panel C and D
distinguish state-owned and private firms. As expected, the jump of the debt revenue ratio for
state-owned listed firms in 2009 is more dramatic than their private counterparts. The
divergence of the debt revenue ratio is more pronounced between private listed firms and
private NBS firms. Using firm-level data (dotted lines) yields almost the same results as those
from aggregate data in China’s Statistical Yearbook.
       Another way to examine the efficiency of capital allocation is to directly measure the
dispersion of the marginal product of capital across firms. We do not directly measure the
marginal product, but with some assumptions, we can proxy the marginal product of capital by
the average product of capital. With this assumption, the overall dispersion in the marginal
product of capital can be measured by the dispersion in the average product of capital. Figure
12 plots the variance in the log average product of capital (value-added relative to the capital
stock) across privately owned industrial firms from 1998 to 2012 (we do not have firm level
data from 2008 to 2010). We normalize the average product of capital of each firm by the
median average product in each four digit industry, and also trim the 1% outliers in each
industry-year.
       As can be seen, the dispersion in the average product of capital falls slightly from 1998
to 2007, but shows a sharp increase between 2011 and 2013. Remember that this is exactly
when off-balance sheet spending by local governments took off and when we start to see a
larger amount of LFV debt used to fund commercial activities. To be clear, the dispersion in
the average product of capital can reflect forces other than differences in access to capital
across firms. For example, adjustment costs or differences in markups across firms will also
                                                23
show up as differences across firms in the average product of capital (see, for example, Song
and Wu, 2015). However, there is no reason why these forces should change over time.
Growing misallocation of capital would lower aggregate TFP and output growth, and as Figure
2 shows, the growth rate of aggregate GDP did fall after 2008.
        The forces behind the growth slowdown in China are clearly complex. The slowdown
can be due to the effect of the anti-corruption campaign that began in 2013 or the effect of
property and equity market bubbles that may have also had the effect of misallocating financial
resources. With more work, it would be very interesting to parse out how much of the growth
slowdown is driven by these forces, including the effect of spending by off-balance sheet
companies by local governments, but this is not a task we undertake in this paper.
        The model also rationalizes why the external adjustment in China since 2008 would
necessarily be associated with an increase in the investment rate (as opposed to a decrease in
the savings rate). As discussed earlier, the current account surplus (as a share of GDP) starts to
decline after 2007. A widely held explanation for the reversal of the current account surplus is
that the appreciation of the Yuan discourages savings. However, there is only a small decline
in the savings rate, and the decline in the current account is entirely driven (in a proximate
sense) by the increase in the investment rate. Song et al. (2011) explain China’s rapid growing
trade surplus prior to 2009 as the result of domestic financial frictions that suppress investment.
Our argument here is that a similar mechanism is a play, but in reverse. The four trillion Yuan
plan and the financial deregulation generates an investment boom, which leads to the
rebalancing of China’s current account.
        Finally, the toy model also predicts a rising market interest rate, which is in line with
what has been happening in the post-2009 period. The market-based deposit rates (i.e., returns
to wealth management products), interbank repo rates and returns to trust products are all
increasing (see, e.g., Hachem and Song, 2016). This is also consistent with the finding of
increasing capital productivity for non-favored firms that have little access to credit at
regulated interest rates.
        In sum, the long run effect of the temporary fiscal stimulus appears to have been an
increase in the investment rate, a decline in the current account surplus, and a decline in
productivity driven by the increased misallocation of resources. Again, we remind the reader
that, at least at the time we are writing this paper, GDP growth appears to have slowed
compared to the 1990s and 2000.




                                                24
6. Conclusion

           The central facts about China’s economy since 2008 are the slowdown in aggregate
growth, the increase in the investment rate, the decline in the external surplus, and the rise in
off-balance sheet debt by local governments. We argue that all four facts can be understood as
outcomes of the institutions created by the decision to finance the fiscal stimulus in 2009 and
2010 by off-balance sheet spending. The fiscal stimulus in China was largely financed by the
creation of off balance sheet companies that allowed local governments to circumvent financial
controls. About three quarters of the stimulus spending was done by these off balance sheet
companies, on behalf of local governments, with only a small increase in the official budget
deficit. After the stimulus spending ended, local governments continued to use their newfound
power to obtain access to financial resources. The result is an increase in off-balance sheet
local government debt and an increase in investment spending. Local governments, who have
long faced high powered incentives to support favored local businesses, used this new found
power to channel financial resources towards favored private firms. The effect on the
efficiency of capital allocation may have had important effects on aggregate productivity
growth in recent years.
           Many observers have commented on the rise in local government debt as well as the
decline in the current account surplus. As an example, in a June 2016 speech widely covered
by the media, David Lipton (the deputy Managing Director of the IMF) praised the reversal of
China’s account surplus but raised concerns about the rise in debt, including local government
debt.25 This paper argues that the rise in local government and the external adjustment are two
outcomes of exactly the same institutional changes. If this is the case, it is difficult to see how
one can praise the external adjustment but condemn the rise in debt. For us, what is more
concerning is that the off-balance sheet institutions may have changed the way the “special
deals” regime operates. Furthermore, the powerful political forces behind off-balance sheet
lending combined with the fear of the short run consequences of shutting down this lending
may make it very difficult to undo the local financing vehicles in the future, with potentially
significant adverse consequences for China’s future growth.




25
     See https://www.imf.org/en/News/Articles/2015/09/28/04/53/sp061016 for the text of David Lipton’s address.

                                                        25
References

Bai, Chong-En, Chang-Tai Hsieh and Zheng Song, 2016, Institutional Foundations of China’s
       Growth, Working Paper.

Chang, Chun, Zheng Liu and Mark M. Spiegel, 2015, Capital Controls and Optimal Chinese
       Monetary Policy, Journal of Monetary Economics, 74, 1-15.

Feng, Shuaizhang, Yingyao Hu and Robert Moffitt, 2015: Long Run Trends in Unemployment
       and Labor Force Participation in China, NBER Working Paper No. 21460.

Hachem, Kinda Cheryl and Zheng Song, 2015: Liquidity Regulation and Unintended Financial
      Transformation in China, NBER Working Paper No. 21880.

Huang, Yasheng, 2008: Capitalism with Chinese Characteristics, Cambridge University Press,
      New York.

Huang, Yi, Marco Pagano and Ugo Panizza, 2015: Public Debt and Private Firm Funding:
      Evidence from Chinese Cities, Working Paper, The Graduate Institute, Geneva.

Jiang, Yonghua, 2008: China’s Tax Sharing System, China Financial and Economic Publishing
        House, Beijing (in Chinese).

Jin, Hehui, Yingyi Qian and Barry R. Weingast, 2005: Regional decentralization and fiscal
       incentives: Federalism, Chinese style, Journal of Public Economics, 89, 1719–1742.

National Audit Office of China (NAO), 2011 and 2013: Audit Report on National Government
       Debt.

Song, Zheng, Kjetil Storesletten and Fabrizio Zilibotti, 2011: Growing like China, American
       Economic Review, 101, 196-233.

Song, Zheng, Kjetil Storesletten and Fabrizio Zilibotti, 2014: Growing (with Capital Controls)
       like China, IMF Economic Review, 62, 327-370.

Song, Zheng and Guiying Wu, 2015: Identifying Capital Misallocation, Working Paper.

Wong, Christine P.W. and Richard M. Bird, 2008, China’s Fiscal System: A Work in Progress,
      429-466, in China’s Great Economic Transformation, Edited by Loren Brandt and
      Thomas G. Rawski, Cambridge University Press, New York.

Zhu, Rongji, 2015: Zhu Rongji on the Record: the Road to Reform 2008-2013, Brookings
      Institution.




                                              26
                                      Figure 1: Investment Rate and Budget Deficit (% of GDP)

                               50                                                                            10

                                         investment rate
                                         budget deficit / GDP

                               47                                                                            7




                                                                                                                  budget deficit / GDP (%)
         investment rate (%)




                               44                                                                            4




                               41                                                                            1




                               38                                                                            -2




                               35                                                                        -5
                                2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014



Note: Total deficit defined as total deficit of central and local government. Investment rate is the gross fixed capital
formation series provided by the NBS (see text for details). Vertical lines drawn at beginning and end of 4 trillion
stimulus program.
                                       Figure 2: GDP Growth Rate

           15


           14


           13


           12


           11


           10


             9


             8


             7


            6
            2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016



Note: Figure plots the quarterly growth rate of real GDP.
                  Figure 3: Share of Local Governments in Total Tax Revenues


          100



           90



           80



           70



           60



           50



           40



           30



           20
                1985         1990             1995   2000   2005       2010



Note: Data from China Statistical Yearbook.
                   Figure 4: Components of Aggregate Investment Rate (% of GDP)

           26
                        Non-Residential Structures
           24
                        Residential Structures
                        Other

           22


           20


           18


           16


           14


           12


           10


            8
            2005      2006      2007     2008      2009      2010      2011      2012     2013      2014



Note: “Non-residential structures” include infrastructure and business structures. We measure investment as the
“gross fixed capital formation” series provided by the NBS (see text for details).
                  Figure 5: Number of Bond-Issuing Local Financing Vehicles


        2000


        1800


        1600


        1400


        1200


        1000


         800


         600


         400


         200


           0
           2006     2007    2008   2009   2010   2011    2012   2013   2014   2015



Source: WIND database.
                     Figure 6: Total Debt of Local Financing Vehicles


           50
                        All LFVs, official debt
           45           Bond-issuing LFVs, total debt
                        Total LFVs, total debt
           40


           35


           30


           25


           20


           15


           10


            5


            0
            2007       2008       2009       2010        2011       2012       2013       2014       2015



Note: Data of “all LFVs, official debt” are from China’s National Audit Office Reports (2011 and 2013) and public
statements in 2016 by the Minister of Finance. Data of “bond-issuing LFVs, total debt” are from WIND database.
Data of “all LFVs, total debt” are our estimates (see text for details).
       Figure 7: Debt Accumulation by Local Financing Vehicles (trillion Yuan)


             8
                         All LFVs, official debt
                         Bond-issuing LFVs, total debt
             7           Total LFVs, total debt


             6



             5



             4



             3



             2



             1



            0
            2007        2008       2009       2010       2011        2012       2013       2014       2015



Note: Debt accumulation defined as change in net debt in the calendar year. See Figure 6 for data sources.
       Figure 8: Aggregate Investment, Savings and Current Account Surpluses
                                                             Panel B: Aggregate Investment
                Panel A: Net Exports / GDP (%)                   and Saving / GDP (%)
           10                                           55
                                                                                  investment
            9                                                                     saving


            8

            7
                                                        50
            6

            5

            4
                                                        45
            3

            2

            1

            0                                           40
                2006    2008    2010   2012      2014        2006   2008   2010   2012         2014




Source: China Statistical Yearbook.
                                   Figure 9: Composition of Assets of China’s Banking Sector


                                                     Panel A: Lending to Local Government
                          25
                                          local government debt
                          20
                                          debt of all LFVs


                          15


                          10


                                  5
                                  2008      2009         2010          2011          2012         2013            2014



                                            Panel B: corporate (excluding LFVs) +household liabilities
                          57

                          56

                          55

                          54

                          53

                          52

                          51
                           2008             2009         2010          2011          2012         2013            2014




                                                                                                                          reserve + central government bond (%)
                                                          Panel C: Bonds and Reserves
                                  8                                                                                 28
                                                                              central bank bond
          central bank bond (%)




                                  6
                                                                              reserve + central government bond     26


                                  4                                                                                 24


                                  2                                                                                 22


                                  0                                                                                  20
                                  2008      2009         2010          2011          2012         2013            2014




Note: The banking sector includes formal and shadow banking. See text and appendix for details.
     Figure 10: Investment Rate by Ownership in the Industrial Sector (%)

           50
                                                            state investment / state VA
           45                                               private investment / private VA

           40


           35


           30


           25


           20


           15


           10


            5


            0
            2005        2006         2007        2008    2009      2010        2011           2012



Source: Tabulations from China’s Statistical Yearbook.
                                    Figure 11: Firm Debt Revenue Ratios
                         Panel A: All Firms                            Panel B: Manufacturing Firms
           1.2                                                  1.2
                                         Listed Firms                                         Listed Firms
                                         CSY                                                  CSY
             1                                                   1
                                         NBS Firms                                            NBS Firms

           0.8                                                  0.8


           0.6                                                  0.6


           0.4                                                  0.4

                 2000        2005        2010           2015          2000       2005        2010            2015


           Panel C: State-Owned Manufacturing Firms                Panel D: Private Manufacturing Firms
           1.2                                                  1.2
                                         Listed Firms                                         Listed Firms
                                         CSY                                                  CSY
             1                                                   1
                                         NBS Firms                                            NBS Firms

           0.8                                                  0.8


           0.6                                                  0.6


           0.4                                                  0.4

                 2000        2005        2010           2015          2000       2005        2010            2015



Note: The solid line in Panel A plots the debt revenue ratio of listed firms. Data source: The CSMAR database. The
dashed line is the ratio of all state-owned and private industrial firms above scale. Data source: China’s Statistical
Yearbook. Panel B plots the debt revenue ratio of manufacturing firms in the listed-firm sample (solid line) and in
the NBS sample (dotted line). Panels C and D plot results for state-owned and private manufacturing firms,
respectively. As a robustness check, the dashed lines in all panels use the data from the Annual Survey of Industrial
Firms conducted by China’s National Bureau of Statistics (NBS sample henceforth), with years missing between
2008-10.
                   Figure 12: Dispersion in Average Product of Capital

           1.2



          1.15



           1.1



          1.05



             1



          0.95



           0.9



          0.85



           0.8
            1998         2000        2002        2004        2006        2008        2010        2012



Note: Figure plots the variance of log value-added/fixed capital among private firms in the balanced-panel of
industrial firms from 1998 to 2013. The ratio of value-added to capital is divided by the median value in each four
digit industry. Top and bottom one percentiles in each industry-year are dropped.
           Table 1: Components of the Fiscal Expansion (trillion Yuan)
                            Planned                           On-Balance Sheet        Off-Balance Sheet
                         Investment                              Spending                 Spending

                                                           Central + Local   Local


    Housing Security           0.40   Housing Security          0.20           0.12         0.14
 Rural Livelihood and          0.37   Urban and Rural           0.20           0.20         0.04
        Infrastructure                    Community
                                             Affairs +
                                          Agriculture,
                                          Forestry and
                                                Water
                                         Conservancy
       Railway, Road,          1.50     Transportation          0.27           0.31         2.53
       Airport, Water
     Conservancy and
   Urban Power Grids
Health, Education and          0.15   Health, Education         0.11           0.11         0.05
              Culture                       and Culture
         Environment           0.21       Environment           0.05           0.05         0.05
            Protection                        Protection
     Self-Independent          0.37                             N.A.          N.A.
       Innovation and
Structural Adjustment
         Post-Disaster         1.00      Post-Disaster          0.23           0.21
       Reconstruction                   Reconstruction

Total                            4                              1.05           1.00         2.81
Table 2: Cumulative Off-Balance Sheet Expenditures of Local Governments
                            (as of June 2013)

                                  % of total expenditures

Municipal Construction                          34.6

Transportation Infrastructure                   24.4

Land Storage                                    11.2

Housing Security                                6.5

Health, Education, and Culture                  5.8

Agriculture, Forestry, and Water Conservation   3.2

Environmental Protection                        2.7

Industry and Energy                             1.4
                           Table 3: Fixed-Effect Regressions on LFVs’ Debt Growth

                                        (Dependent variable: log debt)

                                                (1)                 (2)                (3)               (4)


   One-year lagged log debt of                0.492               0.488              0.467              0.464
   LFVs
                                             (0.011)             (0.011)            (0.013)           (0.013)

   Fiscal Gap                                 0.867              -1.538              1.099            -1.083
                                             (0.308)             (0.514)            (0.360)           (0.563)

   Fiscal Gap x post_09                                           2.355                                2.097
                                                                 (0.404)                              (0.417)

   Year Dummies                                yes                 yes                 yes               yes
   Other Controls                              no                  no                  yes               yes

   Observations                               4,476               4,476              3,855             3,855
   R-squared                                  0.778               0.780              0.753             0.755
   Number of Issuers                           877                 877                861               861

Note: Fiscal gap is (local fiscal expenditure – local fiscal revenue) / local GDP. Other controls include log GDP, log
population and GDP growth. Standard errors are in parentheses. Observations are city-level LFVs (i.e., prefecture-
and county-level LFVs).
