                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




  HOUSING DEMAND, COST-OF-LIVING INEQUALITY, AND THE AFFORDABILITY
                               CRISIS

                                        David Albouy
                                        Gabriel Ehrlich
                                         Yingyi Liu

                                      Working Paper 22816
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w22816


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                  November 2016




During work on this project, Albouy was a David C. Lincoln Fellow for the Lincoln Institute of
Land Policy. Any mistakes are our own. We thank seminar participants at the Budapest Institute
of Economics, Dalhousie, Homer Hoyt Institute, LSE (CEPR), Monash, National University of
Singapore, New Economic School (Moscow), Tinbergen Institute, University of Bern, UIC,
UNSW, USC (Price). We also thank conference participants at the AREUEA, ASSA, and SEA
annual meetings; CHUM-Chicago Fed; IEB IV Workshop on Urban Economics; NBER
Conference on International Comparisons of Income, Prices, and Production; the Ziman-UCLA
Conference on Housing Affordability; David Card, Tom Davidoff, Angus Deaton, Jessie
Handbury, Ed Olsen, Chien-Wen Peng, Changcheng Song , Lewis Warren, and Jing Wu for their
comments and input. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2016 by David Albouy, Gabriel Ehrlich, and Yingyi Liu. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Housing Demand, Cost-of-Living Inequality, and the Affordability Crisis
David Albouy, Gabriel Ehrlich, and Yingyi Liu
NBER Working Paper No. 22816
November 2016
JEL No. D12,E31,R21

                                          ABSTRACT

Since 1970, housing's relative price, share of expenditure, and ``unaffordability'' have all grown.
We estimate housing demand using a novel compensated framework over space and an
uncompensated framework over time. Our specifications pass tests imposed by rationality and
household mobility. Housing demand is income and price inelastic, and appears to fall with
household size. We provide a numerical non-homothetic constant elasticity of substitution utility
function for improved quantitative modeling. An ideal cost-of-living index demonstrates that the
poor have been disproportionately impacted by rising relative rents, which have greatly amplified
increases in real income inequality.

David Albouy                                                      Yingyi Liu
Department of Economics                                           Dept of Economics
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign                        University of Illinois
214 David Kinley Hall                                             1407 W. Gregory Dr
Urbana, IL 61801-3606                                             Urbana, IL 61801
and NBER                                                          liu195@illinois.edu
albouy@illinois.edu

Gabriel Ehrlich
Department of Economics
University of Michigan
611 Tappan St
Ann Arbor, MI 48109-1220
gehrlich@umich.edu
1     Introduction

Food, clothing, and shelter are all considered to be basic needs. Yet, as Figure 1A shows, from
1959 to 2014 the proportion of personal consumption expenditures in the United States devoted to
food and clothing fell from 27.4 percent to 10.6 percent, while the fraction devoted to housing and
utilities rose from 16.1 to 18.1 percent. Data from the American Housing Survey and Consumer
Expenditure Survey indicate more dramatic increases in housing’s share: about 7 percentage points
since 1970, as illustrated in Figure 1B. This growth has been even sharper among renting house-
holds. Figure 1C shows that the percentage of renting households facing “moderate” or “extreme”
affordability burdens, defined as spending more than 30 or 50 percent of their income on hous-
ing, has risen by 20 and 15 percentage points, respectively. Meanwhile, the home-ownership rate
has not seen a persistent rise. These trends support the Secretary of Housing and Urban Develop-
ment’s recent claim: “We are in the midst of the worst rental affordability crisis that this country
has known” (Olick 2013).1 As mapped in figure 2, this crisis is particularly severe in in large cities
and along the coasts.
    The increasing share of expenditures on housing appears to contradict the traditional view
that housing is a necessity. On that view, the expenditure share on housing should have fallen as
average incomes have risen over time. Another common assumption, that preferences over housing
relative to other goods are unit elastic in price and income (i.e., Cobb-Douglas), is also incapable of
explaining increases in un-affordability measures or their variation over space. Below, we consider
preferences and changes in the economy that explain both the rise in the housing expenditure share
over time, as well as the spatial variation in that share.
    First and most important is that the price of housing relative to other goods has risen substan-
tially. Figure 3A shows that the price of housing (or shelter) services has risen almost 40 percent
relative to other goods since 1970, as measured by the Bureau of Labor Statistics’ Consumer Price
   1
     The Joint Center for Housing Studies of Harvard University (JCHS, 2013) documents that from 2000 to 2012, the
median share of renters’ incomes devoted to contract rent rose nearly five percentage points to 27.4 percent, and that
28 percent of renting households now spend more than half of their incomes on rent. Glaeser and Gyourko (2008)
present a thoughtful critique of affordability indices as well as a discussion of how rental expenditures have changed
over time.


                                                          1
Index (CPI). Critiques of the CPI suggest that the official series understates increases in the relative
price of shelter severely, while it overstates increases in the absolute prices of most other goods and
services. When we adopt revisions proposed by Crone, Nakamura and Voith (2010) and Boskin
(1996), the relative price of shelter has increased by 120 percent since 1970. If housing demand is
price inelastic, the large relative price increase of housing can help to explain its rising share.
       Second, rising income inequality has lowered median incomes relative to mean incomes, as
seen in Figure 3B. This phenomenon is particularly acute among renters, whose incomes have
seen weaker gains relative to homeowners. Thus, rising incomes have had smaller effects for the
majority of renters. Third, falling household sizes may have increased demand. Figure 3C shows
that households have shrunk in size by almost 30 percent. This has reduced economies of scale in
housing consumption, thereby increasing per-capita demand for housing.2
       To investigate these issues, we estimate housing demand using an intuitive framework moti-
vated by spatial equilibrium conditions. Section 3 demonstrates that cross-sectional data lends
itself to estimating compensated (Hicksian) housing demand functions, as mobility equalizes the
utility households receive from living in different locations. On the other hand, time-series data
lends itself to uncompensated (Marshallian) demand functions, as utility levels may change over
time. An important innovation of our approach is that we use data on non-housing prices to test
restrictions imposed by demand theory, thus checking the validity of our specifications. This pro-
vides an unconventional examination of demand theory through spatial variation, rather than more
conventional temporal variation (e.g. Deaton 1986, Blundell et al. 1993). We also estimate house-
hold economies of scale in the spirit of Barten (1964), and develop methods for estimating the
direct effect of amenities on housing demand.
       Under such restrictions, we integrate a demand equation into a utility function in the non-
homothetic constant elasticity-of-substitution (NH-CES) framework. This function should be use-
   2
     This increased demand requires that housing is indeed price inelastic. Of course, household sizes may be respon-
sive to incomes and prices. We leave the topic of endogenous household sizes to future work. Note the proportion of
children has fallen as the population has aged. Children under 18 accounted for nearly 24 percent of all household
members in 1970, but accounted for only 15 percent as of 2013. To the extent that adults desire more housing than
children do, this trend should have also raised housing expenditures.



                                                         2
ful to researchers modeling housing consumption and provides cost-of-living indices across space
and time for different income, household sizes, and amenity levels, which account for income and
substitution effects.
   Our compensated estimates suggest that the uncompensated own-price, income, and substitu-
tion elasticities are all near two-thirds in absolute value. Our tests suggest that estimates based on
cross-metropolitan (as opposed to within-metropolitan) variation are likely unaffected by house-
hold sorting, which in principle would bias the estimates away from zero. The quality of our
control for utility, based on the wage predicted by worker skills, cannot be fully tested, but likely
suffers from fewer biases than other measures.
   We find some evidence of economies of scale in housing, in proportion to the square-root of
housing size. A 30-percent reduction in residents per household reduces household housing con-
sumption by only 15 percent, increasing per-capita consumption by the same percentage. Further-
more, estimates suggest that hilliness and hot weather may increase housing demand independently
of prices.
   Time-series patterns are largely consistent with our cross-sectional results. With the adjusted
CPI, an elasticity of substitution slightly lower, or an income elasticity slightly higher than our esti-
mates — in the direction of our expected biases — would completely explain housing’s rising share
in national expenditure. Demographic effects reinforce these trends. Furthermore, rising rents and
growing income equality explain most of the “affordability crisis” affecting renters. There may be
some residual increases in the housing share that warrants additional exploration.
   We demonstrate numerically how an ideal cost-of-living index varies non-linearly with income
and prices across space and time. While the prices of many goods have become much cheaper
over time, housing rents do not appear to have made nearly as much progress. By differentially
impacting the poor, increases in the relative price of housing have increased real income inequality
by 25 percent since 1970.




                                                   3
2        Motivation and Related Literature

Our explanation of competing income and relative-price effects is illustrated in Figure 4, with
production possibility frontiers (PPF) and indifference curves for housing and non-housing goods.
Over time, the PPF has expanded further in the direction of non-housing goods: these goods are
traded internationally and are subject to greater technological improvements. With this expansion,
both income effects (illustrated from point A to point B) and relative-price effects (from B to C)
lead households to increase their consumption of non-housing goods more than of housing. The
income effect causes housing’s share to fall (compare B and D), but the rise in the relative price
causes housing’s share to rise if the substitution response is limited (compare C and E).
        Previous researchers have estimated a wide range of price and income elasticities. Articles
reviewed in Mayo (1981) find uncompensated price elasticities from slightly positive to less than
minus one. Estimates closest to ours include Pollinsky and Ellwood’s (1979) estimate of -0.7
and Hanushek and Quigley’s (1980) experimental estimates of -0.64 in Pittsburgh and -0.45 in
Phoenix.3 Classical studies such as Engel (1857) and Schwabe (1868) estimated the income (or
more precisely, expenditure) elasticity of housing demand to be less than one, which became
known as “Schwabe’s Law of Rent”.4 As discussed in Mayo (1981), a source of contention is
how to measure income: most use a proxy measure of “permanent income” to correct for atten-
uation bias caused by transitory income. Davis and Ortalo-Magne (2011) argue that the median
expenditure share on rent across metros — the evidence we focus on — is roughly constant across
metro areas, consistent with price and income elasticities of one.
        Modelers have taken great latitude in interpreting such disparate findings. Indeed, housing
    3
      Other articles include Muth (1960), Reid (1962), Rosen (1985), Goodman and Kawai (1986), Goodman (1988)
Ermisch et al. (1996), Goodman (2002), and Ioannides and Zabel (2003). Most estimate uncompensated price elastic-
ities ranging from -1 to -0.3 and income elasticities from 0.4 to 1. While some studies use non-housing price data to
deflate their numbers, none use it to test the validity of the housing demand specification, as we do here. Few articles
estimate elastic price demand, with elasticities greater than one. Kau and Sirmans (1979) estimated price elasticity
shifting from -2.25 to -1 from year 1876 to 1970 using historical data from Chicago. However, these are based off
land-price gradients and are not robust to expected sorting behaviors described below.
    4
      See Stigler (1954) for a discussion. As summarized by De Leeuw (1971), Mayo (1981) and later Harmon (1988),
some studies are inconsistent with Schwabe’s Law. See Hansen et al. (1998) and references therein for estimates less
than one, and Muth (1960) and Cheshire and Sheppard (1998) for an estimate greater than one, noting that the latter
study estimates elasticities for housing attributes rather than for a unified bundle.


                                                           4
demand is key to understanding house prices, tax incidence, population density, and location de-
cisions. Many assume a fixed demand for housing, perfectly inelastic to price and income. This
provides a simple derivation of the mono-centric city model, seen from Mills (1967) to Desmet
and Rossi-Hansberg (2013). Other models, such as the search and matching model of Piazzesi and
Schneider (2010), assume housing demand is inelastic to income but not to prices. Unit-elastic
demand — derived from Cobb-Douglas preferences — is especially common: examples include
Eeckhout (2004), Michaels, Rauch and Redding (2012), and Guerreiri, Hartley and Hurst (2013).
While abstraction is often necessary, these disparate assumptions make it hard to reconcile different
findings, and may lead to incorrect conclusions in some contexts.
    Indeed, the issue of housing “affordability,” especially as measured by high expenditure shares,
makes the most sense when demand is income- and price-inelastic. This is especially true for low-
income households, whose incomes have lagged particularly in America’s largest, most expensive
cities (Baum-Snow and Pavan, 2013). Low-skilled workers’ greater housing expenditure share
explains their choosing to live in cheaper cities (Moretti 2013), while those remaining in expen-
sive cities must earn higher wage premia to do so relative to the premia required by more-skilled
workers (Black, Kolesnikova, and Taylor 2009).5
    The secular rise in housing expenditures appears to be understudied. It is in line with Piketty’s
(2014) finding that the value of residential capital relative to output rose substantially over the last
century.6 With inelastic demand for land in both consumption and production, land’s value can
take up an increasing share of the economy, reviving fears of Ricardo (1817) and George (1879).7
    5
      Handbury (2013) estimates a non-homothetic log-logit utility function with a CES superstructure to argue that
high-income households find large cities to be more “affordable” by containing a greater range of groceries suited to
their tastes. We find that large cities are more affordable for high-income households as they spend less on housing.
    6
      Gyourko, Sinai, and Mayer (2013) find housing values’ differences between typical and highest-price locations
widened considerably since 1960. Rognlie (2015) shows that the postwar increase in the share of income flowing to
capital is largely concentrated in the housing sector, which La Cava (2016) shows is mainly due to higher imputed
rental income to owner-occupiers. Davis and Heathcote (2007) present evidence of persistent real growth in land
values, accounting for an increasing share of housing values. This evidence is consistent with limited substitution
between land and non-land inputs in housing production, as found in Albouy and Ehrlich (2012). We note that
housing is a capital asset that provides flow consumption services to its owner. This asset is a composite of land and
structure, the latter of which typically depreciates over time. We follow the bulk of the literature in estimating demand
for a composite housing good, but the shape of the housing demand function can have important implications for land
values separately from housing values.
    7
      This may happen if land-saving technological improvements are weak or stifled by regulation. Thus, rising de-


                                                           5
3     Housing Demand as Prices, Incomes, and Amenities Vary

Here we present a standard static model of housing demand embedded in a spatial equilibrium
framework with local household amenities, similar to the settings of Rosen (1979), Roback (1982),
and Albouy (2016). We derive expressions for the share of expenditure devoted to housing, which
motivate regressions to identify the parameters of the compensated and uncompensated housing
demand functions, amended to allow for variation in household size. We then construct utility and
cost-of-living functions that allow for imperfect substitution, non-homotheticity, varying house-
hold sizes, and variation in amenities.


3.1     Household Budgets and Preferences

The national economy contains many cities, indexed by j, which share a population of mobile
households, who supply one unit of labor where they live. They consume a housing good y
with price pj , and a non-housing good x with price cj .8 Households earn total income mj =
I +(1−τ )wj , determined by unearned income, I, which does not vary by city, and local wage levels
wj , after taxes, τ .9 Household preferences over the consumption good, housing, and location are
modeled by a utility function U (x, y; Qj ), where Qj represents a city-specific amenity bundle con-
ceptualized as “quality-of-life”. The indirect utility function for a household in city j is then given
by V (pj , cj , mj ; Qj ) = maxx,y (U (x, y; Qj )|cj x + pj y = (1 − τ )wj + I). The expenditure function
for a household in city j is likewise given by e(pj , cj , u; Qj ) = minx,y (cj x + pj y|U (x, y; Qj ) ≥ u).


3.2     The Housing Expenditure Share and Uncompensated Demand

To take the model to the data, we approximate the relationships described above around their
national average values. Denote the fraction of household expenditures on housing in city j as
mand may reverse earlier declines in land values engendered by transportation improvements.
    8
      For simplicity, the exposition of the theoretical model will refer to a system of cities and call individual geo-
graphical units as such. However, the empirical work using the Consumer Expenditure Survey (CEX) data will be at
a partly-disaggregated state level. Therefore, the geographies considered in this model are more properly considered
‘areas’, with the term ‘city’ used for concreteness.
    9
      In this static setting, household expenditure equals household income.


                                                          6
sjy ≡ (pj y j )/mj . Log-linearizing this equation produces the identity ŝjy = p̂j + ŷ j − m̂j .10 We
assume that households take local price and income levels as given, so that the only behavioral
variable in sy is housing consumption, y, which is determined by the uncompensated (Marshallian)
demand function y j = y(pj , cj , mj ; Qj ). Log-linearizing demand, ŷ j ≡ y,p p̂j + y,c ĉj + y,m m̂j +
y,Q Q̂j . The parameter y,p is the uncompensated own-price elasticity of housing demand, y,c is the
uncompensated cross-price elasticity, y,m is the income elasticity, and y,Q is the amenity elaticity
amenities. If housing is a normal good, then y,m > 0, and housing obeys the law of demand
that y,p < 0. It is a priori unclear whether housing is a gross substitute for non-housing goods,
i.e., whether y,c > 0, because the cross-price elasticity exhibits a positive substitution effect and
a negative income effect, each of unknown magnitudes. Housing may be a gross complement or
substitute for amenities, i.e. y,Q ≷ 0, if amenities alter the marginal rate of substitution between
housing and non-housing goods.
       Combining the identities above demonstrates how the housing share depends on local variables:


                              ŝjy = (1 + y,p )p̂j + y,c ĉj + (y,m − 1)m̂j + y,Q Q̂j                                   (1)


Unrestricted, equation (1) is merely definitional. Rationality of preferences restricts the demand
function to be homogenous of degree zero in prices and income (p, c, m), so that y,p +y,c +y,m =
0. This restriction of “no money illusion” requires that proportional increases in all prices and
income do not lead to changes in behavior.11
       Adding a constant and error term to equation (1) motivates these regression equations:


                      ln sjy = α0 + α1 ln pj + α2 ln cj + α3 ln mj + α4 q j + ej                                          (2a)

                             = α0 + α1 (ln pj − ln cj ) + α3 (ln mj − ln cj ) + α4 q j + ej                               (2b)
  10
     A hat over a variable represents its log deviation from the (geometric) national average, i.e., ẑ j = d ln z j = dz j /z̄.
  11
     We do not model how households with low tastes for housing may be inclined to seek out more amenable areas
(see Black et al. 2002). Albouy and Lue (2015) present evidence that household sizes, age, and marital status vary little
across metropolitan areas (they vary more within), suggesting such selection issues are not of first-order importance.
While discussed more below, our rationality test appears to rule out large amounts of sorting.




                                                               7
Equation (2b) follows from (2a) as homogeneity requires α1 +α2 +α3 = 0. If we subtract the means
of the right-hand side variables, the regression coefficients are related to the demand parameters
as: α0 = ln s¯y , α1 = 1 + y,p , α2 = y,c , and α3 = y,m − 1. s¯y = eα0 is the geometric mean of
expenditure shares. The own-price uncompensated elasticity is the coefficient on housing prices
minus one, y,p = α1 − 1; income elasticity is the coefficient on income plus one, y,m = α3 + 1.
       Quality of life is not observed directly but is proxied by observable amenities, qj . Moreover,
we model y,Q as a vector because differing amenities may shift housing demand differently.12
       Consistent estimation of equation (2a) requires that non-housing goods are properly accounted
for by the index cj , that preferences across cities are the same, that preferences can be aggregated,
and that we have an appropriate (arguably permanent) measure of income mj .


3.3       Compensated Demand with Household Mobility and Heterogeneity

The uncompensated demand function is converted into a compensated (Hicksian) demand function
by substituting in the expenditure function, i.e. y H (p, c, m; Q) = y(p, c, e(p, c, u; Q); Q). Log-
linearizing the expenditure function directly yields the mobility condition that local incomes will
compensate for local prices and quality of life, conditional on utility:


                                  m̂j = s¯y p̂j + (1 − s¯y )ĉj + m,Q Q̂j + m,u ûj                                    (3)


where m,u is the elasticity of expenditures with respect to utility, and m,Q is the elasticity of
expenditures with respect to quality of life.
       Substituting equation (3) into equation (1) and simplifying by the Slutsky equations gives
the following relationships among the uncompensated (Marshallian) and compensated (Hicksian)
price elasticities: y,p = H                          H                      H        H
                            y,p − s¯y y,m and y,c = y,c − s¯x y,m . Here y,p and y,c are the compensated

elasticities of housing demand with respect to housing and non-housing prices, respectively.13 Ra-
  12
      A priori we are unsure, nice climates could induce households to spend more of their time on the properties or
away from them. Zivin and Neidell (2014) estimate the extent to which extreme heat and cold pushes people indoors.
   13
      The first substitution yields ŝjy = (1 + y,p − s¯y + s¯y y,m )p̂j + [y,c − (1 − y,m )(1 − s¯y )]ĉj + (y,Q − (1 −
y,m )m,Q )Q̂j − (1 − y,m )m,u ûj . Besides the Slutsky equations we also substitute in the identities H   y,Q = y,Q +



                                                             8
tionality requires that compensated demand functions are homogeneous of degree zero in prices,
implying the own and cross-price elasticities sum to zero, H      H
                                                            y,p + y,c = 0.

    Combining these insights yields the following equation for differences in the expenditure share
in terms of relative prices, quality of life, and utility:


                   ŝjy = (H                 j    j      H             j    H
                            y,p + 1 − s¯y )(p̂ − ĉ ) + (y,u − m,u )û + (y,Q − m,Q )Q̂
                                                                                           j
                                                                                                                     (4)


Here H                                                                                        H
      y,Q is the compensated elasticity of housing demand with respect to quality of life and y,u

is a similar elasticity for income.
    We assume that similarly-skilled households are equally well-off across cities. When house-
holds are mobile, households should be indifferent across locations they inhabit, and utility by type
of household will not vary across cities. Rather, utility differences will represent inherent differ-
ences across households, such as different earnings potentials. We parameterize income in city j
as mj = ζ j wj , where ζ j is an index of wage-earning skills, and wj is the city-wide wage level that
compensates households for living in that city.14
    To interpret the coefficient, we posit that our utility function is money metric around national
averages: u(x, y; Q) = e(p̄, c̄, ũ(x, y; Q), Q). This normalization allows us to write utility differ-
ences in terms of differences in the skill index ûj = ζ̂ j , and impose m,u = 1 and H
                                                                                       y,u = y,m .
                                                                                                    15


This motivates a compensated empirical model that replaces income in (2a) with a skill index:


                                ln sjy = β0 + β1 p̂j + β2 ĉj + β3 ζ̂ j + β4 q j + ej                               (5a)

                                       = β0 + β1 (p̂j − ĉj ) + β3 ζ̂ j + β4 q j + ej                              (5b)


where β0 = ln s¯y , β1 = H                                                    j
                          y,p + 1 − sy = −β2 and β3 = y,m − 1. In practice, ζ̂ is an index estimated

y,m m,Q and H y,u = y,m m,u to get the resulting equation.
   14
      When household types vary within city, the compensating wage differences will vary according to their tastes for
housing, quality of life, and taxes.
   15
      Note that we implicitly impose the restriction that the skill index affects housing consumption through income, and
not through differences in tastes. If households with more skills like housing less (more) than those with fewer skills,
the income elasticity estimate will be biased downwards (upwards). Our index also does not handle how earnings over
the life-cycle may differ from permanent income.


                                                           9
from the average log wages households would earn in a typical city based on their human capital
and other location-invariant characteristics.
       The main testable restriction is that β1 + β2 = 0, which may be seen as a joint test of both
demand theory and mobility.16 When this restriction holds, the elasticity of substitution between
housing and non-housing goods is σD ≡ −(ŷ j − x̂j )/(p̂j − ĉj ) = −H
                                                                      y,p /(1 − s¯y ), so that β1 =

(1 − s¯y )(1 − σD ). When σD is less (greater) than one, housing demand is said to be price inelastic
(elastic), and the expenditure share of housing rises (falls) with the relative price of housing, p/c.
An advantage of the compensated specification is that it estimates the elasticity of substitution
without reference to income, which our skill-index may not fully capture.
       The general prediction for neutral quality-of-life amenities, with y,Q = 0, is that they are net
substitutes for housing. However, when housing is a necessity, they increase the housing share
as households take lower real incomes to live in more amenable areas: H
                                                                       y,Q − m,Q = −(1 −

y,m )m,Q < 0. With an estimate of m,Q — available from methods in Rosen (1979) or Albouy
(2008) — the uncompensated effect of an amenity on housing demand is calculated by netting out
this implied income effect using the formula y,Q = β4 + β3 m,Q .


3.4       Economies of Scale in Housing Consumption

Shared living quarters make housing consumption partly non-rival in nature. This “non-congestibility,”
proposed by Barten (1964), and explored by Deaton and Paxson (1998), can have potentially large
price and income effects on housing demand. Here we sketch how to incorporate non-congestibility
in the demand framework. The uncompensated demand function for housing per household mem-
ber in a household of size n is:
                                                               m
                                           y = nφ ỹ c, pnφ−1 ,                                                (6)
                                                                n

where ỹ is the housing demand function for a single-member household, and m/n is income per
capita. The parameter φ governs the degree to which housing is congestible: φ = 1 implies that
  16
    If mobility does not hold, then the coefficients would not be of equal magnitudes. Income effects in the uncom-
pensated elasticities would likely push coefficients on both housing and non-housing prices downwards.



                                                        10
housing is a purely congestible (or private) good. Log-linearizing this equation shows how the log
expenditure share varies with prices, houshold size, and log income per capita, m̂ − n̂:


           ŝy = (εy,p + 1) p̂ + (εy,w − 1) (m̂ − n̂) − (εy,p + εy,m )ĉ − (1 − φ) [εy,p + 1] n̂   (7a)

              = α1 (p̂ − ĉ) + α3 (m̂ − n̂ − ĉ) + αn n̂                                           (7b)


It then follows that congestibility φ = 1 + αn /α1 ∈ [0, 1]. Note this places a restriction on
the estimates that 0 ≥ αn ≥ −α1 . In the appendix we demonstrate an analogous framework
for compensated demand, with φ = 1 + βn /β1 ∈ [0, 1]. The compensated framework is less
appropriate for dealing with differences in household size given our use of the skill index in light
of endogenous labor supply and household size choices.


3.5    Non-Homothetic Utility, Housing Share, and Cost-of-Living Functions

To allow the housing share to vary with both prices and income, we use the non-homothetic sep-
arable family CES (NH-CES) function from Sato (1977). Unlike other utility functions, it neatly
separates out a substitution parameter σ, from a non-homotheticity parameter, γ, as well as a dis-
tribution parameter δ. We amend the function for imperfect household congestion, φ and neutral
shifts in quality of life, Q:

                                                                                    σ
                                                                                 γ(σ−1)
                                                           1−φ
                                                                  σ−1
                                                    δ yn            σ
                                                                         + θ1
                            U (x, y; n, Q) = Q                          σ−1
                                                                                                  (8a)
                                                    θ2 − (1 − δ)x         σ




where θ1 = [1 − σ − γδ]/(γσ) and θ2 = [1 − σ − γ(δ − 1)]/(γσ). This function becomes a standard
CES function (Arrow et al. 1961) as γ → 0, and Cobb-Douglas (1928) if also σ → 1. We show
in the appendix that the housing share and cost-of-living index associated with this utility function




                                                     11
are:

                                                                   p
                                                                      1−σ
                                                            δσ   n1−φ
                  sy (p, c, u; n, Q) =               1−σ                        γ(1−σ) .                     (8b)
                                                p                                u
                                         δσ   n1−φ
                                                            + (1 −   δ)σ c1−σ    Q
                                     "                                       1
                                                                 γ(1−σ) # 1−σ
                                   u σ  p 1−σ                  u
              COL(p, c, u; n, Q) =     δ        + (1 − δ)σ c1−σ                                                  (8c)
                                   Q     n1−φ                    Q


When γ(1 − σ) > 0, households with higher utility consume less in housing, and need less income
to compensate them for rises in p. Our restricted log-linear model maps to this utility function:
when the right-hand side variables are demeaned, β0 = σ ln δ = ln s̄y , β1 = (1 − s̄y )(1 − σ), and
β3 = −γ(1 − s̄y )(1 − σ)/m,u , where m,u is the expenditure elasticity with respect to u. The
parameters are determined recursively with σ = 1 − β1 /(1 − eβ0 ), δ = eβ0 /σ , γ = −m,u β3 /β1 .17
    The cost-of-living index in (8c) requires that prices p and c are expressed in proportion to a
reference level of prices p̄ and c̄. Furthermore, with a value of σ and a reference value for s¯y , e.g.,
the national average, the distribution parameter is set to δ = {1 + [s¯y /(1 − s¯y )](1/σ) }−1 . We can
incorporate a reference utility level for any household based on its housing consumption siy and its
                                                                                   
quality of life, as 8b implies (u/Q)γ(1−σ) = (1 − siy )δ σ p̄1−σ / siy (1 − δ)σ c̄1−σ . Local quality
of life measures, Q, may be estimated using methods described in Albouy (2008).


3.6     Addressing Potential Biases in Elasticity Estimates

Several potential biases can arise in the estimation of the price and inccome elasticities of housing
demand. Regarding the price elasticity, our approach corrects for potential biases that may arise
from omitting non-housing prices, skill levels, and home-ownership. Additionally, the focus on
cross-metro variation limits potential biases due to taste-based sorting.
    Figure 5A shows that non-housing prices vary positively with housing prices. Suppose ĉj =
ρp̂j + v j , where ρ > 0 and v j is white noise. Substituting this projection into equation 5b, together
with the elasticity of substitution, σD , gives that σ̂D = 1 − β1 /[(1 − eβ0 )(1 − ρ)]. Thus, the higher
   17
      Because the units of u and γ are not separately identified, we impose the restriction, COL(1, 1, u; n, Q) = 1 to
solve for γ and u/Q simultaneously.


                                                            12
is ρ, the more ignoring non-housing prices biases σ̂D upwards.
    Omitting the skill level of workers, ζ j , can also bias estimates. As seen in figure 5B, higher-
skilled households locate slightly more in high-rent areas.18 If housing is a necessity, these house-
holds will exhibit a smaller housing share. Thus, higher-price areas have a low housing share
relative to their rent level without this control, biasing estimated substitutability upward.
    Another bias may stem from housing tenure selection. Suppose the propensity to rent rises
with rent levels (possibly due to financing constraints), so that skilled households rent more in
expensive cities. If housing is a necessity, and controls for skills (or utility) are incomplete, this
could bias substitution elasticities upward. This suggests a control for the home-ownership rate.
    Finally, there is the issue of unobserved taste-based sorting. Households that care more for
housing should sort to areas where rents are low, negatively biasing the expenditure-rent gradient
towards finding higher substitution. Such sorting behavior would likely cause the homogeneity
restrictions to fail. To check, we compare estimates using rent variation across metros with those
using variation within metros, where sorting is more likely. Nonetheless, this potential bias leads
us to view our estimates of the elasticity of substitution as an upper bound on the true value.
    The main concern in estimating the income elasticity of housing demand is attenuation bias
from using current-period income. Indeed, our data include numerous observations for which rent
paid exceeds reported income. Taking metro-level medians should greatly reduce biases produced
by measurement error and transitory income. Nevertheless, cities themselves may be subject to
transitory income shocks. The wage index measure is purged of any location effects and should
suffer far less from these issues. It is still limited in that it only captures a snapshot of earnings
over the life cycle.19 Therefore, we view our preferred estimate of the income elasticity as a lower
bound on the actual elasticity.
  18
     Moretti (2013) finds a stronger skill-rent relationship using education only. Our measure includes race, experience,
immigration status, and language ability.
  19
     Classical measurement error in income implies that we observe m̂j∗ = m̂j + η j , where η j is white noise. Defining
λ = 1 − var(η j )/var(m̂j∗ |p̂j , ĉj ) as the reliability ratio, conditional on the other variables, the OLS estimate of α3
will give λ(α3 + 1) − 1, and the inferred value of εy,m is attenuated classically to zero by the factor λ. Haider and
Solon (2006) estimate that as a measure of lifetime earnings, λ peaks in the middle of the life cycle at a value of about
two-thirds.



                                                            13
3.7      The Housing Share, or “Affordability” as a Measure of Welfare

What housing shares, sy , tell us about well-being or affordability hinges on the nature of the
demand function. Housing must be a necessity for large shares to signal low well-being; it must
be price inelastic for high shares to indicate high prices. But if households are mobile, high prices
should reflect high wages or high quality of life. A household in an unsafe area with bad schools
and long commutes may spend little on housing, but still be worse off than a household spending
a larger share in an area with better amenities. If households are immobile, then high shares may
indicate lower welfare, although differing amenities and tastes still complicate analysis.20



4        Data

The primary data source for our cross-sectional analysis is the 2000 Decennial Census microdata
samples from IPUMS (Ruggles et al. 2004).21 These data generate metro-level indices of income,
mj , predicted income, ζ j , the rental-price index, pj , and the housing share, sjy , as explained be-
low. For the price of non-housing goods, we use a series from Carrillo et al. (2013), or “CEO,”
who construct the series from data by the American Chambers of Commerce Research Associa-
tion (ACCRA).22 In our time series analyses, we combine data from several sources. The 1970,
1980, 1990, and 2000 Decennial Censuses and 2001 through 2014 American Community Surveys
provide data on the housing share, as do the 1984-2014 Consumer Expenditures Surveys (CEX)
and personal consumption expenditures data from the Bureau of Economic Analysis for the years
1970 to 2014. Current Population Survey (CPS) data from 1970 to 2014 provide data on house-
hold size and composition, and Consumer Price Index data from the Bureau of Labor Statistics
from the same years provide information on relative prices. The CPI for shelter from the BLS is
    20
     Additionally, elderly households, particularly homeowners, may consume high amounts of housing because they
have not adjusted from when their households were once larger.
  21
     In the appendix we also consider the 1980 and 1990 Censuses and the combined 2007-2011 American Community
Survey (ACS). Each represents 5 percent of the U.S. population. The metro-level indices are calculated for Primary
Metropolitan Statistical Areas using 1999 Office of Management and Budget definitions. The Public-Use files are
available for Public-Use Microdata Areas (PUMAs), are matched to metropolitan areas using standard geographic
correlation techniques, which attempt to preserve the geography over different cross-sectional samples.
  22
     These data begin in 1982, and so we use 1982 values for our 1980 specification.


                                                       14
based on observed rents, and rents imputed for owned units using a rental-equivalence approach.23
The index is chain-weighted, accounting for changes in the geographic distribution of occupied
houses. The BEA measure of housing expenditures imputes rental-equivalent measures for owner-
occupied units. From the CEX, we take measures of average rental expenditures relative to all
expenditures. Both datasets include owner-occupiers.24


4.1     Rental and Housing Expenditure Shares

We focus on median rental expenditure shares. Expenditures for owner-occupiers are complicated
by difficulties in measuring user costs of housing and complications from savings. The rental
share is the ratio of gross rents (including utility costs) to reported household income. Median
shares circumvent aggregation issues and mitigate measurement problems such as under-reporting
income, which can create very high shares for low income households.25


4.2     Price and Wage Indices

To calculate cross-sectional rental and house-price indices, we run regressions of the form ln(P ij ) =
αP + βP X ij + δPj + ij
                      P , where P
                                  ij
                                     is the rent or imputed rent for unit i in area j. XPij is a vector
of housing-unit characteristics described in the appendix.26 The estimated area indicators, δPj , act
as our inter-area housing price indices, pj . To estimate a skill index, we run the wage regression
  23
      The index is based primarily on a re-weighting procedure. The rental portion of the index may suffer from a
downward bias, discussed in Crone et al. (2010).
   24
      We use total expenditures as the denominator rather than income when we use the CEX, as it is closer to the ideal
presented in the model.
   25
      We also consider average and aggregate expenditure shares, equal to the sum of all rental payments divided by
the sum of all tenant income. We consider two possible expenditure measures for owner-occupiers. The first is total
monthly payments (or “cash-flow”) related to housing, including mortgages, property taxes, and utilities. While this
measure is appropriate for a static environment, it may diverge significantly from the true user-cost due to expected
capital gains, mortgage terms, and net improvements relative to (unobserved) depreciation and maintenance costs.
Most importantly, we do not observe income from home equity, which belongs on both the expenditure and income
side of the equation. We also consider a measure of self-reported housing values relative to household income. Ideally,
we would be able to model the decision to rent or own.
   26
      We impute rents using the variable OWNCOST from the IPUMS microdata, which is the sum of mortgage and
similar payments, real estate taxes, hazard insurance, utilities and fuels expenses, and condominium and mobile home
fees where appropriate. When the regression includes both rented and owned units, XPij includes tenure status inter-
acted with every characteristic.



                                                         15
                     ij    j
ln(W ij ) = αW + βW XW  + δW + ij                                                        W
                                W , where Wij is the hourly wage for person i in area j. Xij is

a vector of personal characteristics, and δjW is a set of area fixed effects. The skill index ζ j is from
                                                            ij 27
the corresponding moment (e.g., median or mean) of the β̂W XW . The appendix covers additional
indices for robustness.



5         Empirical Results

This section describes our estimates of the housing demand function. The heart of our estimation
strategy, in tables 1 and 2, is to use cross-sectional variation across U.S. metropolitan areas. Table
3 displays the results from aggregate time series data.


5.1        Cross-sectional Evidence

5.1.1       Price and Income Elasticities: Estimates and Robustness

Table 1 presents metro-level estimates using the compensated model from equation (5b), using the
log median rental share as the dependent variable in columns 1-4. Column 1 displays the results of
a simple regression of the log median rental share on the rental price index, recovering a median
expenditure share, sy , of 22.5 percent, and an implied price elasticity, εy,p of -0.83.28
         Figures 6A and 6B illustrate the inter-metropolitan relationship between median expenditure
shares and relative prices in the Census data. Figure 6A includes renters only, while 6B includes
both renters and owners.29 The regression line has slope β1 = −β2 in equation (5b), with β3 =
β4 = 0 imposed. Both slopes are positive and statistically significant, indicating demand is price-
inelastic: expenditure shares are higher in areas with more expensive housing. Figure 6B features a
steeper slope and a tighter fit, although the housing share for home owners includes net investments
and excludes implicit rents. The slope may be biased for more reasons than discussed above.
    27
      Thus, raw wage differences across cities are the product of differences due to the area itself – compensating wage
differentials for costs-of-living and amenities – and the local skills of the workforce, summarized by the wage index.
Additional specifications use the average predicted values from the wage regressions.
   28
      More technically, sy is the geometric mean of the median expenditure share across metro areas.
   29
      Accordingly, the former uses a price-index for rental units and the latter an index for all housing units.


                                                          16
    As expected, the coefficient on rents, β1 , increases when the non-housing price index and the
skill index are included in column 2 of table 1. The implied price and income elasticities are -0.7
and 0.7, respectively. A test of the homogeneity of demand does not reject the null hypothesis that
β1 = −β2 . Therefore, our preferred specification in column 3 imposes homogeneity of demand,
recovering an elasticity of substitution, σD , of 0.69. The results in column 4 are largely unaffected
by controlling for local home-ownership rates, suggesting that unobserved determinants of renter-
ship do not bias our estimates.30
    Column 5 uses the out-of-pocket expenditure share of home-owners as the dependent variable,
while column 6 includes owners and renters, as in Figure 6B. The estimates in these columns imply
smaller income and price elasticities than the results that are restricted to renters. The results in
column 5 fail the homogeneity restriction, casting doubt on the reliability of the results that include
homeowners, for whom it is more difficult to measure the theoretically appropriate concept of
rents.31 Column 7 uses the aggregate rental share, thereby weighting households in proportion to
their expenditures. The results are similar to column 3, with slightly higher elasticities.
    Column 8 presents results using within-metro variation at the PUMA level to examine house-
hold sorting. This specification suggests a lower income and higher price elasticity. The specifica-
tion fails the homogeneity test, however, suggesting that either the non-housing cost data are not
reliable within metros or that taste-sorting is biasing the estimates.
    Overall, our preferred estimates in column 3 reveal an uncompensated price elasticity of roughly
-2/3, an income elasticity near 2/3 and an elasticity of substitution near 2/3. Furthermore, the ho-
mogeneity restriction holds when using proper rental measures, even after controlling for home-
ownership, suggesting our compensated demand framework based on household mobility is a use-
ful estimation strategy.
   30
      Davis and Ortalo-Magne’s (2011) data for metro areas support an elasticity of substitution of 0.85. However,
their index of rental costs differs from ours by controlling for commuting costs, and thus exaggerates the actual price
differences faced by households (e.g. that suburban dwellers in the New York suburbs face Manhattan prices), biasing
their results towards one. Their study does not account for income or non-housing prices.
   31
      We have also tried imputing rents by adding utility to costs to a percentage of self-reported home values based on
user costs. That percentage is either a uniform 6.2 percent, consistent with Albouy and Hanson (2014). The results
are qualitatively similar, except that the specification in column 6 also fails the homogeneity test.



                                                          17
5.1.2     Household Size and Local Amenities

Table 2 incorporates household-size effects and local amenities both into the compensated demand
specification in the previous section and into estimates of uncompensated regression equations
modeled after equation (2a). The uncompensated regressions include a measure of household
income per capita instead of the skill index in the compensated regressions, which proxies for
earnings potential.
       Columns 1 and 2 show the results of unrestricted Marshallian regression equations that include
measures of household income per capita and household size as suggested by (7b), with an addi-
tional control for the fraction of household residents under the age of 18, following Deaton and
Paxson (1998). The estimated price and income elasticities are somewhat smaller in column 1 than
in the previous table. Although the specification in column 1 passes the homogeneity test easily, we
remain suspicious of the estimated income elasticity, which is based on contemporaneous income,
and therefore likely to be biased downward. The coefficient on log household size is negative: con-
trolling for per-capita income, larger households consume less housing per capita. Combined with
the price elasticity, the implied congestibility of housing is approximately 0.5, halfway between a
pure public good and a pure private good within the household.32
       Column 2 includes six commonly measured metropolitan amenities taken from Albouy (2008):
mild winters, cool summers, sunshine, coastal proximity, hilliness, and clean air. Each is re-
normalized in standard deviations and signed so that a positive value is supposed to increase utility.
None of the amenities is statistically significant at the 5-percent level.33 The addition of so many
amenities appears to have saturated the model to the point where the price and income estimates no
longer satisfy homogeneity, which may be the result of imperfect measurement and the Iron Law
of Econometrics (Hausman 2001).
       Columns 3 and 4 consider compensated models that incorporate household size and composi-
tion effects. They replace the skill index with a skills-per-capita index. The coefficient on house-
  32
     Intriguingly, this estimate is not far from equivalence scales that suggest using the square root of household size
(OECD 2008), although here we only consider housing.
  33
     Cool summers and coastal proximity are significant at the 10-percent level.


                                                          18
hold size is slightly smaller than in column 1 and less precise. Indeed, it is no longer statistically
significantly different from zero, perhaps reflecting the greater difficulties of applying a Barten-
style model in a compensated demand framework. The implied congestion parameter is small, but
is not distinguishable from the earlier value of 0.5 at normal significance levels.
       In column 4, we see stronger evidence that some amenities may impact housing demand. The
typically positive coefficients provide indirect evidence that housing is a necessity, as higher ameni-
ties should reduce real money incomes holding utility constant. Indeed, the estimates in column
5 show the results of a regression of estimated quality of life, adapted from Albouy (2008), on
the regressors from column 4.34 The estimates confirm that all of these amenities increase the
willingness-to-pay of households to live in a given area. A one standard deviation increase in each
amenity appears to lower real income between 0.6 percent, in the case of clean air, and 2.5 percent,
in the case of proximity to the coast.
       Once the income effects of these amenities are netted out, as seen in column 6, their effects on
housing demand are more striking. The effect of the average slope of the land, or “hilliness”, is
decidedly stronger than in column 2, suggesting that households may indeed demand larger houses
in hilly areas after controlling for the higher prices there. This could be due to residents wanting to
take advantage of better views from their homes, or enjoying the greater visibility of their homes.
Furthermore, there is stronger evidence that housing demand in places with extreme heat also tends
to be greater. This pattern may arise if heat induces residents to spend more time on their property,
indoors or out. One caution with the amenity estimates is that they are based on a regression that
no longer satisfies the homogeneity restriction, perhaps from multi-collinearity among regressors.
       Although they stretch the limits of the data, we view the results of table 2 as broadly consistent
with our preferred results in table 1. There is some evidence that housing is a partially public good
within the household, with a congestibility parameter of about one half. There is also suggestive
evidence that some amenities, like hilliness and extreme heat, increase demand for housing.
  34
      This is based on a regression of a quality of life/willingness-to-pay index on the observed amenities. Following
Albouy (2008), this index balances costs-of-living relative to after-tax nominal income gains given by Q̂j = sy p̂j +
sc ĉj − (1 − τ )sw ŵj , where τ is the marginal tax rate, sw is the average income share from labor, and ŵj is the
estimated impact of location j on renters’ wages.


                                                         19
5.2      Time Series Evidence

5.2.1     Time Series Estimates

Table 3 presents uncompensated demand estimates using the time series data presented in figures
1 and 3 for the years 1970-2014. These specifications use nominal prices and incomes, and thus
(perhaps ambitiously) estimate an inflation index that balances housing versus non-housing goods
from the observed behavior of households. We consider two different indices for the relative price
of housing. The first uses the BLS’s official measures, while the second incorporates the revisions
proposed by Boskin (1996) and Crone, Nakamura, and Voith (2010).
       We focus on restricted models satisfying homogeneity of degree zero in prices and income,
which are not rejected by formal tests in our preferred specifications. The specifications include
two additional terms. One is a linear time trend, t, that may capture secular changes in household
preferences, for instance due to cohort effects, or increasing complementarity with local amenities
as households have shifted locations.35 The second term is the logarithm of household size, ln(n).
The multi-collinearity between prices, incomes, and household size pushes the limit of what the
time-series can identify.
       Estimates from the BEA numbers with the official CPI, shown in column 1, imply an own-price
elasticity of -0.55, an income elasticity of 0.61, and household size effect of -0.36. These are not
far from the uncompensated estimates in table 2 and pass the homogeneity test. The estimated
time trend is 0.007 per year, which we suspect may come from an under-estimate of the income
elasticity. This result is consistent with the findings of Aguiar and Hurst (2013). The coefficient
on log household size suggests a low degree of congestibility in housing demand.
       The estimates in column 2, which use the revised relative price index, suggest larger price
and income elasticities that are even closer to the cross-sectional estimates, but nonetheless still
pass the homogeneity restriction. They also exhibit a similar estimated time trend, although the
coefficient on log household size becomes positive, contrary to intuition and our previous results.
  35
    The time trend may also reflect simple measurement error resulting from limitations in the data and its ability to
identify low-frequency responses in housing consumption from shifting prices and income.



                                                         20
   Columns 3 and 4 use the expenditure shares from the CEX for renters. These estimates are
less precise and produce income and substitution elasticities much closer to one. Using the revised
relative price index does not change the estimates substantially. Again, the estimated time trend
is about 0.01 per year. The estimated coefficients on log household size are too imprecise to draw
meaningful conclusions about the congesitibility of housing demand.


5.2.2   Explaining Changes in the Housing Share over Time

In table 4, we decompose the growing share of income spent on housing discussed in the introduc-
tion. Rearranging (4) and replacing Q with n and t, we have


         ŝy = (1 − s¯y + H
                           y,p )(p̂ − ĉ) + (y,m − 1)[(m̂ − ĉ) − s¯y (p̂ − ĉ)] + αn n̂ + αt t + e   (9)


The first component represents the change due to the pure compensated price effect. This effect is
positive when the relative price of housing increases if σ < 1, as 1 − sy + H
                                                                             y,p = (1 − sy )(1 − σ).

The second component is the income effect, from a parallel rise in the budget set, making the
proper adjustment for changes in relative prices. The third component, αn n̂, accounts for changes
in household size; the fourth, αt t, the estimated time trend; and the fifth, e, is a residual.
   Table 4 explains the overall increase in the log housing share of 6.7 percent (just under 2
percentage points) in the BEA numbers from 1970 to 2014. Column 1 uses parameters close to
our preferred cross-sectional estimates in column 3 of table 1, with an elasticity of substitution
and income elasticity of housing demand of two-thirds. The congestibility parameter φ is taken to
be one-half, in line with the results in columns 1 and 2 of table 2. The specification incorporates
the CPI numbers revised for both the CNV and Boskin critiques. The compensated price effect
accounted for a nearly 23 percentage point increase in the housing share under this specification,
while the income effect reduced it by by nearly 45 points. Shrinking household sizes also pushed
up the housing share by 4 points. Nonetheless, the parameters from the cross-sectional estimates
leave a large part of the increase in the housing share unexplained, as relatively easy substitution



                                                     21
from housing to other goods leaves the compensated relative price effect outweighed by a large
income effect.
   Column 2 parametrizes the numbers by shading our estimates slightly in the direction where
biases are most likely: thus σD = 0.5 < 0.667, and y,m = 0.833 > 0.667. φ is kept at 0.5.
Column 2 also uses the CPI numbers revised for both the CNV and Boskin critiques. Under this
specification, the relative price effect and the household size effect combine to explain an increase
in the housing share of over 39 points. After the subtracting the income effect, the net effect is
17 points, slightly over-predicting the observed change of nearly 7 points, which is left in the
time trend and residual. Thus, only modest changes to our cross-sectional parameter estimates are
necessary to produce the observed increase in housing’s share of expenditure.
   Column 3 maintains the revised relative price index but uses the parameters estimated from
the time series evidence in column 2 of table 3. The primary difference from the cross-sectionally
estimated parameters is that the household congestion parameter is larger than one, contrary to
what would be predicted by theory. Accordingly, the decrease in average household size led to
an 8 point increase in the housing share in this specification, reducing the specification’s ability to
explain the increase in the housing share.
   Column 4 uses our preferred parametrization from column 2 in combination with the official
CPI. Using the official CPI implies both a smaller increase in the relative price of housing and
slower growth in real incomes. The income effect’s weaker tendency to decrease the housing
share outweighs the price effect’s weaker tendency to increase it, leading to a predicted change of
approximately zero under these parameters. Column 5 uses the parameters from the time series
estimates in column 1 of table 3, which also use the official CPI. The income effect predicts a very
large fall in the housing share, which is offset only partially by a small price effect.
   Finally, column 6 applies our preferred parametrization from column 2 along with the revised
CPI to the CEX data from 1984 to 2014. The CEX data show a much larger increase in the
housing share, of nearly 24 percent. Notably, the income effect is very small in the CEX data, as
real incomes grew just 24 percent. Together, the relative price effect and slight decrease in average


                                                  22
household size can account for just over half of the observed increase in the housing share in this
specification.
         Overall, the results in table 4 indicate that economic fundamentals are able to account for the
observed increase in housing’s share of expenditure since 1970 when Boskin’s (1996) and Crone,
Nakamura, and Voith’s (2010) critiques of the official CPI are considered. Slight modifications
to reflect the likely biases in our cross-sectional estimates of the housing demand function are
sufficient to explain more than the entirety of the observed increase in the housing share.



6         Applying Estimates of Housing Demand

6.1         Changes in Housing Affordability, 1970 to 2010

Table 5 shows that since 1970, the percentage of households facing “extreme” (over 50 percent)
housing affordability burdens rose from 16 to 28 percent, while the share facing “moderate” (over
30 percent) burdens rose from 30 to 53 percent. The median expenditure share devoted to rent rose
from 20 to 31 percent in that time.
         To explain this decline in affordability, we consider five separate trends in the economy from
1970 to 2010. First is the change in household composition and age structure. We consider this
demographic change by dividing households into 36 categories household type and age categories,
defined by the mean age of adults.36 The 2010 sample is re-weighted so that these groups have the
same proportion as in 1970.
         The second trend is the increase in income inequality, which has pushed the income of renters
down relative to average incomes. To assess this effect, we construct a counterfactual income dis-
tribution that assigns each household the income it would have earned if all incomes had increased
proportionally between 1970 and 2010.37 We denote household i’s counterfactual income m̃i . We
    36
      We define the six household types as one adult without children, one adult with children, two adults without
children, two adults with children, three or more adults without children, and three or more adults with children. We
define the six age categories as 18-24, 25-34, 35-44, 45-54, 55-64, and 65+, where age is defined as the mean age of
the adults.
   37
      Formally, we calculate household incomes at each percentile, k = 1, ..., 100 for years t = 1970, 2010, mkt , as


                                                         23
multiply ln(m̃i /mi ) by the income effect y,m − 1 to determine increasing income inequality’s
effect on household i’s log income share devoted to housing (y,m − 1) ln(m̃i /mi ).
    Third, we consider increasing rental dispersion across metro areas, as in Moretti (2013). In-
creased dispersion will reduce affordability if rent increases happen disproportionately in areas
with more renters. We assume that households’ incomes are compensated for relative price in-
                                                                        j      j
creases, and thus calculate the compensated response (H
                                                       y,p +1−s¯y )[ln(p1970 /p2010 )−ln(p̄1970 /p̄2010 )].
                                                                                                            38


    Fourth, following our previous analysis, we consider changes in average real incomes from
1970 to 2010. The income effect on housing demand is the change in average income, after ac-
counting for the change in non-housing prices, times the income effect, y,m − 1. We consider both
the official and revised CPI in these calculations.
    Fifth and finally, we consider changes in the national average rent level. We calculate what
affordability would have been if average rents had not increased from 1970 to 2010 using the
uncompensated price elasticity of housing demand to account for the behavioral response through
the formula (y,p + 1) ln(p̄1970 /p̄2010 ). Lower rents increase affordability provided that y,p > −1.
We again consider the official and revised CPI in these calculations.
    Table 5 accounts for these factors’ contributions to the 22 and 12 percentage point increases
in households facing moderate and extreme affordability burdens, respectively, as well as the 11
point increase in the median expenditure share among renters from 1970 to 2010. We consider
two of the parametrizations from table 4. The first uses income and substitution elasticities of two-
thirds each, close to our estimated values; the second uses an elasticity of substitution of 0.5 and
an income elasticity of 0.833.
    The change in household composition had small effects under both parametrizations, reducing
the share of households facing an extreme burden by 0.8 percentage points but having a negligi-
ble effect on the other two measures. Widening income inequality had larger effects on moderate
than extreme burdens, increasing them by 2.9 and 1.0 points, respectively, in the first parametriza-
well as mean incomes, m̄t . Based on each household’s observed income mi , the counterfactual income is m̃i =
mi [(m̄2010 /m̄1970 )/(mk2010 /mk1970 )].
   38
      Using uncompensated regressions would create a lower response. We use contemporary population distributions
to calculate relative price changes.


                                                       24
tion, and by half as much in the second. Changes in rent dispersion did disproportionately impact
renters, although increasing dispersion explains less than a one point increase in affordability bur-
dens in either parametrization.
   The largest drivers of affordability burdens are increases in average incomes and average rents.
The income effects are muted using the official CPI because real incomes changed little. The
increase in average relative rents drives 5.8 and 3.2 point increases in moderate and extreme bur-
dens under the first parametrization, and somewhat larger increases of 7.6 and 4.3 points under the
second.
   Using the revised CPI, the increase in average incomes has a much larger impact, as implied
real incomes rose considerably faster than under the official CPI. Under the first parametrization,
rising real incomes accounted for 6.1 and 0.2 point decreases in the affordability burdens, while
under the second, the implied reductions in the affordability burdens were 3.0 and 1.8 percent. The
change in average relative rents is much more pronounced using the revised CPI, explaining 13.3
and 5.5 point increases in the affordability burdens using the first parametrization, which increase
to 16.3 and 9.3 points under the second.
   Taken together, the five factors we consider explain more than 70 percent of the increase
in housing affordability burdens from 1970 to 2010 using the revised CPI under our preferred
parametrization.


6.2    Utility and Expenditure Functions

The estimates from the previous sections are sufficient to identify the utility and expenditure func-
tions in section 3.5. For illustration, we round the parameters based off of estimates from column
3 of table 1, setting σ = 2/3, δ = 1/8, γ = 4/3, and φ = 1/2. Using these values in equations (8a)
and (8c) yields the following utility and cost-of-living functions:

                                           3/2                     "            4/9 #3
                        27 − 14x−1/2
                   
                                                                   u 1 1/3 3 1/3 u
  UN H−CES = Q                                    , COLN H−CES   =     p + c                    (10)
                       2y −1/2 n−1/4 + 3                           Q 4     4     Q



                                                      25
The units of x and y are median income shares for renters, with baseline values of x = 0.78 and
y = 0.22. We hope these functions will have direct applicability to quantitative models in urban,
macro, or public economics involving the housing sector.39


6.3       Cost-of-Living Indices over Space and Time

The estimated housing demand parameters may be used to calculate realistic cost-of-living indices
(COLIs). We compare an index that assumes perfectly price- and income-inelastic housing de-
mand (COL1), an index that assumes Cobb-Douglas preferences over housing and other goods
(i.e., unitary price and income elasticities of housing demand; COL2), an index that relaxes the
assumption of a unitary price elasticity but maintains the assumption of homotheticity (i.e., a CES
demand function; COL3), and an index that allows for a non-homothetic CES demand function at
the median household income and one half the median household income (Separable CES; COL4).
Figure 7 plots these indices against the relative price of housing (pj /cj ) for realistic variations over
time and space. Panel A uses parameters close to those estimated in column 3 of table 1, while
panel B uses the alternative parametrization in tables 4 and 5, which is meant to account for likely
biases in the cross-sectional estimates.
       Figure 7 shows how the fixed housing demand measure overstates differences in cost-of-living
by ignoring households’ ability to substitute between housing and other goods according to their
relative prices, while the Cobb-Douglas preference measure understates these differences by as-
suming that substitution is easier than in reality. The separable (non-homothetic) CES COLI is
steeper than those that fail to account for income effects. For poorer households, the other COLIs
understate the burden of living in expensive areas, and overstate it in poorer areas. The correct in-
dex accounts for how high-rent cities are especially expensive for the poor. Of course, the regular
  39
    For quantitative and analytical purposes, researchers might do well to use a more stylized LES utility and COL
functions. Using a standard parametrization, set the share δ = 1/6, and minimum consumption x = 0 and, y = 0.1.
                                        1/6                           p1/6 c5/6 u
                     ULES = Q yn1/2 − 0.1     x5/6 , COLLES = 0.1p + 0.9 1/12                                (11)
                                                                         n        Q
This corresponds to a typical housing share of 25 percent, with the minimum being 10 percent of median income. For
a typical household the own-price elasticity is -2/3 and the income elasticity is 2/3.


                                                       26
CES function could be adapted to poorer households simply by changing its distribution parameter
δ. The advantage of the non-homothetic CES function is that it offers a continuous mapping of
cost-of-living for any income group, properly referenced to a given city at a given point in time.


6.4   Real Income Changes over Time and Growing Real Income Inequality

Using the ideal price index to deflate changes in income over time has different effects than using
a fixed bundle index for two reasons. First, because housing is a necessity, the welfare of poorer
households is reduced more by increases in the price of housing. Second, our index corrects for
“substitution bias” automatically, mitigating welfare reduction for all groups. Table 6 deflates the
nominal changes at the 10th, 50th, and 90th percentiles of the household income distribution from
1970 to 2010 using our ideal cost-of-living index and a comparable fixed-price index. Once again,
we consider the two parametrizations from tables 4 and 5 along with the official and revised CPIs.
   Nominal incomes of households at the 90th percentile rose 27 percentage more quickly than
those at the 50th percentile and 25 percent more quickly than those at the 10th percentile. With
homothetic preferences, the differences in real income growth of households at those percentiles
would have tracked the differences in nominal income growth. Our ideal index (COL4), using the
first parametrization, shows that with the official CPI, households at the 10th percentile saw real
income growth of 10.9 percent, while those at the 90th percentile saw growth of 46.1 percent. This
implies that real income inequality grew by 35.2 percent between these groups, or 3 percent more
than standard numbers would show. Using the revised CPI, our ideal index implies that real in-
comes at the 90th percentile grew 9.7 percent faster than a fixed consumption bundle would imply,
as the income effect pushed down richer households’ share of expenditure devoted to housing. The
results suggest that real income inequality grew by 45.7 percent from 1970 to 2010.
   These differences are graphed in Figure 8 for the 50th and 90th percentiles. With the revised
CPI we see incomes rising for all groups, but noticeably more for the 90th percentile. The figure
shows that using the revised CPI implies an even larger increase in real income inequality than
implied by the official CPI.


                                                27
         The smaller substitution possibilities implied by the second parametrization implies that all
households experienced weaker real income growth than suggested by the first parametrization.
However, the growth of real income inequality is also smaller under this parametrization.



7         Conclusion

Our econometric framework reveals that a spatial framework may be useful for estimating demand
systems for goods, such as housing, whose prices vary considerably across locations. Both tempo-
ral and spatial estimates suggest that uncompensated own-price and income elasticities are close to
two-thirds in absolute value. Thus, unit elasticities are better approximations than zero elasticities,
although neither extreme can explain the observed variation in housing consumption across metro
areas and over time.40
         Rising rents appear to be the primary driver of the rising housing share in the national income
accounts, and, to a lesser degree, the affordability crisis in rental markets. Increasing inequality as
well as declining household sizes also appear to play a role, but there is some room for a secular
rise in housing consumption that basic economic modeling cannot explain.
         The estimated non-homothetic CES utility and cost-of-living functions we provide should be
useful for realistic and tractable quantitative modeling in several economic fields.41 They suggest
substantial roles for substitution as well as for non-homotheticity. Indeed, we find that expensive
cities are even more expensive for the poor, thereby exacerbating affordability problems. More-
over, nationally rising rents over time have increased real-income inequality considerably, even
while spatial trends have not (Moretti, 2013). These findings highlight the idea that the “afford-
ability crisis” in housing is deeply tied to the overall well-being of households, particularly at the
bottom of the income distribution. Therefore, policies and regulations that raise rents by creating
    40
      Taste-based sorting across space may bias our estimates towards finding greater price elasticity, but a large role
for sorting seems incompatible the results of our specification tests. Moreover, those tests provide unique support for
spatial estimates, as well as indirect evidence that household mobility is great enough to ensure compensating price
and income differentials.
   41
      Our elasticity of substitution estimates are consistent with the assumptions made by Albouy and Stuart (2014) and
Rappaport (2008), who do not consider non-homotheticity.


                                                          28
artificial shortages in housing supply (Glaeser and Gyourko 2013, Albouy and Ehlrich 2016) may
have particularly concerning distributional consequences.42



References

 [1] Aguiar, Mark, and Erik Hurst. 2013. “Deconstructing Lifecycle Expenditure.” Journal of
     Political Economy 121(3): 437-492.

 [2] Albouy, David. 2008. “Are Big Cities Really Bad Places to Live? Improving Quality-of-Life
     Estimates across Cities.” NBER Working Paper No. 14981.

 [3] Albouy, David. (2016) “What Are Cities Worth? Land Rents, Local Productivity, and the
     Total Value of Amenities.” Review of Economics and Statistics.

 [4] Albouy, David, and Gabriel Ehrlich. 2012. “Housing Productivity and the Socail Cost of
     Land-Use Restrictions.” NBER Working Paper No. 18110.

 [5] Albouy, David, and Andrew Hanson. 2014. “Are Houses Too Big or in the Wrong Place?
     Taxes Benefits to Housing and Inefficiencies in Location and Consumption.” NBER Tax Pol-
     icy and the Economy.

 [6] Albouy, David, and Lue Bert. 2015. “Driving to Opportunity: Local Rents, Wages, Commut-
     ing Costs and Sub-Metropolitan Quality of Life.” Journal of Urban Economics 89: 74-92.

 [7] Albouy, David, and Bryan Stuart. 2014. “Urban Population and Amenities: The Neoclassical
     Model of Location.” NBER Working Paper No. 19919.

 [8] Arrow, K.J., H.B. Chenery, B.S. Minhas, R.M. Solow (1961) “Capital-Labor Substitution and
     Economic Efficiency.” Review of Economics and Statistics, 43(3): 225-250.

 [9] Barten, Anton P. ”Family Composition, Prices and Expenditure Patterns.” in Peter E. Hart,
     Gordon Mills, and John K Whitaker, eds. Econometric Analysis for National Economic Plan-
     ning. London: Butterworths, 1964.

[10] Baum-Snow, Nathaniel and Ronni Pavan. 2013. ”Inequality and City Size.” Review of Eco-
     nomics and Statistics 95(5): 1535-1548.

[11] Black, Dan, Gates Gary, Sanders Seth, and Taylor Lowell. 2002. “Why Do Gay Men Live in
     San Francisco ?” Journal of Urban Economics 51(1): 54-76

[12] Black, Daniel, Natalia Kolesnikova, and Lowell Taylor (2009)“Earnings Functions When
     Wages and Prices Vary by Location.” Journal of Labor Economics 27(21).
  42
       See Davis et al. 2016 for potential impacts of high rents on the educational impacts of the poor.




                                                            29
[13] Blundell, Richard, Panos Pashardes and Guglielmo Weber “What do we Learn About Con-
     sumer Demand Patterns from Micro Data?” The American Economic Review 83(3): 570-597.

[14] Carrillo, Paul, Dirk Early, and Edgar Olsen. 2013. “A Panel of Interarea Price Indices for All
     Areas in the United States 1982-2012” Available at SSRN: http://ssrn.com/abstract=2378028
     or http://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.2378028.

[15] Cheshire, Paul, and Sheppard Stephen. 1998. “Estimating the Demand for Housing, Land,
     and Neighbourhood Characteristics.” Oxford Bulletin of Economics and Statistics. Depart-
     ment of Economics, University of Oxford, vol. 60(3): 357-82, August.

[16] Crone, Theodore M., Leonard I. Nakamura and Richard Voith. 2010 “Rents Have Been Ris-
     ing, Not Falling, in the Postwar Period.” Review of Economics and Statistics 92: 628-641.

[17] Cobb, Charles W. and Paul H. Douglas (1928) “A Theory of Production.” American Economic
     Review 18(1): 139-165.

[18] Davis, Morris A., Jesse Gregory, Daniel A. Hartley, and Kegon T.K. Tan. 2016. “Neighbor-
     hood Choices and Neighborhood Effects.” mimeo, Rutgers University. July 26, 2016.

[19] Davis, Morris A., and Jonathan Heathcote. ”The price and quantity of residential land in the
     United States.” Journal of Monetary Economics 54.8 (2007): 2595-2620.

[20] Davis, Morris, and Francois Ortalo-Magne. 2011. “Household expenditures, wages, rents.”
     Review of Economic Dynamics(14): 248-261.

[21] Deaton, Angus. 1986. “Demand Analysis” in Z. Grilliches and M.D. Intriligator Handbook
     of Econometrics, 3: 1767-1839.

[22] Deaton, Angus and Christina Paxson. 1998. “Economies of Scale, Household Size, and the
     Demand for Food.” Journal of Political Economy. 106: 897-930.

[23] De Leeuw, Frank. 1971. “The Demand for Housing: A Review of Cross-section Evidence.”
     The Review of Economics and Statistics 53 (1): 1-10.

[24] Desmet, Klaus and Esteban Rossi-Hansberg. 2013. “Urban Accounting and Welfare.” Amer-
     ican Economic Review 103(6): 2296-2327.

[25] Eckhout, Jan. 2004. “Gibrats law for all cities.” American Economic Review 94 (5): 1429-
     1451.

[26] Ermisch, J., J. Findlay, and K. Gibb, 1996, “The Price Elasticity of Housing Demand in
     Britain: Issues of Sample Selection. Journal of Housing Economics 5(1): 64-86.

[27] Engel, E. 1857. “Die Produktions- und Consumtionsverhaltnisse des Konigreichs Sachsen.”
     reprinted with Engel (1895), Anlage I, 1-54.

[28] Guerreri, Veronica, Daniel Hartley, and Erik Hurst. 2013. “Endogenous Gentrification and
     Housing Price Dynamics.” Journal of Public Economics 100: 45-60.


                                                30
[29] Glaeser, Edward and Joseph Gyorko (2008) Rethinking Federal Housing Policy: How to
     Make Housing Plentiful and Affordable. Washington, DC: AEI Press.

[30] Glaeser, Edward L and Joseph Gyourko (2003). “The Impact of Building Restrictions on
     Housing Affordability.” Federal Reserve Bank of New York Economic Policy Review, 9, pp.
     21-29.

[31] Goodman, Allen C. 1988. “An Econometric Model of Housing Price, Permanent Income,
     Tenure Choice, and Housing Demand.” Journal of Urban Economics 23 (May): 327353.

[32] Goodman, Allen C. 2002. “Estimating Equilibrium Housing Demand for “Stayers” of Hous-
     ing Price, Permanent Income, Tenure Choice, and Housing Demand.” Journal of Urban Eco-
     nomics51: 1-24.

[33] Goodman, Allen C, and Kawai Masahiro. 1986. “Functional Form, Sample Selection, and
     Housing Demand.” Journal of Urban Economics 20: 155-167.

[34] Gyourko, Joseph, Christopher Mayer, and Todd Sinai, 2013. ”Superstar Cities,” American
     Economic Journal: Economic Policy 5(4): 167-99.

[35] Handbury, Jessie (2013) “Are Poor Cities Cheap for Everyone? Non-homotheticity and the
     Cost-of-Living across U.S. Cities.” mimeo.

[36] Hansen, Julia L. and Formby John P. 1998. “Estimating the Income Elasticity of emand
     for Housing:A Comparison of Traditional and Lorenz-Concentration Curve Methodologies.”
     Journal of Housing Economics 7: 328-342.

[37] Hanushek, Eric, and Quigley John. 1980. “The Dynamics of housing market: a stock adjust-
     ment model of housing consumption.” Journal of Urban Economics 6(1), pp. 90-111.

[38] Haider, Stephen and Gary Solon (2006) “Life-Cycle Variation in the Association between
     Current and Lifetime Earnings” American Economic Review 96: 1308-1320.

[39] Harmon, Oskar R. 1988. “The Income Elasticity of Demand for Single-Family Owner-
     Occupied Housing: An Empirical Reconciliation.” Journal of Urban Economics 24: 173-
     185.

[40] Hausman, Jerry. 2001. “Mismeasured Variables in Econometric Analysis: Problems from the
     Right and Problems from the Left.” Journal of Economic Perspectives 15(4): 5767.

[41] HUD PD & R Edge. “Secretary Donovan Highlights Convening on State of Americas
     Rental Housing.” January 2014. http://www.huduser.org/portal/pdredge/
     pdr_edge_featd_article_012714.html.

[42] Ioannides, Yannis M., and Jeffrey E. Zabel. 2003. “Neighborhood Effects and Housing De-
     mand.” Journal of Applied Econometrics 18 (Sep): 563-584.

[43] Joint Center for Housing Studies of Harvard University. 2013. “America’s Rental Housing:
     Evolving Markets and Needs.” Mimeograph. Harvard University.

                                             31
[44] Kau, James B., and Sirman C. F. 1979. “Urban Land Value Functions and the Price Elasticity
     of Demand for Housing.” Journal of Urban Economics 6(4): 112-121.

[45] La Cava, Gianni. 2016. “Housing Prices, Mortgage Interest Rates and the Rising Share of
     Capital Income in the United States.” Research Discussion Paper 2016-04, Reserve Bank of
     Australia.

[46] Malpezzi, Stephen, Gregory H. Chun, and Richard K. Green. “New PlacetoPlace Housing
     Price Indexes for US Metropolitan Areas, and Their Determinants.” Real Estate Economics
     26.2 (1998): 235-274.

[47] Mayo, Stephen K. 1981. “Theory and Estimation in the Economics of Housing Demand.”
     Journal of Urban Economics 10: 95-116.

[48] Michaels, Guy, Ferdinand Raurch, and Stephen J. Redding. 2013. ”Urbanization and Struc-
     tural Transformation.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics 127(2): 535-586.

[49] Mills E.S. 1967. “An aggregative model of resource allocation in a metropolitan area.” Amer-
     ican Economic Review 57: 197-210.

[50] Moretti, Enrico 2013 ”Real Wage Inequality” American Economic Journal: Applied Eco-
     nomics 5(1): 65-103.

[51] Muth, Richard F. 1960. “The Demand for Non-Farm Housing.” in The Demand for Durable
     Goods, edited by Arnold C. Harberger, 29-96. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press,
     1960. (Ph.D. dissertation)

[52] Piketty, Thomas. 2014. Capital in the Twenty-First Century. Cambridge, MA: Harvard Uni-
     versity Press.

[53] Pollinsky, A. Mitchell, and Ellwood David T. 1979. “An Empirical Reconciliation of Micro
     and Grouped Estimates of the Demand for Housing.” The Review of Economics and Statistics
     61(2): 199-205

[54] Rappaport, Jordan. 2008a. “A Productivity Model of City Crowdedness.” Journal of Urban
     Economics 65: 715-722.

[55] Reid, Margaret. 1962. Housing and Income. Chicago: University of Chicago Pres.

[56] Roback, Jennifer. 1982. “Wages, Rents, and the Quality of Life.” Journal of Political Econ-
     omy 90: 1257-1278.

[57] Rognlie, Matthew. 2015. “Deciphering the Fall and Rise in the Net Capital Share: Accumu-
     lation or Scarcity?.” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 2015(1): 1-69.

[58] Rosen, Harvey. 1985. “Housing Subsidies: Effects on Housing Decisions, Efciency, and Eq-
     uity. In Handbook of Public Economics, vol. 1, edited by M. Feldstein and A. Auerbach.
     Amsterdam: North-Holland.



                                               32
[59] Rosen, Sherwin. 1979. “Wages-based Indexes of Urban Quality of Life.” In Current Issues in
     Urban Economics, edited by P. Mieszkowski and M. Straszheim. Baltimore: John Hopkins
     Univ. Press.

[60] Ruggles, Steven, Matthew Sobek, Trent Alexander, Catherine A. Fitch, Ronald Goeken, Pa-
     tricia Kelly Hall, Miriam King, and Chad Ronnander. 2004. Integrated Public Use Microdata
     Series: Version 3.0. Minneapolis: Minnesota Population Center.

[61] Saiz, Albert. 2010. ”The geographic determinants of housing supply.” The Quarterly Journal
     of Economics 125.3: 1253-1296.

[62] Sato, Ruozo (1977) “Homothetic and Non-Homothetic CES Production Functions” American
     Economic Review 67(4): 559-569.

[63] Schwabe, Hermann. 1868. ”Das Verhaltniss von Miethe und Einkom-men in Berlin.” in
     Berlin und seine Entwickelung fur 1868 (Berlin, 1868): 264-67.

[64] Stigler, George J. 1954. “The Early History of Empirical Studies of Consumer Behavior.”
     Journal of Political Economy 62(2): 95-113

[65] Wright, Carroll. 1875. “Sixth Annual Report of the Bureau of Labor Statistics.”(Boston)

[66] Zivin, Joshua G., and Matthew Neidell, 2014. ”Temperature and the Allocation of Time:
     Implications for Climate Change.” Journal of Labor Economics 32(1): 1-26.




                                              33
                    TABLE 1: COMPENSATED DEMAND FUNCTION ESTIMATES AT THE METROPOLITAN LEVEL USING 2000 CENSUS DATA

                                                       (1)             (2)              (3)             (4)              (5)             (6)             (7)              (8)
                                                   Log Median      Log Median       Log Median      Log Median       Log Median      Log Median      Log Aggreg.      Log Median
                         Dependent Variable:       Rental Share    Rental Share    Rental Share     Rental Share    Spend. Share     Hous. Share     Rental Share    Rental Share
                 Panel A: Regression Results
                  Rental/Housing Price Index          0.172            0.233           0.239            0.246           0.392           0.407            0.233           0.163
                                                     (0.026)          (0.029)         (0.027)          (0.027)         (0.053)         (0.032)          (0.025)         (0.015)
                    Non-Housing Price Index                           -0.185          -0.239           -0.246          -0.123          -0.407           -0.233           0.475
                                                                      (0.087)         (0.027)          (0.027)         (0.157)         (0.032)          (0.025)         (0.285)
                  Skill/Predicted Wage Index                          -0.298          -0.282           -0.287          -0.511          -0.511           -0.173          -0.529
                                                                      (0.108)         (0.112)          (0.112)         (0.148)         (0.132)          (0.115)         (0.027)
                        Homeownership Rate                                                              0.079
                                                                                                       (0.061)
                                     Constant        -1.492           -1.492          -1.492           -1.492          -1.703          -1.628           -1.640          -1.495
                                                     (0.006)          (0.004)         (0.004)          (0.004)         (0.008)         (0.006)          (0.005)         (0.001)

              Sample Size (number of areas)            331              331             331              331             331             331              331            1655
                       Adjusted R-squared             0.297            0.518           0.519            0.524           0.577           0.674            0.432           0.109
        Homogeneity of Demand Restricted               No               No              Yes              Yes             No              Yes              Yes             No
    Unconstrained Sum of Housing and Non-                              0.047           0.047            0.043           0.269           0.127            0.065           0.622
           Housing Price Index Coefficients                           (0.071)         (0.071)          (0.066)         (0.127)         (0.102)          (0.082)         (0.287)
        P-value of Test of Homog. of Demand                            0.504           0.504            0.519           0.035           0.212            0.429           0.031
                                                                                                                                     Renters and
                                      Sample      Renters Only     Renters Only    Renters Only     Renters Only    Owners Only                      Renters Only    Renters Only
                                                                                                                                      Owners
                         Unit of Observation          Metro           Metro            Metro           Metro           Metro            Metro           Metro           PUMA
        Panel B: Implied Demand Paramters
                                                      0.225            0.225               0.225           0.225            0.182           0.196         0.194            0.224
          Geometric Mean Expenditure Share
                                                     (0.001)          (0.001)             (0.001)         (0.001)          (0.001)         (0.001)       (0.001)          (0.000)
       Uncompensated Own Price Elasticity of         -0.828           -0.700               -0.697          -0.689          -0.515           -0.492        -0.734           -0.719
                              Housing Demand         (0.026)          (0.043)             (0.042)         (0.043)          (0.073)         (0.052)       (0.037)          (0.019)
                                                      1.000            0.702               0.718           0.713            0.489           0.489         0.827            0.471
        Income Elasticity of Housing Demand
                                                    Restricted        (0.108)             (0.112)         (0.112)          (0.148)         (0.132)       (0.115)          (0.027)
   Elasticity of Substitution Between Housing                                              0.691           0.682                            0.493         0.711            0.790
                    and Consumption Goods σ                                               (0.035)         (0.035)                          (0.040)       (0.032)          (0.019)
                                                                                           0.116           0.112                            0.037         0.100            0.151
                       Distribution Parameter δ
                                                                                          (0.012)         (0.012)                          (0.010)       (0.010)          (0.007)
                                                                                           1.178           1.165                            1.254         0.743            3.252
                Non-homotheticity Parameter γ
                                                                                          (0.444)         (0.430)                          (0.272)       (0.484)          (0.241)
Robust standard errors reported in parentheses. The predicted wage index is based on the wage level predicted by education, experience, race, immigrant status, occupation, and
industry, partialing out the effect of location. Homogeneity of demand test is for whether the coefficients on the rental/housing price index and the non-housing price index sum to
zero. All regressions include controls for the log trimean of household size. All regressions exclude households that include college students.
TABLE 2: UNCOMPENSATED AND COMPENSATED DEMAND FUNCTIONS WITH HOUSEHOLD SIZE AND AMENITY SHIFTERS -
                                  2000 CENSUS DATA, RENTERS ONLY
                                                   Uncomp-           Uncomp-                                                               Housing
                                                    ensated           ensated       Compensated      Compensated      Amenity Value        Effects
                                                       (1)              (2)               (3)              (4)              (5)              (6)
                                                                                                                                         Adj. Rental
                       Dependent Variable:       Rental Share      Rental Share     Rental Share      Rental Share     Qual. of Life       Share
              Panel A: Regression Results
                                                      0.553            0.529            0.233             0.149
               Rental/Housing Price Index
                                                    (0.023)           (0.033)          (0.029)           (0.025)
                                                     -0.037            0.105           -0.185             0.143
                 Non-Housing Price Index
                                                    (0.064)           (0.060)          (0.087)           (0.084)
      Log Trimean Household Income per               -0.533           -0.501
                                Capita              (0.036)           (0.036)
                                                                                        -0.298            -0.300
                     Household Skill Index
                                                                                       (0.108)           (0.093)
                                                     -0.299            -0.281          -0.204             -0.312
              Log Trimean Household size
                                                    (0.045)           (0.039)          (0.147)           (0.117)
                                                      0.047             0.058            0.291             0.182
             Trimean Fraction of Children
                                                    (0.122)           (0.096)          (0.177)           (0.129)
     Mild Winters (Minus Heating Degree                                 0.002                             0.011            0.007             0.009
                         Days in 1000s)                               (0.005)                            (0.008)          (0.007)           (0.005)
   Cool Summers (Minus Cooling Degree                                  -0.010                            -0.016            0.017            -0.021
                       Days in 1000s)                                 (0.006)                            (0.008)          (0.006)           (0.005)
                                                                       -0.004                             0.012            0.018             0.006
      Percent of Annual Sunshine Possible
                                                                      (0.005)                            (0.006)          (0.004)           (0.005)
                                                                       -0.007                             0.002            0.025            -0.005
Proximity to Coast (Log Inverse Distance)
                                                                      (0.004)                            (0.006)          (0.004)           (0.005)
                                                                        0.005                             0.019            0.009             0.016
        Hilliness (Average Slope of Land)
                                                                      (0.003)                            (0.004)          (0.003)           (0.003)
                                                                       0.003                               0.007           0.006             0.005
           Clean Air (minus median AQI)
                                                                      (0.002)                            (0.003)          (0.003)           (0.003)
                                                     -1.492           -1.492           -1.492             -1.492          -0.018
                                   Constant
                                                    (0.003)           (0.002)          (0.004)           (0.003)          (0.004)
            Sample Size (number of areas)             331               329              331               329              329
                       Adjusted R-squared            0.807             0.817            0.518             0.655            0.439
  Unconstrained Sum of Price and Income              -0.017            0.133            0.047             0.292
                            Coefficients            (0.053)           (0.055)          (0.071)           (0.078)
    P-value of Test of Homog. of Demand              0.744             0.016            0.504            0.0002
    Panel B: Implied Demand Parameters
                                                     0.225             0.225            0.225             0.225
       Geometric Mean Expenditure Share
                                                    (0.001)           (0.001)          (0.001)           (0.001)
   Uncompensated Own Price Elasticity of              -0.447         -0.471            -0.700          -0.784
                     Housing Demand                  (0.023)         (0.033)          (0.043)          (0.038)
                                                       0.467          0.499             0.702           0.700
     Income Elasticity of Housing Demand
                                                     (0.036)         (0.036)          (0.108)          (0.093)
                                                       0.458          0.468             0.121           -1.095
   Congestion of Housing Consumption φ
                                                     (0.078)         (0.073)          (0.584)          (0.718)
All specifications include renters only. Robust standard errors in parentheses. Test of homogeneity of demand for the uncompensated regressions
is that the coefficients on both price indices and income sum to zero. Rental share in column 6 is adjusted to reflect quality-of-life's effects on real
income as discussed in section 5.1.2 and footnote 33.
                      TABLE 3: NATIONAL HOUSING DEMAND OVER TIME - ESTIMATES

                                               Data Source:          BEA          BEA          CEX           CEX
                                       Consumer Price Index:        Official    Revised       Official      Revised
                                        Dependent Variable:             Log Aggregate Housing Expenditure Share
                                                                      (1)          (2)          (3)           (4)
                       Panel A: Restricted Regression Results
                                                                      0.452          0.351         0.171          0.177
 Log CPI-U: Shelter minus Log CPI-U: All Items Less Shelter
                                                                    (0.042)        (0.034)       (0.140)        (0.131)
Log Average Income/Expenditures Per Capita minus Log CPI-            -0.389         -0.324        -0.205         -0.207
                                 U: All Items Less Shelter          (0.060)        (0.051)       (0.173)        (0.172)
                                    Linear Time Trend (years)         0.007          0.008         0.009          0.010
                                                                    (0.002)        (0.002)       (0.001)        (0.002)
                                          Log Household Size         -0.359          0.333         0.760          0.819
                                                                    (0.093)        (0.125)       (0.698)        (0.683)
                                                     Constant        -1.717         -1.717        -1.222         -1.222
                                                                    (0.003)        (0.003)       (0.004)        (0.004)
                                           Sample size (years)          45             45            31             31
                                              Sample Period                1970-2014                    1984-2014
                  P-value of Test of Homogeneity of Demand            0.455          0.515         0.857          0.743
                       Panel B: Implied Demand Parameters
                                                                        0.180          0.180         0.295         0.295
                          Geometric Mean Expenditure Share
                                                                      (0.001)        (0.001)       (0.001)       (0.001)
                                                                       -0.548         -0.649        -0.829        -0.823
     Uncompensated Own-Price Elasticity of Housing Demand
                                                                      (0.042)        (0.034)       (0.140)       (0.131)
                                                                        0.611          0.676         0.795         0.794
                          Income Elasticity of Housing Demand
                                                                      (0.060)        (0.052)       (0.173)       (0.172)
Newey-West standard errors reported in parentheses. Income/expenditure measure in per capita terms. Homogeneity of
demand requires that the coefficients on log CPI-U for shelter, log CPI-U for all items less shelter, and log real household
income sum to zero. The restricted regressions shown impose this constraint making one estimate redundant. For non-BEA
series, a moving average with weight of 0.5 for the year after and the year before is used. Columns 2 and 4 revise the CPI-U
for shelter according to Crone, Nakamura, and Voith (2010), and also revise the CPI-U for Shelter and All Items Less
Shelter for the biases reported in the Boskin Commission (1996).
                         TABLE 4: DECOMPOSING INCREASES IN THE HOUSING SHARE OVER TIME

                                                (1)            (2)            (3)              (4)            (5)            (6)
                           Data Source         BEA            BEA            BEA             BEA            BEA             CEX
                   Consumer Price Index     Revised CPI    Revised CPI    Revised CPI     Official CPI   Official CPI    Revised CPI
                                              Cross-          Low                             Low                           Low
                                                                          Time Series                     Time Series
Parameters Used:                             Sectional     Subst./Weak                    Subst./Weak                    Subst./Weak
                                                                           Estimates                       Estimates
                                             Estimates     Income Eff.                    Income Eff.                    Income Eff.
               Elasticity of Substitution      0.667          0.500          0.643           0.500           0.534          0.500
                      Income Elasticity        0.667          0.833          0.676           0.833           0.611          0.833
                 Household Congestion          0.500          0.500          1.949           0.500           0.206          0.500

Observed Change:
         Change in Log Relative Prices         0.828          0.828           0.828          0.306           0.306           0.351
      Change in Log Deflated Incomes           1.339          1.339           1.339          1.128           1.128           0.237
        Change in Log Household Size          -0.239         -0.239          -0.239         -0.239          -0.239          -0.075
             Change in Housing Share           0.067          0.067           0.067          0.067           0.067           0.239
                          Sample Years      1970-2014      1970-2014       1970-2014      1970-2014       1970-2014       1984-2014

Change in Housing Share Attributable to:
    Compensated Relative Price Effect          0.226           0.340          0.242           0.125          0.117           0.124
                        Income Effect         -0.446          -0.223         -0.434          -0.188         -0.439          -0.039
                Household Size Effect          0.040           0.053         -0.080           0.053          0.086           0.015
                           Time Trend          0.272          -0.087          0.341           0.065          0.310           0.137
                              Residual        -0.025          -0.015         -0.002           0.012         -0.008           0.002
                    Total Unexplained          0.247          -0.102          0.339           0.077          0.303           0.140

Parameters in Estimate 1 (column 5) taken from Table 3, column 1. Parameters in Estimate 2 (column 3) taken from Table 3, column 2.
Parameterization 1 allows for moderate substitutability between housing and other goods and assumes housing is a necessary good.
Parameterization 2 assumes weaker substitutability and income effects.
   TABLE 5: UNDERSTANDING INCREASES IN HOUSING AFFORDABILITY BURDENS FOR RENTERS, 1970-2010

                                                                                           Share with          Share with
                                                                         Median             Moderate             Extreme
                                                                       Exependiture          Burden              Burden
                                                                          Share            (over 30%)          (over 50%)
                                                                           (1)                 (2)                 (3)

                                         Renter Households in 2010         0.306              0.524               0.276

Parameterization 1: Income Elasticity 2/3, Elasticity of Substitution 2/3
                    1. Undoing Changes in Household Composition           0.306               0.522               0.268
                         2. Undoing Increases in Income Inequality        0.293               0.493               0.258
                             3. Undoing Changes in Relative Rents         0.291               0.489               0.254

            4A. Undoing Increase in Average Income (Revised CPI)           0.321              0.550               0.257
             5A. Undoing Increase in Average Rents (Revised CPI)           0.256              0.416               0.202

             4B. Undoing Increase in Average Income (Official CPI)         0.292              0.492               0.257
              5B. Undoing Increase in Average Rents (Official CPI)         0.264              0.434               0.224

Parameterization 2: Income Elasticity 5/6, Elasticity of Substitution 1/2
                    1. Undoing Changes in Household Composition           0.306               0.522               0.268
                         2. Undoing Increases in Income Inequality        0.299               0.507               0.263
                             3. Undoing Changes in Relative Rents         0.296               0.500               0.258

            4A. Undoing Increase in Average Income (Revised CPI)           0.311              0.530               0.276
              5A. Undoing Increase in Average Rents (Revised CPI)          0.232              0.367               0.183


             4B. Undoing Increase in Average Income (Official CPI)         0.297              0.502               0.259
              5B. Undoing Increase in Average Rents (Official CPI)         0.261              0.426               0.216

                                         Renter Households in 1970         0.197              0.303               0.156

Notes: Datasets used are 1970 Census and pooled 2009-2011 American Community Survey. Moderate burden is defined as an
expenditure share on housing in excess of 30%; extreme burden is defined as expenditure share in excess of 50%. Counterfactual
1 assumes no change in household composition 1970-2010. Counterfactual 2 assumes no increase in income inequality 1970-2010.
Counterfactual 3 additionally assumes no increase in dispersion of rents across metro areas 1970-2010. Counterfactual 4
additionally assumes no increases in average incomes 1970-2010, deflated by CPI. Counterfactual 5 assumes no increase in
average rents 1970-2010, deflated by CPI.
 TABLE 6: CHANGES IN REAL INCOMES 1970-2010 BY INCOME PERCENTILES IDEALLY DEFLATED

   Household         Income Ratio          Ideal          Ideal Deflated     Deflated Fixed   Ideal Correction to
    Position          2009/1970           Deflator           Income             Bundle               Fixed
Parameterization 1: Income Elasticity 2/3, Elasticity of Substitution 2/3
Panel 1A: Official CPI
10th Percentile          6.103              5.504             1.109              1.120              -0.011
50th Percentile          6.002              5.440             1.103              1.102              0.002
90th Percentile          7.869              5.386             1.461              1.444              0.017
Panel 1B: Revised CPI
10th Percentile          6.103              4.862             1.255              1.253               0.002
50th Percentile          6.002              4.717             1.273              1.232               0.040
90th Percentile          7.869              4.596             1.712              1.615               0.097


Parameterization 2: Income Elasticity 5/6, Elasticity of Substitution 1/2
Panel 2A: Official CPI
10th Percentile          6.103              5.473             1.115              1.120              -0.005
50th Percentile          6.002              5.442             1.103              1.102              0.001
90th Percentile          7.869              5.414             1.453              1.444              0.009
Panel 2B: Revised CPI
10th Percentile          6.103              4.825             1.265              1.253               0.012
50th Percentile          6.002              4.753             1.263              1.232               0.031
90th Percentile            7.869            4.688               1.678             1.615              0.063
Income ratio in nominal terms from Census data. Ideal deflator uses estimated COL4 index and fixed-bundle
deflator uses COL1 index as described in section 6.3. Revised CPI uses Boskin and CNV revisions described in the
text. Ideal correction takes difference.
                        Figure 1A: Personal Consumption Expenditures by Major Category, 1959-2014
               1.0
               0.8
Cumulative consumption share
    0.4        0.2
               0.0 0.6




                               1959            1970              1980      1990       2000                      2014
                                                                        Year
                                      Housing and utilities                       Funishings and h.hold equipment
                                      Motor vehicles and parts                    Transportation services
                                      Gasoline and other energy goods             Recreational goods and vehicles
                                      Food and beverages                          Clothing and footwear
                                      Other goods                                 Health care
                                      Financial services                          Recreation services
                                      Food services and accomodations             Other services & Nonprofits
                                                Figure 1B: Expenditure Share on Housing 1960-2015                                     Figure 1C: Housing Unaffordability and Homeownership 1970-2013
                                  0.35




                                                                                                                                0.60




                                                                                                                                                                                                           0.90
                                                                                                      Proportion of Renters with Affordability Burden
   Expenditure Share on Housing




                                                                                                                                       0.45




                                                                                                                                                                                                                               0.75
                                                                                                                                                                                                              Homeownership Rate
                                  0.25




                                                                                                                 0.30




                                                                                                                                                                                                           0.60
                                                                                                                                0.15




                                                                                                                                                                                                           0.45
                                  0.15




                                         1960       1970        1980      1990     2000        2010                                                     1970   1980     1990          2000          2010
                                                                        Year                                                                                              Year

                                          Aggregate Housing Share-BEA        Avg Housing Share-CEX                                                                    Extreme: Housing share over 50%
                                          Avg Rent Share-CEX                 Median Rent Share-AHS                                                                    Moderate: Housing share over 30%
                                          Median Rent Share-Census                                                                                                    Homeownership Rate



Note: For non-BEA series, a moving average with weight of 0.5 for the years before and after shown. Housing shares include renters and owners; rent shares include renters only.
BEA = Bureau of Economics Analysis, CEX = Consumer Expenditure Survey, AHS = American Housing Survey
Figure 2: Working Households Spending Over 50 Percent of Income on Housing, Percent: 2010




 Fraction of Households with "Extreme Burden"
                50




                                                    50




                                                                               00
       00




                          00

                                   50




                                                              00
                                           00




                                                                      50
                         .2




                                                    .3
       .1

                .1




                                  .2

                                           .3




                                                             .4




                                                                               .0
                                                                      .4
      -0




                                       -0
            -0




                                                -0
                     -0

                              -0




                                                         -0

                                                                  -0

                                                                           -1
            1

                     1

                              1

                                       1

                                                1

                                                         1




                                                                           1
   6




                                                                  1
       10

                15




                                           30
  07




                         20

                                  25




                                                    35




                                                                      45
                                                             40
 0.

       0.

                0.

                         0.

                                  0.

                                           0.

                                                    0.

                                                             0.

                                                                      0.
Shelter Relative to Non-Shelter                                                     Figure 3A: The Relative Price of Shelter




                                                                                                                                                            Shelter Relative to Non-Shelter
                                         2.5




                                                                                                                                                                 1.0 1.5 2.0 2.5
                                         2.0
                                         1.5
                                         1.0




                                                           1970            1980                  1990                       2000     2010

                                                                    Official CPI                         Revised CNV                Revised: CNV + Boskin
Official CPI-Deflated Household Income




                                                                                                                                                            Official CPI-Deflated Household Income
                                                                                   Figure 3B: CPI deflated Household Income
                                         1.4




                                                                                                                                                                       1.0 1.2 1.4
                                         1.2
                                         1.0




                                                           1970           1980                  1990                        2000    2010

                                                                      Mean - All                          Median - Owners              Median - Renters




                                                                                       Figure 3C: Household Demographics
                                                                                                                                                                                 Proportion Less than 18 Years
Average Household Size




                                                                                                                                                                                    0.14 0.17 0.21 0.24
                                         1.8 2.2 2.6 3.0




                                                           1970            1980                   1990                       2000     2010

                                                                  Household Size                          Number Adults              Fraction Children (RHS)




                       Note: CPI = Consumer Price Index. CNV = Crone, Nakamura, and Voith (2010), Boskin from New Product bias in Table 2
                       of the Boskin Commission (1996) Report. Income and Household Demographics from Current Population Survey.
                       We normalize relative prices to 1 in 1970 and income to 1 in 1976 when renter status known.
              Figure 4: Housing Consumption with Production Possibility Expansions
Non‐housing


                E                                                                     LEGEND
                                            Income
                                                                      A = original bundle
                                           expansion
                                                                      C = new bundle
                                              path
                                                                      A to B = income effect (necessity)
                                                         Constant     B to C = substitution effect (inelastic)
        Constant
                                                        expenditure
       expenditure                C                       share at
                                                                      A to D = income effect (neutral)
         share at                                                     D to E = substitution effect (unit)
                                      B                   original
        changing
                                                           prices
          prices
                                           D                                                          New
                                                                                                  Indifference
                                                                                                     Curve
                                                                                 Equivalent new
                                                                                budget constraint
                Original budget            New production                       at original relative
                  Constraint              possibility frontier                         prices



                       A
                                                     New budget
                                                      Constraint
                                                                                   Original
                                                                                 Indifference
       Original production                                                          Curve
       possibility frontier


                                                                                                 Housing
                                      Figure 5A: Non-Housing Price Index vs. Housing Price Index,                                                                                    Figure 5B: Predicted Wage/Skill Index vs. Housing Price Index,
                                                                2000                                                                                                                                            2000

                                                                                                        Nassau-Suffolk
                               0.2




                                                                                                                                                                  0.2
                                                                                                                         San Francisco
                                                                                                    Boston

                                                                                                                              San Jose
                               0.1




                                                                                                                                                                               0.1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Boston
 CEO Non Housing Price Index




                                                                                     Sacramento              Oakland




                                                                                                                                                    Predicted Wage/Skill Index
                                                                                                   Washington
                                                                                      Los Angeles-Long   Beach                                                                                                           Minneapolis-St. Paul
                                                                     Riverside-San  Bernardino     New York                                                                                                                                   Washington
                                                                             Minneapolis-St.  Paul
                                                                                      Philadelphia San Diego                                                                                                                 Seattle-Bellevue-EverettNassau-Suffolk
                                                                                   Seattle-Bellevue-Everett
                                                                                                  Newark                                                                                                                                                                  San Jose
                                                                                                            Orange County                                                                                      Pittsburgh                  Denver                   San Francisco
                                                            Cleveland-Lorain-Elyria                                                                                                                                    Kansas   City
                                                                                            Chicago                                                                                                                        Portland-Vancouver
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Baltimore                  Oakland
                                                                             Portland-VancouverDenver                                                                                                                  St. Louis PhiladelphiaNewark
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Cincinnati
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ColumbusSacramento
                                                                                Baltimore                                                                                                                             Indianapolis
                                                                                                                                                                                                        Cleveland-Lorain-ElyriaDetroit Atlanta
                                                                                          Fort Lauderdale                                                                                                                                Chicago
                               0.0




                                                                                                                                                               0.0
                                                                  Pittsburgh                Miami                                                                                           Norfolk-Virginia Beach-Newport   News                San Diego
                                                                                          Atlanta                                                                                                                  Fort Worth-Arlington
                                                                                       Las Dallas
                                                                                           Vegas                                                                                                                                         Dallas
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Phoenix-Mesa            Orange County
                                                                         Kansas  Detroit
                                                                                 City                                                                                                                  Tampa-St. Petersburg-Clearwater
                                                                         St.
                                                                           Columbus
                                                                             Louis
                                                           Tampa-St. Petersburg-Clearwater
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Orlando
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Houston
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  San Antonio         Fort Lauderdale
                                                                                    Houston
                                                                                       Orlando
                                                                       CincinnatiNews
                                                Norfolk-Virginia Beach-Newport
                                                                                   Phoenix-Mesa                                                                                                                                              New York
                                                                         Indianapolis
                                                                      San Antonio
                                                                     Fort Worth-Arlington                                                                                                                        Riverside-San Bernardino
                               -0.1




                                                                                                                                               -0.1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Los Angeles-Long
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Miami      Beach
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Las Vegas
                               -0.2




                                      -0.8      -0.6         -0.4 -0.2    0.0     0.2    0.4                                 0.6         0.8                      -0.2               -0.8        -0.6         -0.4 -0.2    0.0     0.2    0.4                                 0.6     0.8
                                                                Census Housing Price Index                                                                                                                       Census Housing Price Index

                                         METRO POP                             >5 Mil                                        1.5-5 Mil                                                      METRO POP                           >5 Mil                                        1.5-5 Mil
                                             0.5-1.5 Mil                       <0.5 Mil                                                                                                      0.5-1.5 Mil                        <0.5 Mil

                                         Linear fit                            Slope = 0.199 (0.009)                                                                                        Linear fit                          Slope = 0.025 (0.013)



Data Source: Non-housing price index is from CEO prices panel, housing price index is from Census
                                                                        Figure 6A: Median Share of Income Spent on Rent                                                                                                                Figure 6B: Median Share of Income Spent on Housing
                                                                       and the Relative Price of Housing, Renters Only 2000                                                                                                           and the Relative Price of Housing, All Households 2000

                                                        0.30




                                                                                                                                                                                                                               0.25
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Miami



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Los Angeles-Long Beach
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Riverside-San Bernardino   San Diego
                                                                                                                   Miami
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Fort Lauderdale         Orange County
Median Expenditure on Gross Rent as a Share of Income




                                                                                                                                                                         Median Expenditures on Housing as a Share of Income
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Las Vegas
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Norfolk-Virginia Beach-Newport  News
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Seattle-Bellevue-Everett          Oakland
                                                                                                                    Fort Lauderdale                                                                                                                                            Sacramento
                                                                                                                                      Orange County                                                                                                                                     Denver
                                                                                     Riverside-San Bernardino             San Diego
                                                        0.25




                                                                                                          Los Angeles-Long Beach                                                                                                                                       Portland-Vancouver
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Orlando
                                                                                                                 Orlando                                                                                                                                                      Phoenix-Mesa                              San Jose
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   San Francisco
                                                                                                               Las Vegas                                                                                                                                                                             New York
                                                                                                              Phoenix-Mesa                                                                                                                                                                 Nassau-Suffolk
                                                                      Norfolk-Virginia Beach-Newport  News
                                                                                                Portland-Vancouver   Nassau-SuffolkOakland                                                                                                                                                           Newark
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Washington
                                                                                                     Sacramento Denver




                                                                                                                                                                                                                               0.20
                                                                                                       Seattle-Bellevue-Everett                       San Jose                                                                                                                    Atlanta
                                                                                 Tampa-St. Petersburg-Clearwater Atlanta                                                                                                                    Tampa-St. Petersburg-Clearwater             Chicago
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Baltimore
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Dallas
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Boston
                                                                                              San Antonio Paul
                                                                                             Minneapolis-St.                                                                                                                                                           Columbus
                                                                                                       PhiladelphiaDallas
                                                                                                                     Newark
                                                                                                                      New York               San Francisco                                                                                                       Minneapolis-St.  Paul
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Philadelphia
                                                                                                             Houston Boston
                                                                                                                      Washington                                                                                                                                   Fort Worth-Arlington
                                                                                                                Chicago                                                                                                                                      San Antonio
                                                                                                  Baltimore
                                                                          Cleveland-Lorain-ElyriaFort Worth-Arlington                                                                                                                            Cleveland-Lorain-Elyria
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Houston
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Indianapolis
                                                                                               Columbus
                                                                                                 Indianapolis                                                                                                                                                          Cincinnati
                                                                                              Kansas City
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Kansas City
                                                                                             St. Louis Detroit
                                                                                  PittsburghCincinnati
                                                        0.20




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       St. Louis
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Detroit
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Pittsburgh




                                                                                                                                                                                                                               0.15
                                                               0.6




                                                                                       0.8




                                                                                                           1.0



                                                                                                                         1.2


                                                                                                                                     1.4


                                                                                                                                                1.6

                                                                                                                                                             1.8

                                                                                                                                                                   2.0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          0.6




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                0.8



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    1.0


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     1.2


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               1.4

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           1.6

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   1.8

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         2.0
                                                                                  Housing (Rental) vs. Non-Housing Price Index                                                                                                                           Housing vs. Non-Housing Price Index

                                                                     METRO POP                           >5 Mil                                       1.5-5 Mil                                                                       METRO POP                             >5 Mil                                           1.5-5 Mil
                                                                     0.5-1.5 Mil                         <0.5 Mil                                                                                                                     0.5-1.5 Mil                           <0.5 Mil

                                                                     Linear fit                         Slope = 0.214 (0.031)                                                                                                         Linear fit                           Slope = 0.372 (0.018)
                            Figure 7: Comparison of Ideal Cost-of-Living Indices by Functional Form
Fig. 7A : Moderate substitution; housing necessity σ = 2/3, δ = 1/8, εy,m = 2/3                                                                                                                       Fig. 7B: Low substitution; housing weak necessity σ = 1/2, δ = 1/16, εy,m = 5/6




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Original Time Change
                                                                                                                      From 1970 to 2010


                                                                                                                                          San Jose




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      National Average, Kansas City
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      1.3
                                                                                               Original Time Change
                                                 National Average, Kansas City
                 1.3




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         San Jose
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             From 1970 to 2010
                             Johnstown, PA




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Johnstown, PA
                                                                                 Los Angeles




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Los Angeles
                 1.2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                      1.2
                                                                                                                                                     Revised Time Change




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Revised Time Change
                                                                                                                                                                           From 1970 to 2010




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          From 1970 to 2010
Cost of Living




                                                                                                                                                                                                     Cost of Living
                 1.1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                      1.1
                 1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                      1
                 .9




                                                                                                                                                                                                                      .9


                       .5                    1                                     1.5                                                          2                                              2.5                          .5                    1                                     1.5                                                  2                                                2.5
                                                 Relative Price of Housing                                                                                                                                                                            Relative Price of Housing

                            COL1: Fixed Demand                                                                                      COL2: Cobb-Douglas                                                                           COL1: Fixed Demand                                                                              COL2: Cobb-Douglas
                                                                                                                                COL4: Non-Homothetic CES                                                                                                                                                                         COL4: Non-Homothetic CES
                            COL3: Homothetic CES                                                                                at one half of median income                                                                     COL3: Homothetic CES                                                                            at one half of median income
                                   Figure 8: Real Household Income Deflated by Cost-of-living Index, 1970-2014
           1.8       1.6
Real Household Income
   1.2     11.4




                           1970                        1980                          1990                          2000                   2010
                                                                                         Year

                                          50th Percentile: Official CPI                                       90th Percentile: Official CPI
                                          50th Percentile: CNV Revision                                       90th Percentile: CNV Revision
                                          50th Percentile: CNV + Boskin Revision                              90th Percentile: CNV + Boskin Revision

                           Note: Real household income at each percentile to 1 in 1970. Uses σ = 2/3, εy,m = 2/3
    Appendix
A     Separable Family of CES
A.1    Formulation and Parameters

We use the simple “separable family” of CES utility function from Sato (1977), and complement

it with the Barten (1964) model as well as add a quality of life parameter:

                                                              ργ1
                                         δ1 (yn1−φ )ρ + θ1
                                          
                                    U =Q
                                             δ2 xρ + θ2


where θi = − (1/γ − δi ) ρ − δi is composed of more elementary parameters. These are the dis-

tribution parameter, δ1 = δ and δ2 = δ − 1 < 0, the substitution parameter, σ = 1/(1 − ρ), and

the non-homotheticity parameter, γ. Raising the arguments by 1/γ helps with the limiting case

as γ → 0. The utility function is express in per–capita terms, so that co-habitating with others

consuming the same amount contributes n1−φ times the amount from sharing.



A.2    Marginal rate of substitution

Taking the ratio of partial derivatives, the marginal rate of substitution between the housing and

non-housing goods is

                         1−ρ                                       γ        σ−1
                   δ     x      ρ(1−φ) δ(yn
                                           1−φ ρ
                                              ) + θ1     δ  y  σ1   u     1−φ
                                                                                   σ
      M RSy,x   =              n                      =                   n
                  1−δ    y             (δ − 1)xρ + θ2   1−δ x         Q


At the household’s optimal consumption bundle, c/p = M RSx,y , implying:

                                               σ  γ       1−σ
                              x         p 1−δ        u     1−φ
                                =         ·              n
                              y         c   δ        Q




                                                  i
A.3    Expenditure Share on Housing

To solve for the expenditure share on housing, note that d ln y/d ln x = dy/dx(x/y) = cx/py =

sx /sy . Then the ratio of the expenditure share spent on x to the share spent on y is:

                                                 σ  1−σ  γ(1−σ)
                 sx   d ln y   cx           1−δ       c      u
                    =        =    =                                   n(1−φ)(1−σ)
                 sy   d ln x   py            δ        p      Q


With σ < 1 and γ > 0, the relative share of x to y increases with u/Q as well as c. It increases

with n when φ < 1. Then to solve for the housing expenditure share sy , add one and invert:

                                                                      p
                                                                         1−σ
                  1    cx                                      δσ   n1−φ
                     =    + 1 ⇒ sy =                                              γ(1−σ) .
                  sy   py                         p
                                                        1−σ                      u
                                            δσ   n1−φ
                                                               + (1 − δ)σ c1−σ    Q



Taking logarithms, we obtain an only partly linear equation

                                                               "
                                                          p 1−σ                 γ (1−σ)        #
                                                       σ                   σ 1−σ  u
ln sy = σ ln δ + (1 − σ)[ln(p) − (1 − φ) ln(n)] − ln δ      1−φ
                                                                  + (1 − δ) c
                                                          n                       Q


To complete the log-linearization, we take the total derivative to get the approximation:

                                             h                                  i
                       sby = (1 − sy )(1 − σ) p̂ − ĉ − γ û + γ Q̂ − (1 − φ)n̂


Relating the above equation to the regression equation ((5b)) we can set gives β0 = σ ln δ =

ln s̄y , β1 = (1 − s̄y )(1 − σ), and γ = −β3 /β1 if the term in brackets is set to one for reference

prices p = c = 1 and a reference household size normalized to 1 n = 1 (so that n is household size

relative to the mean). Then we need to set

                                                       1
                                              1 − δ σ γ(1−σ)
                                           
                                       u
                                         =
                                       Q     (1 − δ)σ




                                                        ii
For instance, suppose eβ0 = 1/4, and β1 a = 1/2, then σ = 2/3 and δ = 1/8. Then we need

u/Q = 0.64 β3 = −γ(1 − s̄y )(1 − σ). The parameters can thus be expressed recursively as

σ = 1 − β1 /(1 − eβ0 ), δ = eβ0 /σ



A.4     Hicksian Demand and Expenditure Functions

The Hicksian, or compensated, demands for the housing and non-housing goods associated with

this utility function can be derived as:

                                                                   σ
                                        σ "           γ 1−σ # σ−1
                                 ẽ                     u    σ
                            y = δ n1−φ         θ2 − θ1                                           (A.1)
                                 p                      Q
                                                                              σ
                                          σ  γ(1−σ) "          γ 1−σ # σ−1
                                        ẽ      u                    u  σ
                            x = (1 − δ)                   θ2 − θ1                                (A.2)
                                        c       Q                    Q


where ẽ is a standard CES price index adjusted with an increasing utility weight on c and a division

of p, so that

                                                                          1
                        γ  "                             γ(1−σ) # 1−σ
                    p    u          p   1−σ                  u
        ẽ = ẽ 1−φ , c       = δσ           + (1 − δ)σ c1−σ                                     (A.3)
                n        Q         n1−φ                       Q


The expenditure for the NH-CES function with the Barten adjustment is then:

                                                                       1 "                       σ
                        "
                          p 1−σ                 γ(1−σ)          # 1−σ             γ 1−σ # σ−1
                       σ                   σ 1−σ  u                                   u    σ
  e(p, c, u, n; Q) = δ      1−φ
                                  + (1 − δ) c                                θ2 − θ1                .
                          n                       Q                                   Q

                                                                                                 (A.4)


B     Data

We define cities at the Metropolitan Statistical Area (MSA) level using the 1999 Office of Man-

agement and Budget definitions of primary MSAs (e.g., San Francisco is separate from Oakland



                                                    iii
and San Jose), of which there are 311. Data from the U.S. Census data from Integrated Public-Use

Microdata Series (IPUMS), from Ruggles et al. (2004), for several purposes.



B.1    Wage Differentials

The wage differentials are calculated for workers ages 25 to 55 who report working at least 30

hours a week, 26 weeks a year. The MSA assigned to a worker is determined by their place

of residence, rather than their place of work. The wage differential of an MSA is calculated by

regressing log hourly wages on a rich set of covariates and a set of indicators for which MSA a

worker lives in. The wage differentials are taken to be the coefficients on these MSA indicators,

renormalized to have a national average value of zero. The covariates consist of:

   • 12 indicators of educational attainment;

   • a quartic in potential experience, and potential experience interacted with years of education;

   • 9 indicators of industry at the one-digit level (1950 classification);

   • 9 indicators of employment at the one-digit level (1950 classification);

   • 4 indicators of marital status (married, divorced, widowed, separated);

   • an indicator for veteran status, and veteran status interacted with age;

   • 5 indicators of minority status (Black, Hispanic, Asian, Native American, and other);

   • an indicator of immigrant status, years since immigration, and immigrant status interacted

      with black, Hispanic, Asian, and other;

   • 2 indicators for English proficiency (none or poor).

All covariates are interacted with gender.

   This regression is run using census-person weights.

                                                 iv
B.2      Housing Rent and Price Indices

The housing rent and price differentials are calculated using the logarithm of rents, whether they are

reported gross rents or imputed rents derived from housing values. The differential housing price

of an MSA is calculated in a manner similar to the wage differential, except using a regression of

the actual or imputed rent on a set of covariates at the unit level and a set of MSA indicators. The

covariates for the adjusted differentials are:

   • 9 indicators of building size;

   • 9 indicators for the number of rooms, 5 indicators for the number of bedrooms, number of

        rooms interacted with number of bedrooms;

   • 2 indicators for lot size;

   • 7 indicators for when the building was built;

   • 2 indicators for complete plumbing and kitchen facilities;

   • 8 indicators for home heating fuel;

   • an indicator for commercial use;

   • an indicator for condominium status (owned units only).

We first run a regression of housing values on housing characteristics and MSA indicator variables

weighting by census-housing weights. The housing-price index are taken from the MSA indicator

variables in this regression, renormalized to have a national average of zero.


B.2.1    Alternative Census Housing Price Index

The Alternative Census Housing Price Index are estimated from the 2000 united States Census 5%

data from the Integrated Public-Use Microdata Series (IPUMS), following Malpezzi, Chun and

                                                  v
Green (1998). The housing price differentials are calculated using the logarithm of rents, whether

they are reported gross rents or imputed rents derived from housing values. We first fit separate

regressions for each MSA, regressing the log yearly rents on a set of MSA dummies and a number

of covariates at the unit level. We then use the predicted price from each regression in each location

to get the normalized price index. The covariates for the adjusted differential are:


   • 9 indicators of building size;

   • 9 indicators for the number of rooms, 5 indicators for the number of bedrooms, number of

        rooms interacted with number of bedrooms;

   • 2 indicators for lot size;

   • 7 indicators for when the building was built;

   • 2 indicators for complete plumbing and kitchen facilities;

   • 8 indicators for home heating fuel;

   • an indicator for commercial use;

   • an indicator for condominium status (owned units only).


We first run a hedonic regression for each MSA, using housing characteristics alone. Second, we

calculate predicted housing prices in each MSA from each regression, and calculate the MSA-level

means. Third, we obtain the normalized housing price index for each MSA by using the predicted

values of housing minus the national average.


B.2.2    CEX Housing Price Index

The CEX Housing Price Index is computed from 1997-2003 pooled Consumer Expenditure Sur-

vey. The housing price differentials are calculated using the logarithm of rents, whether they are

                                                 vi
reported gross rents or imputed rents derived from housing values. We regress the log yearly rents

on a set of geographical area dummies and a number of covariates at the unit level. The geograph-

ical area is defined based on state, population size, and whether it is in a metro area. In order to

compare with the other price indices, we match CEX geographical units with Census PMSAs by

state, population, and metropolitan area status. The matching process is not perfect, since a state

may have two MSAs with indistinguishable populations, preventing us from differentiating them.

   The covariates for the adjusted differentials are:


   • 9 indicators of building size;


   • 9 indicators of building structure;


   • 9 indicators for the number of rooms, 5 indicators for the number of bedrooms, number of

      rooms interacted with number of bedrooms;


   • 5 indicators for the number of bathrooms;


   • 7 indicators for when the building was built;


   • 2 indicators for complete plumbing and kitchen facilities;


   • 4 indicators for home heating fuel;


   • an indicator for commercial use;


   • an indicator for condominium status (owned units only).


We first run a regression of housing values on housing characteristics and geographical area in-

dicator variables weighting by CEX-housing weights. The housing-price index is taken from the

coefficients on the geographical area indicator variables in this regression, renormalized to have a

national average of zero.


                                                 vii
B.2.3   CEO Prices Panel Housing Price Index

We use the Carrillo, Early, Olsen (2013) Prices Index Panel for all areas in the United States in the

year 2000. CEO’s source of housing data is HUD’s 2000 Section 8 Customer Satisfaction Survey

(CSS). They produce a geographic housing price index for 2000 by estimating a hedonic regres-

sion. They regress the logarithm of gross rents on observed characteristics of the rental units and

their neighborhoods, other determinants that reflect unobserved characteristics that affect market

rents, and a set of geographic area dummies for metropolitan areas and the non-metropolitan areas

of each state.



B.3     Housing Expenditure Share

B.3.1   Census Housing Expenditure Share

The Census housing expenditure share is calculated from the 2000 United States 5% data from the

Integrated Public-Use Microdata Series (IPUMS). The housing expenditure share is calculated as

the ratio of housing expenditure to household income. For renters, we use gross rent as housing

expenditure, while for owners, we use imputed rents derived from housing values plus utility fees.

The cross-MSA mean of the MSA-level median rental share is .225 and the mean of the MSA-level

meadian housing share for both renters and owners is 0.196.


B.3.2   AHS Rental Share

The AHS rental share is computed from the 1974-2013 American Housing Survey microdata.

The AHS housing expenditure share is defined as the ratio of monthly housing cost to household

income.




                                                viii
B.3.3   CEX Rental Share

The CEX rental share in appendix table 2 is derived from 1997-2003 Consumer Expenditure Sur-

vey microdata. The rental share in figure 1B is derived from 1974-2014 microdata. The CEX rental

share is computed as the ratio of expenditure on rents to total expenditure. We define geographies

in the CEX as discussed in section B.2.2.




                                                ix
APPENDIX TABLE 1: COMPENSATED DEMAND FUNCTIONS - ADDITIONAL YEARS, DATASETS, AND PRICE INDICES -
                                       RENTERS ONLY
                                                                                                           Alt Housing      CEO Housing
                           Dataset/Price Index:      Census 1980       Census 1990       ACS 2007-11       Price Index       Price Index
                                                          (1)               (2)              (3)                (4)              (5)
                          Dependent Variable:                                       Log Median Rental Share
                  Panel A: Regression Results
                   Rental/Housing Price Index            0.219             0.246             0.283             0.203            0.118
                                                        (0.042)           (0.028)           (0.028)           (0.027)          (0.034)
                     Non Housing Price Index             -0.219            -0.246            -0.283            -0.203           -0.118
                                                        (0.042)           (0.028)           (0.028)           (0.027)          (0.034)
                         Predicted Wage Index            -0.407            -0.266            -0.483            -0.235           -0.163
                                                        (0.133)           (0.141)           (0.102)           (0.115)          (0.134)
                                      Constant           -1.538            -1.476            -1.275            -1.492           -1.492
                                                        (0.006)           (0.007)           (0.005)           (0.005)          (0.005)

              Sample Size (number of areas)               328               331               331               331              331
                         Adjusted R-squared              0.166             0.604             0.582             0.481            0.379
           Homogeneity of Demand Restricted               Yes               Yes               Yes               Yes              Yes
     Unconstrained Sum of Housing and Non-               -0.175            -0.355            0.149             0.058            0.146
             Housing Price Index Coefficients           (0.207)           (0.173)           (0.068)           (0.073)          (0.098)
   P-value of Test of Homogeneity of Demand              0.398             0.041             0.030             0.429            0.137
        Panel B: Implied Demand Parameters
                                                         0.215              0.229            0.279              0.225             0.225
           Geometric Mean Expenditure Share
                                                        (0.001)            (0.002)          (0.001)            (0.001)           (0.001)
        Uncompensated Own Price Elasticity of            -0.693             -0.694           -0.582             -0.744            -0.846
                                Housing Demand          (0.053)            (0.051)          (0.047)            (0.043)           (0.057)
                                                         0.593              0.734            0.517              0.765             0.837
          Income Elasticity of Housing Demand
                                                        (0.133)            (0.141)          (0.102)            (0.115)           (0.134)
     Elasticity of Substitution Between Housing          0.720              0.682            0.607              0.738             0.848
                      and Consumption Goods σ           (0.054)            (0.037)          (0.039)            (0.035)           (0.044)
                                                         0.882              0.885            0.878              0.867             0.828
                        Distribution Parameter δ
                                                        (0.018)            (0.013)          (0.016)            (0.012)           (0.015)
                                                         1.856              1.083            1.705              1.157             1.382
                  Non-homotheticity Parameter γ
                                                        (0.682)            (0.537)          (0.333)            (0.534)           (0.980)
All specifications include renters only. Columns 1 through 3 use the 1980 Census, 1990 Census, and 2007-2011 American Community
Surveys to calculate house price indices and rental shares as in table 1. Column 4 calculates the house price index similarly to Malpezzi et
al. (1998) as described in appendix B.2.1. Column 5 constructs the house price index using the Price Indexes Panel provided by Carrillo,
Early, and Olsen (2013), described in appendix B.2.4. Columns 4 through 5 use the share of income devoted to housing from the 2000
Census as the rental share.
                  APPENDIX TABLE 2: METRO LEVEL REGRESSIONS - CONSUMER EXPENDITURE SURVEY
                                                                                Renters and                        Renters and
                                          Household Type      Renters only                        Renters only
                                                                                 Owners                              Owners
                                                                (1)                 (2)              (3)               (4)
                                        Regression Type:     Compensated       Compensated      Uncompensated     Uncompensated
                              Panel A: Regression Results
                                     Housing Price Index         0.341             0.525             0.685             0.723
                                                                (0.056)           (0.042)           (0.075)           (0.077)
                        Log Median Predicted Expenditure         -0.086            0.001             -0.644            -0.549
                                                                (0.164)           (0.129)           (0.075)           (0.081)
                                                 Constant       -1.013            -1.174            -1.013            -1.174
                                                                (0.008)           (0.007)           (0.006)           (0.006)
                             Sample Size (number of areas)        163               163               163               163
                                       Adjusted R-squared        0.289             0.573             0.723             0.815
                P-value of Test of Homogeneity of Demand         0.000             0.000             0.736             0.004
                     Panel B: Implied Demand Parameters
                                                                 0.363             0.309             0.363             0.309
                        Geometric Mean Expenditure Share
                                                                (0.003)           (0.002)           (0.002)           (0.002)
                                                                -0.628            -0.476            -0.315            -0.277
   Uncompensated Own Price Elasticity of Housing Demand
                                                                (0.104)           (0.072)           (0.075)           (0.077)
                                                                 0.914             1.001             0.356             0.451
                     Income Elasticity of Housing Demand
                                                                (0.164)           (0.129)           (0.075)           (0.081)
Elasticity of Substitution Between Housing and Consumption       0.465             0.241             0.292             0.199
                                                   Goods σ      (0.089)           (0.061)           (0.083)           (0.081)
The data are from Consumer Expenditure Survey 1997-2003.All regressions are constrained to exhibit homogeneity of demand.
Standard errors are clustered at the metro level. The predicted income measure in Panel A is the median predicted expenditures of
all adults in the household.
                                         Figure A: Alternative vs. Census Housing Price Index                                                                                Figure B: CEO vs. Census Housing Price Index
                      0.8

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         San Francisco
                                                                                                            San Francisco
                                                                                                                 San Jose                                                                                                                     San Jose




                                                                                                                                  -0.8 -0.6 -0.4 -0.2 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8
   -0.8 -0.6 -0.4 -0.2 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6



                                                                                                  Orange County                                                                                                              Nassau-Suffolk
                                                                                                 Nassau-Suffolk
           Alternative Housing Price Index




                                                                                                    Oakland
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Boston
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           New York




                                                                                                                                             CEO Housing Price Index
                                                                               Los Angeles-Long Beach
                                                                             Seattle-Bellevue-Everett                                                                                                                              Oakland
                                                                                              San York
                                                                                             New  Diego
                                                                                            Washington
                                                                                                Boston                                                                                                                    NewarkOrange County
                                                                                      Fort
                                                                         Portland-VancouverLauderdale
                                                                                           Denver
                                                                                             Newark
                                                                                        Chicago                                                                                                              Los Angeles-Long Beach
                                                                                  Philadelphia                                                                                                           Seattle-Bellevue-Everett
                                                                                 Sacramento                                                                                                                               Washington
                                                                                    Las Atlanta
                                                                         Minneapolis-St.Vegas
                                                                                           Paul
                                                                                           Miami                                                                                                                            San Diego
                                                                 Riverside-San  Bernardino
                                                                                        Dallas                                                                                                         Minneapolis-St.Chicago
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Denver
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Paul
                                                                               Phoenix-Mesa
                                                                                     Orlando
                                                                               Baltimore                                                                                                                        Philadelphia
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Atlanta
                                                                                Detroit
                                                                                  Houston
                                                      Tampa-St. Petersburg-Clearwater                                                                                                                        Baltimore   Miami
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Fort Lauderdale
                                                                   Fort Indianapolis
                                                                         Worth-Arlington
                                                                        Kansas   City                                                                                                          Riverside-San      Las Vegas
                                                                                                                                                                                                       Portland-Vancouver
                                                                                                                                                                                                              Bernardino
                                             Norfolk-Virginia             Columbus
                                                              Beach-Newport    News                                                                                                                            Sacramento
                                                                                                                                                                                                             Phoenix-Mesa
                                                                                                                                                                                                              Detroit Dallas
                                                                         St. Louis
                                                           Cleveland-Lorain-Elyria                                                                                                                                 Orlando
                                                                      Cincinnati
                                                                     San  Antonio
                                                                                                                                                                                      Tampa-St.
                                                                                                                                                                             Norfolk-Virginia    Petersburg-Clearwater
                                                                                                                                                                                              Beach-Newport   News
                                                                                                                                                                                                        Indianapolis
                                                                                                                                                                                           Cleveland-Lorain-Elyria
                                                                  Pittsburgh                                                                                                                       Fort
                                                                                                                                                                                                      Cincinnati
                                                                                                                                                                                                  Pittsburgh     Houston
                                                                                                                                                                                                         Worth-Arlington
                                                                                                                                                                                                          Columbus
                                                                                                                                                                                                     SanKansas  City
                                                                                                                                                                                                          Antonio
                                                                                                                                                                                                         St. Louis




                                             -0.8     -0.6      -0.4 -0.2 0.0     0.2    0.4                      0.6       0.8                                             -0.8      -0.6     -0.4 -0.2 0.0     0.2    0.4                      0.6     0.8
                                                                 Census Housing Price Index                                                                                                     Census Housing Price Index

                                                           Linear Fit: Slope = 1.006 (0.007)                                                                                              Linear Fit: Slope = 0.933 (0.019)
                                                           Reverse Linear Fit : Slope = 1.026 (0.007)                                                                                     Reverse Linear Fit : Slope = 1.079 (0.022)
                                                           45-degree line                                                                                                                 45-degree line




                                             Figure C: AHS vs. Census Housing Price Index                                                                                   Figure D: CEX vs. Census Housing Price Index
                            0.8




                                                                                                                                                  0.8
                            0.6




                                                                                                                                                  0.6




                                                                                                     San Francisco
                                                                                                          San Jose
                                                                                         Nassau-Suffolk
   -0.8 -0.6 -0.4 -0.2 0.0 0.2 0.4




                                                                                                                                  -0.8 -0.6 -0.4 -0.2 0.0 0.2 0.4
             AHS Housing Price Index




                                                                                                                                            CEX Housing Price Index




                                                                                              Oakland
                                                                                          Orange   County
                                                                                    New York                                                                                                                          New York
                                                                                    Newark
                                                                                     San Diego                                                                                                          Los Angeles-Long   Beach
                                                                     Seattle-Bellevue-Everett
                                                                                       Boston
                                                                                    Washington
                                                                       Los Angeles-Long  Beach                                                                                                                       Washington
                                                                                                                                                                                          Riverside-San Bernardino
                                                                                                                                                                                                          SacramentoSan Diego
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Orange
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Oakland
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    County
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     San Francisco
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           San Jose
                                                                   Minneapolis-St.  Paul
                                                                                  Chicago                                                                                      Tampa-St. Petersburg-Clearwater      Denver
                                                                                                                                                                                                              Orlando
                                                                                                                                                                                                               Fort Lauderdale
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Miami
                                                                                    Denver                                                                                                        Portland-Vancouver
                                                                                                                                                                                                     Seattle-Bellevue-Everett
                                                                                                                                                                                                           Houston
                                                                                                                                                                                                           Philadelphia
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Chicago
                                                                            Philadelphia
                                                                                     Miami
                                                                               Fort Lauderdale                                                                                                    Minneapolis-St. Paul
                                                                            Sacramento                                                                                                           Kansas   City
                                                                                                                                                                                                         Detroit
                                                                                                                                                                                                  St. Louis
                                                                                  Dallas
                                                                              Las Vegas
                                                                         Baltimore                                                                                                                      Phoenix-Mesa
                                                           Riverside-SanPhoenix-Mesa
                                                                           Bernardino
                                                                          Detroit
                                                     Cleveland-Lorain-Elyria                                                                                                                Fort
                                                                                                                                                                                              SanWorth-Arlington
                                                                                                                                                                                                   Antonio
                                                                                                                                                                                           Pittsburgh
                                                                                                                                                                                    Cleveland-Lorain-Elyria
                                                                                                                                                                                               Cincinnati
                                                                                                                                                                                                   Columbus      Dallas
                                                                     ColumbusOrlando
                                                Tampa-St. Petersburg-Clearwater                                                                                       Norfolk-Virginia Beach-Newport    News
                                                                                                                                                                                                        Baltimore
                                                             Fort Worth-Arlington
                                                                    St. Louis
                                                             Pittsburgh
                                                                   Kansas   Houston
                                                                           City   Atlanta
                                                                 Cincinnati
                                                                  Indianapolis
                                       Norfolk-Virginia Beach-Newport    News
                                                                San Antonio




                                             -0.8      -0.6      -0.4 -0.2 0.0     0.2    0.4                     0.6       0.8                                             -0.8    -0.6      -0.4 -0.2 0.0     0.2    0.4                       0.6     0.8
                                                                  Census Housing Price Index                                                                                                   Census Housing Price Index

                                                           Linear Fit: Slope = 0.991 (0.038)                                                                                              Linear Fit: Slope = 0.590 (0.041)
                                                           Reverse Linear Fit : Slope = 1.184 (0.045)                                                                                     Reverse Linear Fit : Slope = 1.064 (0.075)
                                                           45-degree line                                                                                                                 45-degree line



Data Source: 2000 Census, 1997-2003 CEX, 1997-2003 AHS, renters only
