NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

PAST PERFORMANCE AND PROCUREMENT OUTCOMES
Francesco Decarolis
Giancarlo Spagnolo
Riccardo Pacini
Working Paper 22814
http://www.nber.org/papers/w22814

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 2016

We are grateful to Nick Bloom, Luis Cabral, Liran Einav, Rosa Ferrer, Stefano Gagliarducci, Ricard
Gil, Luigi Guiso, Hugo Hopenhayn, Neale Mahoney, Rob Metcalfe, Enrico Moretti, Gustavo Piga,
Piero Sabbatini, Stephane Saussier, Steve Tadelis, Paola Valbonesi and to the participants at the seminars
at Barcelona GSE, Berkeley, FGV, Stanford University, Stockholm University, University of Bologna
and University of Paris I for their useful suggestions. We thank Acea for sharing its data. We also
thankfully acknowledge financial support from both the European Research Council (ERC Starting
Grant 679217, Decarolis) and the Wallander and Hedelius foundation (Handelsbanken P2013-0162,
Spagnolo). The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2016 by Francesco Decarolis, Giancarlo Spagnolo, and Riccardo Pacini. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Past Performance and Procurement Outcomes
Francesco Decarolis, Giancarlo Spagnolo, and Riccardo Pacini
NBER Working Paper No. 22814
November 2016, Revised April 2020
JEL No. D44,D47,D82,H54,H57,I18,K12,L22,L74
ABSTRACT
Reputational incentives may be a powerful mechanism for improving supplier performance and limiting
the perverse effect of price competition on contract execution. We analyze a unique experiment run
by a large utility company in Italy which introduced a new vendor rating system scoring its suppliers'
past performance and linking it to the award of future contracts. We study responses in both price
and performance to the announcement of the switch from price-only to price-and-rating auctions. Average
performance improves from 25 percent to 90 percent of the audited parameters. Improvements involve
all parameters and suppliers, are long-lasting (for at least 10 years after the initial experiment) and
are reflected in higher service quality by the utility. Contract prices do not significantly change overall,
but we find evidence of lower prices right after the announcement when suppliers compete to win
contracts to get scored, and of higher prices, once they have established a good reputation. We then
argue that supplier moral hazard is the main force behind our findings. The main takeaway from this
study is that the gains from curtailing supplier moral hazard may be higher than those from always
bolstering price competition, and that a reputational mechanism based on objective past performance
can be a powerful tool to achieve this goal.

Francesco Decarolis
Bocconi University
Via Sarfatti 25
Milan, 20136
Italy
and EIEF
francesco.decarolis@unibocconi.it
Giancarlo Spagnolo
SITE-Stockholm School of Economics
Sveavägen 65
Stockholm, SE-113 83
Sweden
and EIEF, University of Tor Vergata, and CEPR
spagnologianca@gmail.com

Riccardo Pacini
Agenzia del Demanio
riccardo.pacini01@agenziademanio.it

I

Introduction

Reputational forces linking future business to past performance are a pillar of large sectors of the economy, from business-to-business negotiations to transactions over electronic
platforms.1 In this paper, we exploit a unique setting of a large scale firm experiment to
document for the first time, and in considerable detail, the effects of reputational incentives
on performance and prices in a centralized, auctions-based public procurement market.
In private procurement, past performance indicators have always affected the selection of
suppliers and their behavior because private buyers are free to act upon them by refraining
from selecting suppliers with a poor track record. In public procurement, however, this type
of discretional management practice is typically limited: the need to prevent corruption
led lawmakers around the world to ensure that open auctions, where bidders receive equal
treatment, are used as often as possible, even if supplier track records differ considerably.
Unfortunately, as is well known, competitive auctions can be a problematic mechanism in
the context of contract procurement: with incomplete contracts, bolstering competition at
the bidding stage might come at the cost of poor ex post performance.2 Balancing this
price versus performance trade-off, and – specifically – how the use of past performance can
contribute to that, is a fundamental, yet unsolved, problem of public procurement.
Our study contributes to the analysis of this problem by exploiting a very rich set of data
related to the introduction of a past performance monitoring system in the procurement
practices of a large Italian multi-utility company, Acea. This company provides water and
power to a vast area in central Italy that includes its capital, Rome. In 2007, Acea started an
“experiment” with a new vendor rating system to understand how to improve contractual
performance (in terms of quality and safety) in the execution of the construction jobs it
1

See Tadelis (2016) for a recent survey of reputational mechanisms in electronic platforms. On businessto-business negotiations involving the sale of complex goods, see Banerjee and Duflo (2000).
2
A classic reference is Spulber (1990) which shows that in the construction sector, where contracting is
typically imperfect, open competition spurs adverse selection and ex post opportunism of contractors. More
generally, the limits of competitive auctions in this type of settings have been shown theoretically by – among
others – Manelli and Vincent (1995), Zheng (2001), Bajari and Tadelis (2001) and Burguet, Ganuza and
Hauk (2012) and confirmed empirically by Bajari, McMillan and Tadelis (2009), Decarolis (2014), Liebman
and Mahoney (2016), Lewis-Faupel et al. (2016) and Kang and Miller (2019).

1

awards for the maintenance and upgrade of the electricity grid.3 Acea’s engineering unit laid
down a list of 136 observable parameters measuring both quality and safety features of the
job carried out by its suppliers. Acea’s auditors, who used to perform worksite inspections
and then write paper-based memos, were given tablets embedded with a software to record
the scores on these parameters. Only a few months later, Acea made its first public statement
explaining to its suppliers that the results of the new audit system would be converted into a
numerical “reputation index” and that such an index would be used to award new contracts
after a few more months of data collection.
This timing allows us to study the evolution of both price and performance around
the time when the new audit system was publicly announced. As extensively discussed
below, focusing on the period when the new price-and-reputation auction system was only
announced, but not yet implemented, has a series of advantages concerning the interpretation
of the empirical analysis. Moreover, it is right after the announcement period that the most
interesting dynamic involving both price and performance takes place. Hence, in the first part
of the paper, we analyze how compliance with the monitored parameters monitored evolved in
response to the timing of the five public announcements. Using audit data for the years 2007
to 2009, we find clear evidence of a substantial change in contractors’ behavior: compliance
in the 136 parameters increased from 25 percent before the first announcement to more than
80 percent before the first auction took place under the new price-and-performance award
criterion. We find that essentially all active suppliers improved their compliance in similar
ways and they did so strategically, with compliance increasing relatively more for those
parameters with higher weights in the computation of the reputation index. The striking
increase in compliance for the audited parameters is clearly shown by the left panel of Figure
3

For Acea, this was an experiment in the sense that it introduced the new audit system only for a subset
of contracts (all of those involving public illumination and electrical-substation works, but none of those
related, for instance, to water delivery) and its stated goal was to learn whether the new audit system could
be beneficial for its overall procurement. While this experiment does not satisfy all the characteristics of an
ideal field experiment (List and Reiley, 2008), it is nevertheless a very useful natural experiment that, to the
best of our knowledge, allows us to do the first quantitative analysis of the effects of a reputational mechanism
in public procurement. For the distinction among types of firm-level experiments see Bloom et al. (2014)
who state that “in personnel economics there is a tradition of exploiting changes in firm policies initiated
by a CEO (a natural experiment such as Lazear (2000)).” In our case, the experiment was autonomously
decided by Acea’s CEO, but we had an active role in its design and implementation, in the collection and
analysis of the first few years of data, as well as in the five communications to the suppliers discussed below.

2

1: full compliance for all parameters, by all the firms audited in a given month would set the
blue line equal to 100, but we see that the compliance level in 2007 is only between 20 percent
and 30 percent. The vertical, red line marks the date of the first announcement: it is evident
how performance improves after this date. Moreover, the long time series of available data
provides a rare opportunity to observe the long lasting impact of this reform which entails
average compliance settling at around 90 percent. As discussed at the end of this section,
this is the case even after a legal controversy led to the dismissal of the price-and-reputation
system and its replacement with a hybrid mechanism.
Figure 1: Internal and External Performance Measures

Note: the left panel shows the monthly average (weighted) compliance recorded in Acea’s audits. A value of
100 would thus imply that, across all the audits taking place in that month, all suppliers were compliant on
all parameters inspected. The right panel displays the yearly evolution of one of the external performance
measures: the number of long-lasting blackouts (i.e., those lasting 3 hours or more) per client, for both Acea
(in green) and other utilities (in blue). The red line indicates the date of Acea’s first announcement.

In the right panel of Figure 1, we report the evolution of the average number of blackouts
per client for both Acea and the other electricity distributors in Italy. This is one of the
external performance measures to which we have access. As discussed below, these are all
measures that are not part of the scored parameters, but that represent socially-relevant
outcomes associated with the quality of the distribution service. Improvements in the performance of Acea’s suppliers should lead to improvements in the external measures, although
possibly with a time lag. This is indeed what we observe in the right panel: the number of
blackouts experienced by Acea’s customers declines (green line), both in absolute terms and
relative to those of the clients of the other utility company in the control group (blue line).
3

Improvements in blackouts are necessarily more gradual than improvements in the internal performance measure due to technological features. Even if the quality of the maintenance work on the grid suddenly improves, observing greater reliability in the electricity
grid requires a large portion of it to undergo work executed according to the higher quality
standards. Moreover, a second feature linked to supplier behaviour that we document below
contributes to explaining this slower improvement in the external performance measures:
supplier improvement is not uniform across parameters. It is faster for parameters carrying more weight in the reputation index (which are mostly related to worksite safety) and
those that are cheaper to improve quickly. A similar pattern characterizes all the external
measures involving the electricity sector. On the contrary, no improvements are found for
the Acea’s water distribution service, which was not part of the experiment. Both the total
amount of water leakage experienced by Acea grows over time and its relative performance
to the other water distributors does not improve.
Given this evidence on improved performance, in the second part of the analysis we ask
what its cost was and whether it was worth it. We find that the cost was quite limited
and most likely worth the benefits in terms of extra quality and safety. This part of the
analysis takes advantage of a second dataset containing information on all the contracts
awarded by both Acea and all other Italian public buyers, mostly utilities, procuring the
same type of contracts. We use the variation across procurers and over time to develop
a difference-in-differences identification strategy. We find that, if we consider the date of
the first announcement to be the one characterizing the occurrence of the policy change,
then there is no significant effect on the price paid by Acea. More specifically, by looking
at any symmetric window of time around the first announcement, prices remain stable on
average. However, when we extend the empirical model to account for the evolution of
compliance, the price response appears more nuanced. Using the results from the first part
of the analysis, we partition the period after the first announcement into a first phase when
compliance grows, and a second phase when it flattens out at high levels. When we extend
the baseline difference-in-differences model to account for different behaviors in these two
phases, we see that the original finding of no effect results from the combined effects of
prices declining when compliance improves, but prices increasing after compliance stabilizes.
4

We interpret this evidence as suggestive of a first phase in which suppliers compete harder
to win contracts: since only contract winners can be audited, winning is required to earn
(or improve) the reputation index. Winning a contract has thus the additional benefit of
improving the chances of winning future contracts. After all contractors have earned a
high reputation index, however, this benefit is outweighed by the increased cost of high
compliance, and auction prices become correspondingly higher. The estimates indicate that
these effects cancel out each other.
The lack of any significant cost increase coupled with evidence of improved performance
allow us to assert that the reform was a cost effective improvement over the previous status
quo. We formalize this argument by using our estimates to quantify the savings produced by
reducing both the probability of deadly accidents and the duration of blackouts. By using
the OECD figures for the value of a statistical life together with the same statistical model
employed by Acea’s engineers to map the relationship between changes in parameter compliance and the occurrence of fatal accidents, we estimate that the benefit from increased
compliance on the safety parameters ranges between e3.5 and e5.3 million per year. Furthermore, from the official statistics of the electricity regulator, we associate a cost to every
hour of blackouts for both residential customers and business customers: the reduction in
blackouts implies a benefit of e6.6 million, 39 percent of which accrues to business customers.
The final part of the analysis studies the mechanisms driving our findings. In particular, it focuses on whether the observed effects are the result of changes in the selection
of contractors which are bidding, or in their behavior, i.e., moral hazard. The evidence is
definitely compatible with the latter, implying the presence of moral hazard: suppliers that
are observed bidding both before and after the new rating system is announced stop offering
suspiciously low prices. These are precisely the abnormal, low ball bids often associated with
poor ex post contractual performance. On the other hand, we find only limited effects of
selection based on three features in the data. First, while several suppliers leave the market,
the timing of their exit is not associated with the announcements. Second, both the firms
that leave the market and those that remain have similar bidding patterns. Third, for many
observable characteristics, the firms leaving Acea’s auctions are no different from the sup-

5

pliers leaving the auctions of another large multi-utility company that did not participate in
the experiment and that we use as a benchmark. Thus, the main result from this study is
that the gains from curtailing suppliers moral hazard may be higher than those from always
bolstering price competition, and that a reputational mechanism based on objective past
performance can be a powerful tool to achieve this goal.
Overall, the results in this study contribute to multiple strands in the literature. At
the highest level, it is related to two strands of the law and economics literature on agency
problems. The first strand concerns ex ante regulation vs. ex post incentives. Shavell
(1984), and the research line following from it, modeled the theoretical question of whether
ex ante or ex post interventions are more effective tools for dealing with a firm engaging in
potentially risky behaviours and having private information about the extent of potential
hazards.4 Acea, with its dominant position as the largest buyer in the market, is akin to
a regulator that decides to bolster the role of ex post incentives to curb risky behaviors by
its regulated subjects (i.e., Acea’ suppliers).5 The second strand is that of the efficiencycorruption trade-off in delegation within an organization, see Banfield (1975) as the classic
reference. Price-only auctions represent rigid mechanisms where delegation to the agents (i.e.,
Acea’s engineers) of the awarding and monitoring the contracts is minimal. The introduction
of a reputation system requires delegating more powers to the auditors, thus risking that they
will exploit it for personal gain. In our case, we find that increasing delegation is beneficial.
Interestingly, a wave of recent papers on public procurement – see Coviello, Guglielmo and
Spagnolo (2017), Carril (2019) and Decarolis et al. (2020) – all reached the same conclusions
despite looking at different countries and different types of discretion, thus suggesting that
public procurement regulations tend to involve too little delegation.6
Our findings are also related to a recent wave of studies highlighting the importance of
4

A large body of subsequent studies have extended this original result and explored applications ranging
from environmental protection to banking regulation. See, among others, Kolstad, Ulen and Johnson (1990),
Rose-Ackerman (1991) and Hiriart, Martimort and Pouyet (2004).
5
Importantly, the success of this strategy likely hinges on fact that the enforcement of ex ante (i.e.,
contract) clauses through penalties is limited by the well know inefficacy of the Italian civil court system.
See Djankov et al. (2008) for a cross-country study and Giacomelli and Menon (2016) for Italy.
6
As discussed below, Acea’s approach involved not only fostering delegation but also containing corruption
risks through a mechanism of rotation and random drawing on the pool of auditor scored suppliers.

6

adopting a dynamic framework to understand and redesign public procurement markets.7
Our study is the first to empirically document the strength of this approach. A remarkable
feature of our results is the sheer size of the performance improvements driven by the market
design intervention. This runs against the typical “revenue equivalence’s curse” by which
the strategic behavior of bidders undoes most (if not all) of the benefits that the designer
intended to achieve with its intervention. Crucial for our result is the repeated nature of
the procurement process. In this respect, this study is close in spirit to those of Jofre-Bonet
and Pesendorfer (2003), Marion (2017) andChassang and Ortner (2016) which stress that a
dynamic approach to repeated procurement is key to understand the role supplier behavior.
Another strand of the literature to which our paper contributes is that on the design and
use of contract audit measures. The detailed performance measures, from random audits
by centrally managed inspectors we have access to, relate our paper to the work on public
procurement by Olken (2007) on Indonesia and Colonnelli and Prem (2017) on Brazil.
Finally, on the policy side, this study contributes to the hotly debated issue of the supplier
past performance in public procurement. We will return to this debate in the conclusions,
but we shall anticipate that controversies over the proper use of past performance have
been rampant in the European Union. Indeed, due to growing concerns within Acea’s legal
counsel that the experiment described below, and especially the use of price-and-reputation
auctions was in breach of the EU procurement directives, the experiment was ultimately
abandoned after just 36 price-and-reputation auctions were held in the space of about one
year. Nevertheless, the new audit system was never abandoned and is still used today.
The auctions system returned to being price-only, but was combined with a new provision
allowing Acea’s inspectors to block the payments to the supplier if the audits on a worksite
revealed major violations. This latter feature is important in understanding the persistence
of the observed performance improvements which indeed come not just from the changes in
physical capital and managerial behaviour (similar to the cases reviewed in Brandon et al.
(2017)), but also from changes in the environment within which suppliers operate.
7

A few theoretical studies have argued in favor of the positive role that past performance and reputation
may play in improving contract performance in repeated public procurement under imperfect contracting.
See, among others, Kim (1998), Doni (2006) and Calzolari and Spagnolo (2009).

7

II

The Experiment

The context of the experiment is that of a multi-utility company, Acea s.p.a., offering electricity and water services to about 1.6 million customers, both private households and business
establishments, in the Rome area. The firm is vertically integrated, owning and operating
the majority of its generation, transmission and distribution systems. From this point of
view, it is very similar to some of the largest US power operators such as the Los Angeles Department of Water and Power (LADWP), ComEd (Chicago), BGE (Baltimore) and
PECO (Philadelphia).8 As shown in Table 1, all of these firms spend significant resources
every year on works aimed at preserving the operational efficiency of its power grid.
Table 1: Comparison with U.S. Multi-Utility Providers

Total Employees (000)
Power Customers (mln)
Power Grid (000/miles)
Total Turnover (bln/$)
Power Supply (TWh)
Works on Power Grid Works (mln/$)

ACEA
5.0
1.6
19
3.2 (2.1)
11
206

LADWP
9.4
1.4
14
4.4 (3.3)
26
318

ComEd
6.8
3.8
90
4.9
86∗
2,400

BGE
3.3
1.3
26
3.1
29∗
500

PECO
2.6
1.6
14
3.0
36∗
475

Note: Acea and LADWP figures on employees and turnover include the water business too. BGE and PECO
figures on employees and turnover include the gas business too. All values are for 2015. Values with a ∗
symbol are estimates: the supply is estimated proportionally to the customers out of the total supply of all
Exelon subsidiaries (195TWh). For the total Turnover (bln $), the values in parenthesis refer to power only.

In 2015, Acea spent about US $200 million on procuring the kind of works which are the
focus of the experiment in this study. The jobs typically entail the maintenance, upgrade
and replacement of transformers, poles, underground cables, underground vaults, station
transformers, distribution and receiving stations.9 These are all works exposing workers to
safety hazards linked to electricity-induced accidents. In 2007, after these risks materialized
8

The external validity of what can be learned from a firm-level experiment is a typical concern in the
literature (Bloom et al. (2014)). In our case, it is thus reassuring to observe that Acea is similar to both some
other major operators active in the US, such as the multi-utility companies of the four US cities mentioned
above, and to the other companies providing the same services in Italy, as discussed below.
9
Moreover, specific investment is required to integrate increasing amounts of intermittent renewable
generation resources and transformational technologies such as energy storage, electric vehicles, and other
aspects of the smart grid. Hence, resource planning and infrastructure asset management need to be aligned
to ensure ageing assets are replaced with infrastructure that is able to meet new system requirements and
maintain reliability with a modern generation mix.

8

in some deadly accidents, the company’s management decided to take action to enhance the
safety (and quality) standards in contract execution.
The main goal was to introduce an objective measure of contractual performance (combining elements of both safety and quality), with the plan of using its ratings in the award
stage of future procurement processes. That is, two processes that had been separated until
then – contract procurement and ex post auditing – were going to become interdependent.10
At the same time, it was also decided to leave out from this experiment the water sector in
order to have a benchmark against which to evaluate the effectiveness of the new system.
Within the electricity sector, two groups of jobs – works related to public illumination and
electricity distribution – were considered sufficiently homogeneous to define a list of items
to assess contractual performance. A total of 136 parameters were identified for this goal.
Table 2 reports how these 136 parameters are divided into 12 categories, further divided into
2 macro classes: “safety” (51 parameters; 7 categories) and “quality” (85 parameters; 5 categories). For instance, “Equipment and machinery,” the first category in Table 2, comprises
5 parameters involving the adequacy of both the formal documentation and the physical
condition of equipment and machinery.11 Parameters in this category are quite general and
can be inspected for essentially all work sites. Other categories, instead, involve parameters
specific to a subset of contracts only. For instance, the 25 parameters in “Underground
works” involve exclusively jobs on underground wires and electrical substations.
The system works as follows. Scores are collected by teams of rotating auditors (Acea’s
engineers) in one or more visits to the work sites, with a score assigned to each of the 136
parameters.12 The score is 1 if the value is “compliant,” zero if “not compliant” or “n/a” if
it is impossible to inspect. In an average audit, 34 parameters are scored with either a zero
10

Contract auditing was conducted even before this experiment begun, but purely for legal reasons linked
to contract enforcement and not to determine the awarding of subsequent contracts. Although the outcomes
of these audits could have been used to enforce penalties, penalties were rarely enforced in this market, partly
to avoid legal disputes and partly not to disrupt cooperation within the buyer-seller relationship, crucial for
this type of work according to Acea’s management.
11
While important for the safety of the work site, these features might also influence the quality of the
work executed, thus making the distinction between the two classes of quality and safety blurry.
12
Two system features entail a randomization: which contracts are audited and which engineers from
Acea are assigned to the team inspecting each work site are both determined through a process of random
drawing. Thus, a single contract might be audited one or more times and by the same or different engineers.

9

Table 2: Reputation Index Components
Class

Category

Parameters
Number Avg. Weight

Safety
Equipment and machinery
Documentation
Works execution
Personnel
Works site regularity
Works site safety
H.T. works site controls

5
9
8
4
10
10
5

8.4
6.9
8.8
9.3
8.2
9.4
8.8

Works on joints
Customer relationship mgnt
Air works
Underground works
Works on transformer station

19
3
25
25
13

5.7
7.3
6.7
6.0
6.2

Quality

Note: The table reports the two classes and 12 categories in which the 136 parameters are
subdivided. For each category, the first number reported is the number of parameters in that
category, while the second is the average RI weight across these parameters.

or a 1. The scores on the individual parameters are then aggregated into a unique reputation
index (RI). Each parameter is associated with a weight, ranging from 2 to 10. The RI is
calculated as a weighted average across a predefined time span:
Pm P136
RI =

i=1

j=1

P136

j=1

pij uj

uj

,

(1)

with pij ∈ {0, 1} indicating the score in each of the j ∈ {1, .., 136} parameters, with
uj ∈ {2, 3, ..., 10} being the weight attached to parameter j and m being the set of audits
considered (at each point in time, these are the audits in the previous 12 months). Hence,
RI ranges from 0 to 1 and entails no differential discounting of the m audits.13
We will refer to the elements composing the RI as “internal” performance measures.
13

Similar systems exist in other utility companies. For instance, the LADWP Contractor Performance
Program states that: “A Contractor Performance Scorecard system will be maintained on all contractors
that have been identified by end users and Contract Administrators of having not met the terms of the
contract/purchase order. An “infraction point” will be assessed against the contractor when contractual
terms are not met and are communicated to the contractor. Each point will stay on a contractors record in
Supply Chain Services for a 12 month period after infraction. If a particular contractor receives a total of 3
or more points within a 12 month period, that contractor may be debarred from bidding with the Department
of Water & Power for a period of up to 5 years.”

10

All other measures of quality and safety which are monitored but not included in the RI
calculation, such as the number or duration of blackouts and the number or intensity of
workers’ accidents, will be indicated as “external” performance measures. The availability
of the latter will be particularly useful to assess the extent to which improvements in the
internal measures might be the result of the shifting of efforts to those parameters in the RI,
possibly leading to performance worsening along non-monitored dimensions.
On October 16, 2007, the Acea’s engineers conducted their first audit with the new
auditing system. For the following 3 months audits were conducted in this way and, to
the firms receiving these inspections, it was explained that Acea had simply decided to
modernize its auditing process: the former paper-based memos where inspectors described
the state of the worksite had been abandoned in favor of a digitalized recording system based
on a set of 136 parameters. Indeed, Acea’s engineers used a tablet pc to record and transmit
the scores recorded during their worksite visits. The true motivation for the switch to the
digitalized audits was later revealed to the suppliers in a public meeting held on December
20, 2007 (t1). On this occasion, Acea announced to its contractors the intention to switch its
contract procurement system from price-only auctions to price-plus-performance auctions.
In the latter, the winner would be the firm with the highest score S calculated as:
S = wprice (1 −

Price offered
) + (1 − wprice )RI,
Reserve price

(2)

where wprice is the weight assigned to price relative to that assigned to the RI. Hence, from
a status quo of a wprice = 1, the new system would entail switching to a wprice = 0.75.
Equation (2) is a form of linear scoring rule auction that gives incentives to perform well in
contract execution to accumulate RI points valuable for future auctions. Both in this first
meeting with its suppliers and in 4 follow up meetings held in the following 13 months, Acea
extensively explained this new system, showed simulation of how a firm would benefit from
higher RI and updated each firm by (privately) informing it of its current RI, as well as
(publicly) disclosing the distribution of RI across all suppliers.
The final two crucial and interrelated aspects worth discussing involve new entrants
and legal constraints. Regarding the former, Acea announced that the RI, calculated as
11

in equation (1), would apply exclusively to those bidders audited at least 7 times in the
previous 12 months.14 Otherwise, a bidder would be assigned a RI equal to the average
RI of the bidders in the auction. The same averaging rule was going to be used for new
entrants (i.e., firms never audited). Regarding the legal constraints, they likely represented
the most significant concern for most of the Acea personnel involved in this experiment.
Without entering into the complexities of this issue, we shall remark that while Italian, and
European Union, regulations encourage the use of scoring rule auctions (which are known
as MEAT, most economically advantageous tenders), the parameters in the scoring formula
must pertain to the bids and not the bidders. The basic logic is that allowing supplier-based
scores would create a risk of favoritism, which would be detrimental to the establishment of
a single European public procurement market. To what extent a system like that in equation
(2) can be reconciled with the laws is, however, an open and intensely debated issue in the
community of scholars and practitioners involved in EU procurement.15
Figure 2: Timeline

Note: Timeline of the changes in the auditing (top bar) and auctioning (bottom bar) systems. Acea’s five
announcements of the future switch to equation (2) are marked with t1,...,t5, with t1 being the first announcement date, and t2,...,t5 the dates of follow up meetings where Acea provided additional explanation to its
suppliers regarding this new system.
14

This requirement concerns the number of audits and not the number of contracts, as a supplier can be
audited multiple times for the same contract.
15
Directive 18/2004, art. 2 required that “contracting authorities shall treat economic operators equally
and non-discriminatorily and shall act transparently.” Under art. 54 of the Directive 17/2004, reputation
indicators can be used if based on measurable parameters that are verifiable by third parties and agreed
upon by contractors. The EU Court of Justice, however, ruled that contracting authorities, when evaluating
quality with MEAT, should only consider the object of the tender and not the bidder’s characteristics (like
past performance), see judgments in cases C-488/01 and C-31/87.

12

The differing views on this topic explain the peculiar timing of the implementation of
equation (2). After just 36 scoring rule auctions in the space of about a year, the new
management team, that in the meantime had replaced the one under which the experiment
had been designed, decided to abandon the combined auctions-audits system, officially terminating the experiment. As illustrated in Figure 2, the auditing system that was changed
in October 16, 2007 was maintained and is still in use (see upper timeline). Instead, the
auction system was first switched from price-only to a scoring rule on May 18, 2010, but
then returned to price-only auctions in June 2011 (see lower timeline). We refer to this latter
system as hybrid price-only auction. In fact, to avoid worsening the contractual performance,
Acea’s inspectors were given new powers to block the contract execution if major violations
were detected during the audits. To resume the job, the supplier would need to give proof
that all violations were being fixed.
The timing described in Figure 2 has important implications for our analysis. It implies
that we shall consider the period leading up to the switch to the scoring rule in May 2010
as a period when suppliers credibly expected the introduction of price-plus-performance
auctions. In this period, they competed to win contracts under price-only auctions but were
already building their stock of RI. Clearly, in this period the RI could not act as a barrier
to entry since bids were just price discounts, but it could have already affected the firms’
decisions of whether to participate in an auction and which price to offer. Hence, for this
period from December 2007 up until May 2010 we can cleanly study the effects produced
by the announcement of a new, reputation-based system. The subsequent periods are also
interesting to discuss, but we remark that their interpretation is less straightforward for two
main reasons. First, it is less credible that all firms correctly anticipated the timing with
which the scoring rule auctions would be removed. Second, as we shall see below, both
the switch to scoring rule auctions and to the hybrid system took place after suppliers had
already modified in a substantial way those features that were driving low quality and safety
before the experiment started.

13

III

Data

The analysis is based on three sets of data. The first comes from Acea and contains audit
data covering the internal performance measures recorded through the new auditing system.
The second combines data from Acea and Telemat, a large provider of public tender data,
and contains auction data, covering bidding and other auction-related information. The third
comes from the public authorities supervising the power and water sectors and contains the
external performance measures.
A. Acea’s Audits: Internal Performance Measures. The first dataset contains all
of Acea’s audits under the new system, from its introduction in October 2007 until April
2017. There are 302,634 scores assigned to each parameter inspected during 8,974 audits
involving 634 contracts and 73 different contractors. Recall that, since the subset of worksites
inspected in each given week is randomly drawn at the beginning of that week, a contract
might receive no inspections at all or multiple inspections during its life. Although the
shorter-lasting contracts might be rarely observed in the data, the level of detail of this
dataset offers a rare opportunity to evaluate how contractual performance evolved over a 10year period. Table 3 offers some initial descriptive evidence by reporting summary statistics,
aggregating parameters at the level of the 12 categories. The table shows that there is
substantial heterogeneity in the frequency with which different parameters are scored: very
few contracts entail features that allow inspectors to check parameters in the “Customer
relationship mgnt” category whilst, at the opposite end of the spectrum, parameters in the
“Works site regularity” and “Works site safety” categories are systematically assessed.
The table also reports the average share of compliant parameters (i.e., those scored with
a 1 over all those scored with either zero or 1). The share is reported separately for each of
the 12 categories and for four time periods: before the suppliers were informed of the true
motivation for the digitalized audits (Pre t1), after they received this information but before
the introduction of scoring auctions (Post t1), during the scoring auctions (SR Period) and
after the hybrid price-only auctions (Post SR). Across nearly all categories, there is a sharp
increase between the Pre t1 and Post t1 periods. The increase is more moderate in the latter
14

Table 3: Summary Statistics for the Acea’s Audits (Internal Performance Measures)
Class

Category

Share Compliant Parameters
Pre t1 Post t1 SR period Post SR

Number of
observations

Safety
Documentation
Equipment and machinery
H.T. works site controls
Personnel
Works execution
Works site regularity
Works site safety

0.33
0.70
.
0.32
0.19
0.10
0.31

0.65
0.93
0.79
0.67
0.84
0.61
0.75

0.84
0.96
0.93
0.91
0.97
0.84
0.92

0.93
0.95
0.97
0.96
0.98
0.94
0.96

53,121
44,266
2,507
21,513
30,663
59,531
78,338

Works on joints
Customer relationship mgnt
Air works
Underground works
Works on transformer station

1
1
.
0.40
1

0.96
0.94
0.98
0.69
1

1
.
1
0.91
1

1
1
1
0.89
1

1,746
85
146
10,450
268

Quality

Note: The 136 parameters audited are partitioned into the 12 categories and 2 classes indicated in the first
two columns. For each of the four subperiods in which the sample is split, the share of compliant parameters
indicates the share of scores equal to 1, over the sum of all scores that are either zero or 1.

periods. For instance, for the two most audited classes “Works site regularity” and “Works
site safety”, the increase between the first two periods is stunning: from 10 percent to 61
percent and from 31 percent to 75 percent respectively. By contrast, the change observed
between the latter periods is more modest: from 84 percent to 94 percent and from 92 percent
to 96 percent respectively. Indeed, this decreasing rate at which performance improves was
already observed in Figure 1 and will be further analyzed in the next section.
Finally, another important angle of the analysis, to which we will return in the discussion
of the mechanisms presented at the end of the paper, regards the role of moral hazard
versus adverse selection among Acea suppliers. Figure 3 offers an insight into what will be
discussed more extensively there: all suppliers improved their performance, albeit with a
different timing. By pooling suppliers into 4 groups depending on the frequency with which
they win, the positive trend in compliance is evident for all of them. The higher performance
by those suppliers winning less often should not be surprising: these are the firms bidding
less aggressively, thus winning less, but delivering higher quality.
15

Figure 3: Evolution of Contractors’ Performance over Time

Note: the four lines show the progress of the average compliance to the parameters of the Reputation Index,
calculated on a monthly basis, for 4 different groups of firms. Each observation is thus the average of all
the scores obtained by all of the firms in a given firm group and a given month. The groups are formed on
the basis of the firm’s success in concluding contracts. The line with circle markers represents the “most
awarded” firms, triangles are for the “often awarded” group, diamonds are for “the less awarded group” and
squares are for “the rarely awarded group.”

B. Auctions Data. The second dataset contains data on the awarding of public procurement auctions. By combining internal Acea data with data from a private provider of
data on public contracts (Telemat), we obtained a dataset covering the universe of auctions
held between 2005 and 2016 for the type of maintenance jobs involved in Acea’s experiment.16
The data include the object of the contract, the reserve price, the award price and date, the
identity of both the procurer and the winning contractor, and various other information on
the call for tenders, such as the award procedure and criterion. For a subset of auctions,
we integrate the data with the information on losing bids and on the subsequent life of the
contracts using data from the authority supervising public contracts (ANAC).

16

These jobs belong to a well-defined contract category identified by the Italian regulation as “OG10,”
which makes it feasible to select comparable projects across different buyers. Furthermore, by using textual
search methods, we were able to separate OG10 contracts into those involving public illumination and those
involving electrical substations. Finally, to ensure contract comparability, we trimmed a few particularly
large or small contacts (i.e., all of those with a reserve price below e10,000 or above e2.5 million).

16

Table 4: Summary Statistics for the Auctions Data
Panel (a): Pre-announcements (01/2005-11/2007)
Acea
Control
Mean SD
N
Mean SD
Winning Discount
21.73 10.51 172
21.30 10.19
Winning Bid
516.1 428.6 172
445.5 522.4
Length (days)
401.6 179.1 172
327.8 340.4
Num. Bids
10.69 4.305 172
Public Illumination 0.180 0.386 172
0.266 0.442
Central Region
1
0
172
0.202 0.402
Municipal Firm
1
0
172
0.390 0.488

N
2020
2020
1788
2020
2020
2020

Panel (b): Post-announcements & before SR period (12/2007-03/2010)
Acea
Control
Mean SD
N
Mean
SD
N
Winning Discount
18.99 10.40 138
22.95 11.60 2247
Winning Bid
516.1 313.5 138
384.9 468.1 2247
Length (days)
385.9 146.7 138
354.1 1106.8 1741
Num. Bids
11.21 4.337 138
Public Illumination 0.232 0.424 138
0.265 0.442 2247
Central Region
1
0
138
0.197 0.398 2247
Municipal Firm
1
0
138
0.395 0.489 2247
Panel (c): SR and hybrid price-only periods
SR period
Mean SD
N
Winning Discount
28.76 7.292 35
Winning Bid
513.2 260.5 35
Length (days)
421.3 98.24 35
Num. Bids
13.52 2.336 35
Public Illumination 0.629 0.490 35

(04/2010-12/2016)
Post SR
Mean SD
N
28.16 6.631 159
884.6 616.1 159
421.3 183.6 159
12.42 4.568 159
0.245 0.432 159

Note: selected summary statistics for the auction data. “Control” sample consists of auctions held by CAs
other than Acea. Panel (a) covers auctions held before t1 by both Acea and Control units; Panel (b) covers
auctions held at or after t1 (and before the switch to SR) by both Acea and Control units; Panel (c) covers
Acea’s auctions held under either the SR (left panel) or the hybrid price-only (right panel) systems. The
definition of the variables is as follows: Winning Discount is the discount (over the reserve price) offered by
the winning supplier, Winning Bid is the price bid by the winning supplier, Length is the contractual duration
of the contract in days (a contractual duration of 1 year corresponds to 250 working days), Num. Bids is the
number of bids submitted, Public Illumination is a dummy equal to 1 if the contract type is classified by Acea
as public illumination and zero if it is classified as work on electrical substations, Central Region is a dummy
equal to 1 if the CA is located in one of Italy’s Center regions and zero otherwise and Municipal Firm is a
dummy equal to 1 if the CA is a multi-utility company that is (at least partially) owned by the municipality
in which it operates. The last two variables are not reported for Panel (c) as they are both always equal to 1
for the Acea’s auctions.

17

Table 4 reports summary statistics for the auction data, dividing them in three panels. The top panel describes the data during the pre-announcement period (i.e., 01/200511/2007). The middle panel covers the data after the first announcement (t1), but before
the SR was implemented. The bottom panel presents statistics for the later periods, after
the SR was introduced. The first two panels report the data for both Acea and the control group, the last one reports data for Acea only, but separately for the SR and post-SR
periods. The main outcome variable for the price analysis below is the winning discount.17
The comparison of the top and bottom panels of Table 4 indicates that the average winning
discount in Acea’s auctions declines, from 21.73 percent to 18.99 percent, while it grows
in the Control group’s auctions, from 21.30 percent to 22.95 percent. This suggests that
the prices paid by Acea might have increased after the first announcement. The validity
of the control group is clearly illustrated by the common trend observed in top-left panel
of Figure 4 for the period before the first announcement (t1 is marked in the figure by the
red, vertical line). The figure also reveals a more nuanced pattern for the winning discounts
after t1 relative to what is visible from the statistics in Panel (b): discounts first increase
and then sharply decrease (soon after t5). The very different behavior in the control group
suggests that this is likely due to Acea’s reform and not to changes in market conditions.
The following analysis will establish these effects formally.
Regarding the other variables reported in Table 4, there are no major differences between
the top two panels, neither for Acea nor for the Control group. This is the case, for instance,
for contract duration or the share of public illumination contracts.18
Finally, Panel (c) reports statistics for the period from the introduction of the SR onward.
The Difference-in-differences strategy presented next focuses exclusively on the sample periods of Panel (a) and (b). The statistics in Panel (c) are nevertheless interesting to get a
17

Bids are percentage discount relative to the reserve price publicized in the call for tenders. This reserve
price is unlikely to be affected by Acea’s reform because public buyers are not in full control of it: it is obtained
by multiplying input quantities (estimated by the procurer’s engineers) by their prices and summing up these
products. Crucially, input prices are not the current market prices, but the list prices set every year by the
region where Acea operates and used exclusively by contracting authorities to calculate reserve prices.
18
It is important to stress that the main effort to ensure the comparability of the auctions was at the data
collection stage, where we selected only auctions that, in terms of their object, were a close fit to the public
illumination and electricity distribution contracts auctioned off by Acea.

18

sense of the longer run impacts of the reform. In particular, we observe that during the 35
auctions using the SR procedure, there is a sharp increase in the discounts relative to the
earlier period and that this higher discount level is preserved during the following hybrid
price-only system. As shown in Figure 4, this increase takes place in the Control group too
and, hence, likely reflects some broader trend in the market. Finally, notice that the reserve
price is higher in the post-SR period relative to those in the SR period: this is part of a
trend in Acea’s contracting in order to concentrate its demands into fewer, larger lots.
Figure 4: Evolution of Discounts and External Performance Measures

Note: The figure illustrates external performance measures on water and electricity for both Acea (in green)
and other providers (in blue). Top-left: blackout duration; top-right: the number of short-lasting blackouts;
bottom-left: number of programmed power cuts; bottom-right: water leakage. In all graphs, the red, vertical
line indicates the t1 announcement date.

C. Regulatory Reports: External Performance Measures. In Italy, electricity and
water are both partially-regulated sectors. For electricity, although only power transmission
19

is still under a regulatory regime, the regulator (ARERA) collects detailed information on
the whole sector. From ARERA we were thus able to obtain various firm-level performance
measures. These yearly data range from year 2000 to 2016 and cover all low-voltage power
distributors, including Acea. Herein, the main indicators of firm performance are constituted
by the number and duration of blackouts and programmed power cuts. The top six rows of
Table 5 report summary statistics for these external performance measures, none of which
is part of the RI parameters. As discussed when presenting Figure 1 in the introduction,
the external performance measures allow comparison of Acea’s performance to that of other
similar firms. In that figure, we plot the evolution of the number of long lasting blackouts.
In Figure 4, we do the same for three other external performance measures: the blackouts
duration (in minutes) and the number of blackouts lasting less than 3 hours. The observed
pattern is qualitatively similar to that discussed earlier: after t1, Acea’s performance gradually improves in both absolute and relative terms.19 The reasons why improvements in
electric grid performance occur more slowly than those in internal performance are mostly
due to technological constraints: even if suppliers use higher quality joints and materials
(some of the quality parameters, see Table 3), only when a large enough portion of the grid
is affected will blackouts fall. In the next section, we will explore some additional features
linked to Acea’s suppliers’ behavior that contribute to explaining the slow improvement in
external performance measures.
For the water sector, we do not have Acea’s internal performance measures as this sector never introduced a digitalized system like that described above. Nevertheless, external
performance measures have been obtained from the environmental census of the Italian
Statistical Institute (Istat). This census is performed in collaboration with the water distributors and includes information on water inflow and outflow in the distribution channel
for each Italian county from 1999 to 2012. A performance measure is thus the extent of
water leakage, calculated as the percentage incidence of leakage over water inflow. Although
the data is released at county level, it is easy to aggregate counties in such a way as to pin
19

In the appendix, Figure A.1 reports the analogous plots for the programmed power cuts. More programmed power cuts typically imply improved service quality as they are associated with work on the grid
and they substitute unplanned blackouts. Although the plots in Figure A.1 show very small changes in Acea’s
planned power cuts, the estimates in the next section will suggest improvements along these measures.

20

Table 5: Summary Statistics for the Regulators’ Reports (External Performance Measures)
VARIABLES

(1)
Mean

(2)
St. Dev

(3)
Median

(4)
Min

(5)
Max

(6)
N

(7)
Source

Long-lasting blackouts (num/LV lines)
Blackouts duration (min/LV lines)
Short-lasting blackouts (num/LV lines)
Programmed power cuts (num/LV lines)
Duration programmed power cuts (min/LV lines)
Low voltage users (thousands)
Water Leakage (%)
Water users (thousands)

2.43
94
2.70
0.6
65.60
365
0.33
893

2.50
134
3.90
1.24
114
815
0.09
1,054

1.76
49.40
1.84
0.30
31.20
6.42
0.32
491

0
0
0
0
0
0
0.15
119

24
960
62
29.50
989
4,664
0.74
4,341

1,433
1,419
1,286
1,431
1,428
1,642
257
257

ARERA
ARERA
ARERA
ARERA
ARERA
ARERA
ISTAT
ISTAT

Note: Long-lasting blackouts and Blackouts duration are, respectively, the average number and the average
duration (in minutes) of long-lasting blackouts per user, Short-lasting blackouts is the average number of
short-lasting blackouts per user, Programmed power cuts and Duration programmed power cuts are, respectively, the average number and average duration (in minutes) of programmed power cuts to the low voltage grid
per user, Low voltage users is the total number of low voltage grid customers (in thousands), WaterLeakage
is the percentage incidence of water leakage over water inflow (Water Leakage= (Inflow-Outflow)/Inflow),
while Water users is the total number of customers (in thousands).

down the water leakage level experienced by Acea. In fact, by law each county can have
no more than one water distributor, so we simply aggregated up the water leakage data for
all the counties served by Acea.20 The bottom rows in Table 5 report summary statistics
for the water sector, while the bottom panels of Figure 4 plots the dynamic of the water
leakage indicator, separately for ACEA and other firms. There is no visual evidence of lower
leakages for Acea, both in absolute terms and relative to other providers.

IV

Empirical Analysis

The descriptive evidence so far shows that Acea’s reform improved contract performance over
the following 10 years. A careful empirical analysis is nevertheless needed to answer three
questions crucial to deriving more general implications from this experiment. First, what
triggered the performance improvement and, in particular, was it driven by a response to the
20

This aggregation is performed by weighting the leakage in each of the counties served by a provider by its
share of water customers relative to the total population of water customers served by the provider. County
data are aggregated to mirror the “catchment areas” over which there is, by law, only one water provider.

21

announcement of the scoring auction? Second, what was the effect on prices of the changes in
performance? Third, was the improvement in performance confined to the internal measures
or did it also affect the external performance measures? These are interrelated but distinct
questions that we will address through different combinations of the data described earlier
and with different empirical strategies.
In particular, for the first question we need to rely on Acea’s audit data and on their
time series analysis. In fact, no comparison group is available in this case to serve as a
benchmark. We will instead exploit the very clear timing of the events in which Acea
presented its new procurement system to the suppliers to evaluate changes in their contract
performance around these announcements. It is a different case for the following empirical
questions whose answers are based on the regulatory and auctions datasets in which both
Acea and similar providers are observed. We will thus follow a differences-in-differences
estimation strategy:
Of t = af + bt + cXf t + βDAcea∗P ost + f t ,

(3)

where Of t is an outcome measure observed for unit f in year t. In the regulatory data, f will
indicate firms, while it will refer to contracts in the auctions data. On the right hand side of
the equation, af and bt are fixed effects for firms and years, while Xf t is a matrix of controls
and, finally, DAcea∗P ost is a dummy for Acea’s auctions held after some pre-specified date
marking the beginning of a treatment (i.e., after t1). The coefficient of interest is β, which
thus captures the difference in external performance between Acea and other firms, after the
treatment date. But what should be the treatment date(s)? The earlier description of the
experiment clarify that multiple candidate dates exist. A benefit of the time series analysis
from which we now move is that it provides the answer to this question, thus representing a
key pillar of the following difference-in-differences estimates.
A. What Caused Performance Improvements? As discussed earlier, most of the
performance improvements observed over the long run took place during the first years
(see Figure 1). In Figure 5, we focus on this earlier period, zooming into the dynamics of
performance after the new audit system was introduced but before the switch to scoring auc22

tions. We also add to Figure 5 vertical bars marking each one of the Acea’s announcements,
t1, ..., t5. We can visually observe how performance jumps upward after each announcement
– except t3 – and how its growing dynamic reduces its speed soon after t5. Moreover, the
variance declines over time, as shown by the 95 percent confidence interval for the monthly
mean.
Figure 5: Average Compliance

Note: The graph shows the monthly average compliance with the internal parameters (audits data). The
average is calculated across all the scores recorded in all the audits taking place in the month of reference,
weighting each parameter by its weight in the RI. The vertical lines identify each announcement date.

This graphical evidence illustrates what clearly emerged during the experiment: suppliers
began improving their compliance with the audited parameters even before the scoring rule
was introduced and Acea’s announcements had a key role in driving this behavior. To
formally show the connection between performance changes and announcement timing, Table
6 reports the results of Bai-Perron tests for the presence of structural breaks in the time series
of the compliance measure in the same time window as Figure 5. In the first two columns,
the variable of interest is the monthly weighted average compliance across all parameters.
The next two columns restrict the parameters to those in the quality class, while the last two
columns use the subset of parameters in the safety class. We report Bai-Perron tests in which
we do not specify the dates of the breaks but let the test determine them, either without
23

specifying how many breaks there are (odd numbered columns) or specifying that there are
5 breaks at unknown dates (even numbered columns). The test results are a clear indication
that t1 is a breakpoint. As regards the other break dates, all tests allowing for an unspecified
number of breaks identify a break near t5 + 1 (i.e., 1 month after t5).21 This is also quite
revealing since, by the fifth meeting, suppliers had found out that average compliance had
reached a fairly high level across all active suppliers and parameters. As discussed below, this
likely changed the strategic environment in the auctions, through a change in the perceived
value of further improvement in compliance.
Table 6: Breakpoints in the Internal Performance Measures

Number of breaks
Dates of the brakes:
Date 1
Date 2
Date 3
Date 4
Date 5

Weighted Compliance
F-stat
5 unknown
breaks
breaks
4
5
t1
t2
t3+1
t5+1
-

t1
t2
t3+1
t5+1
t5+7

Quality
F-stat 5 unknown
breaks
breaks
2
5
t1
t3+2
-

t1
t3+2
t4+2
t5+2
t5+5

F-stat
breaks
4
t1
t2
t3+1
t5+7
-

Safety
5 unknown
breaks
5
t1
t2
t3+1
t5
t5+7

Note: The table reports the results of Bai-Perron tests. The variable is the monthly weighted average compliance, measured on all audited parameters (first two columns) or on the subset of quality parameters (next
two columns) or safety parameters (latter two columns). We indicate as ty + x a breakpoint taking place x
months after Acea’s announcement date ty, where y = 1, ..., 5. The test criterion used is that of sequential
F-statistic determined breaks. Results are identical with the significant F-statistic largest breaks criterion.

In Table 7, we complement the time series evidence with estimates of linear regressions
of the average monthly compliance by contract and supplier on dummy variables for the
four break dates detected by the Bai-Perron test (see column (1), panel (b) of Table 6)
and other controls (the share of safety parameters among those audited and whether the
contract is for public illumination). Column (1) confirms the significance of all four break
dates. However, more interestingly, when we gradually augment the set of regressors to
include fixed effects for suppliers, contracts and months, we find that the dummy for t1
preserves its statistical significance and large magnitude, thus confirming its saliency. In the
appendix, we also present an extensive set of robustness checks showing that the observed
21

Either exactly at t5 + 1 in the case of the overall compliance, and at t5 + 2 for the quality parameters
or at t5 for the safety parameters.

24

Table 7: Acea’s Announcements and Supplier Compliance
(1)
0.200∗∗∗
(0.044)

(2)
0.195∗∗∗
(0.042)

(3)
0.172∗∗∗
(0.049)

(4)
0.456∗∗
(0.200)

t2

0.065∗∗
(0.031)

0.060∗∗
(0.030)

0.058∗∗
(0.029)

0.082
(0.132)

t3+1

0.122∗∗∗
(0.024)

0.115∗∗∗
(0.023)

0.138∗∗∗
(0.023)

-0.107
(0.109)

t5+1

0.082∗∗∗
(0.018)

0.067∗∗∗
(0.017)

0.055∗∗∗
(0.020)

0.013
(0.068)

No
No
No
963

Yes
No
No
963

Yes
Yes
No
963

Yes
Yes
Yes
963

t1

Firm Fixed Effects
Contract Fixed Effects
Month Fixed Effects
N

Note: The dependent variable is the average compliance (weighted with the RI parameter weights) for each
firm-contract-month triplet. Regarding the regressors, t1 is a dummy variable equal to 1 from t1 onward and
zero before then. t2, t3 + 1, t5 + 1 are constructed analogously. We indicate as ty + x a breakpoint taking
place x months after the Acea’s announcement date ty, where y = 1, ..., 5. All regressions also control for the
Safety share – the weighted average share of safety parameters – and Job type – the proportion of contracts
classified as public illumination, – both calculated among those parameters audited in the firm-contract-month
triplet. Standard errors in parentheses. ∗ (p < 0.10), ∗∗ (p < 0.05), ∗∗∗ (p < 0.01).

increase in performance is not driven by changes in the composition of the set of parameters
audited or of firms inspected.22
Two obvious concerns that may be raised involve how corruption and multitasking might
lead to biased audits. We already mentioned, but it is worth recalling, the mechanism
Acea used to limit corruption risks. Each week the 12 engineers in the auditors’ office were
randomly allocated to three-member teams and then the teams were randomly allocated
to contracts to be audited in that week. Rotation should help to sever any link between
specific suppliers and auditors, while the random composition of the teams reduces the
likelihood that a collusive agreement can be formed. Furthermore, the auditors have no
direct benefit to their wage or career progression from assigning more positive (or negative)
22

In the appendix, we show that over time the set of parameters remains identical in terms of the proportion
of weights allocated to quality and safety (Figure A.2), despite an increase in the number of audits per month
(Figure A.3). Moreover, improvements over time are also evident for each of the 2 indicator classes of quality
and safety, Figure A.4, as well as for the individual parameter categories, Figure A.5. Similarly, the result
holds across different sets of firms, as seen in Figure 3.

25

scores to the firms inspected. Clearly, this system also helps to counteract concerns linked to
the auditor scoring heterogeneity. The multitasking concern is that performance improves
exclusively on the audited tasks, while staying constant or even worsening on dimensions
outside the audit process. In the data, however, we observe both cost overruns and delays in
contract completion and, although they are not part of the RI, none of them worsens. Acea’s
engineers explain this fact as the necessary outcome of the 136 parameters being exhaustive
of the contract quality/safety features. Further evidence on a limited role for multitasking is
presented below when looking at external performance measures from the regulatory data.
Finally, an important question is whether we can consider the improved compliance to
be the result of strategic decisions by suppliers to improve their performance. Indeed, in
experimental settings, the mere change in the environment might trigger forms of Hawthorne
effect (or observer effect). Hence, the mere change from paper-based to digitalized audits
might have led suppliers to improve their performance.23 To rule out this possibility, we
can compare how the probability of observing a compliant parameter changes between the
audits held before and after t1. The estimates in Table A.1 in the appendix show that
parameters receiving a higher weight in the announced scoring formula pass from being the
ones more likely to be non-compliant before t1, to being the most likely to be compliant after
t1. Furthermore, the parameters more likely to be compliant post t1 are those that experts
consider faster to adjust.24 These results are indicative of suppliers effectively changing
their behavior.25 These findings are also interesting to rationalize why the evolution of the
external performance measures shows a gradual improvement over time after t1 and not a
sharp jump like that of the internal measure: supplier improvement across parameters was
gradual and they improved more promptly on the safety parameters than on the quality ones
23

The Hawthorne effect is a change, typically an improvement, in some aspects of behavior in response to
the awareness of being observed, see Levitt and List (2011).
24
With the help of expert engineers, we created an indicator variable, quick, taking the value of 1 if the
transition from a score of not compliant to one of compliant can be reasonably achieved within a one month
time frame without incurring extraordinary costs. For instance, examples of parameters with quick equal to
1 are those involving the adequacy of “personal protection tools” (mostly helmets) or the presence of signs
warning of ongoing work nearby. The adequacy of the machinery, instead, is an example of a parameter with
quick equal to zero. While clearly arbitrary, this dummy variable is helpful to test the reasonableness of the
performance response observed in our data.
25
In line with this interpretation, is the evidence in Appendix Table A.3. There, exploiting the random
timing of the audits, we show that all firms respond to the t1 announcement, regardless of whether they
were ever audited before t1 or not. Thus, ruling out not only a Hawthorne-type effect, but also learning.

26

(due to the higher weights assigned to the former in the RI formula). But since changes in
the number and duration of blackouts likely hinge more on the quality of the suppliers’ work
than on their adherence to the worksite safety parameters, this contributes to explaining the
lack of major discontinuities in the external performance measures at t1.
B. What Was the Cost for Acea of the Improved Performance? Answering
this question is an essential step in evaluating the reform’s effectiveness. To measure the
price impact of the improved performance, we will closely follow what we learned above
about the timing of the performance increases. In particular, to causally estimate how the
initial jump in compliance (associated with the announcement at t1) affects winning auction
discount, we will employ a difference-in-differences (DD) strategy. The units of analysis are
the auctions held by Acea (treated group) and by other utility firms (control group), both
recorded in the Auctions Data. We estimate a model analogous to that of equation (6), but
with contract-level data:
w
Dif
t = af + bt + cXif t + βt1 (T reatment) + if t ,

(4)

where Dw is the winning discount (over the reserve price) and the index i indicates
the auction, f the entity awarding the contract and t the year. T reatment is a dummy
variable equal to one for the contracts awarded by Acea from t1 onward and zero otherwise.
The coefficient of interest is βt1 , the effect of the announcement on the winning discount,
conditional on fixed effects for the entity awarding the contract (af ) and time (bt ), and on
other covariates (X) involving contract characteristics.26
The other break systematically detected by the Bai-Perron test is at t5 + 1, when the
performance growth slows down. We thus estimate a second DID model with two breaks:
one at t1 and one at t5 + 1 to account for the two differential phases of RI accumulation and
stabilization. It also captures the dynamic from Figure 4 in which the sharp rise in discounts
26

We present estimates with different specifications for X. We always include a dummy for whether the
award procedure includes a provision for the automatic exclusion of abnormally low tenders (a common type
of provision across Italian public procurement auctions, see Decarolis (2014)). In some specifications, we also
add a dummy variable for whether the object of the job involves public illumination works and four dummy
variables for levels of the reserve price (below e250 thousand; e250 thousand and e0.5 million; between
e0.5 million and e1.5 million; above e1.5 million).

27

immediately after t1 is followed by a reversion to discounts closer to the ones observed for
the control group. Thus, we extend the previous model to include a dummy for auctions
held from t5 + 1 onward, Dt>t5+1 :
w
Dif
t = af + bt + βt1 T reatmentf t + βt5+1 T reatmentf t ∗ Dt>t5+1 + Dt>t5+1 + γXif t + εif t , (5)

where βt1 measures the effect on Acea’s award discounts past t1, but before t5 + 1, while
βt5+1 measures the same effect for being after t5 + 1, relative to the t1 to t5 + 1 period.
Hence, the effect of the RI accumulation phase is captured by βt1 , while that of the RI
stabilization phase is captured by βt5+1 . The identification of the key parameters in the
two models above crucially hinges on the validity of the auctions in the control group to
capture price variations that would have affected Acea’s auctions absent its reform. As
discussed earlier, the graphical comparison of the evolution of winning discounts between
the treated and control groups supports the fact that the similar pre-t1 dynamics in the
treatment and control auctions make the parallel trends assumption likely to hold. We
proceed by first presenting our baseline DD estimates and then exploring their robustness
to both identification and inference concerns.
Table 8: Baseline Price Estimates

β1

(1)
3.48
(2.82)

(2)
3.63
(2.76)

(3)
3.53
(2.70)

(4)
6.22∗∗∗
(1.88)

(5)
6.26∗∗∗
(1.80)

(6)
5.96∗∗∗
(1.81)

Yes
Yes
4577
0.47

-5.92∗
(2.30)
No
No
4577
0.47

-5.66∗
(2.23)
Yes
No
4577
0.47

-5.23∗
(2.16)
Yes
Yes
4577
0.47

β2
Reserve Price FE
Object & Res.Pr. FE
N
R2

No
No
4577
0.47

Yes
No
4577
0.47

Note: the dependent variable is the winning discount. The sample includes auctions by Acea (treatment
group) and all other contracting authorities (control group). The first three columns report estimates for
the model in equation (4), while the last three columns report estimates for the model in equation (5). For
each model, the model specification gradually expands the set of contract characteristics included as controls:
award criterion (columns 1 and 4), also fixed effects for four levels of the reserve price (columns 2 and 5)
and also a dummy for whether the contract is for public illumination (columns 3 and 6). Standard errors
clusters by year and CA are reported in parentheses. ∗ (p < 0.10), ∗∗ (p < 0.05), ∗∗∗ (p < 0.01).

28

Table 8 presents these baseline estimates for the models in equation (4) (first three
columns) and in equation (5) (last three columns). For each model, estimates of three
specifications differing in the set of covariates, X, are presented: we first include only a
control for whether the award rule involves the automatic elimination of abnormally low
bids (columns 1 and 4), then we add four dummy variables for the level of the reserve price
(columns 2 and 5) and then also a dummy variable for whether the job involves public
illumination works. The results in Table 8 show the lack of any price effect when the post-t1
period is considered altogether (first three columns). In addition to not being statistically
significant, the estimated coefficients are relatively small in magnitude (a 3.5 percent decline),
when compared to the major shift in performance documented above. Interestingly, the
estimates change, revealing a rich price dynamic if the post-t1 period is divided into a phase
pre and post t5 + 1. The estimates in the last three columns confirm the visual evidence
discussed earlier: discounts initially increase, by about 6 percent of the reserve price, but
subsequently decline by approximately the same amount. The magnitudes of β1 and β2 are
indeed statistically the same at the 1 percent confidence level. Across model specifications
and samples, all estimates of β1 are highly statistically significant, while β2 is less precisely
estimated due to the systematically higher standard errors relative to those of β1 . With the
control group of auctions held in central Italy, all estimates are qualitatively the same albeit
somewhat larger in magnitude.
In the next section, we will discuss a rationale for these results. In a nutshell, the
argument will be that, while firms improved their compliance with the performance measures,
they also competed more fiercely to win auctions. Only suppliers with ongoing contracts can
be scored and accumulate RI points to be used under the forthcoming SR award system.
However, as all firms reached a high score, two forces push toward lower discounts: first,
they need less to get additional scores and, second, increasing performance when its level
is already high is very costly. Hence, discounts declined in this phase. The β2 estimate
indicates a less pronounced decline than that indicated by Figure 4 because the regressions
control for auction characteristics.27 That figure also reveals that winning discounts increased
27

The control variable driving most of this difference is a dummy for whether the auction is an “average
bid auction.” This is a form of modified first price auction incentivizing low discounts. See discussion below.

29

once again during the short period in which SR were introduced, to about 30 percent, and
remained relatively high afterwards.28
Table 9: Robustness Checks: Contamination and Comparability

β1

Panel (a): No Contracting Authorities in Central Regions
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
∗∗∗
∗∗∗
3.48
3.69
3.58 6.08
6.18
5.88∗∗∗
(2.60) (2.54) (2.48) (1.64) (1.55) (1.57)
-5.38∗
(2.24)
3726
0.50

-4.93∗
(2.17)
3726
0.50

Panel (b): Contracting Authorities in Central Regions
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
∗∗∗
3.58
3.31
3.33 7.19
6.67∗∗∗
(2.68) (2.68) (2.56) (1.57) (1.59)

(6)
6.37∗∗∗
(1.58)

β2
N
R2

β1

3726
0.50

3726
0.50

3726
0.50

β2
N
R2
Reserve Price FE
Object & Res.Pr. FE

1161
0.34
No
No

1161
0.35
Yes
No

1161
0.36
Yes
Yes

-5.61∗
(2.30)
3726
0.50

-7.57∗∗
(2.57)
1161
0.35
No
No

-7.06∗∗
(2.39)
1161
0.36
Yes
No

-6.38∗∗
(2.31)
1161
0.37
Yes
Yes

Note: the organization of the table is isomorphic to that in Table 8, with the only difference being the control
group observations: panel (a) excludes all auctions held by contracting authorities in Central Italy regions;
panel (b) includes only auctions held by contracting authorities in Central Italy regions. Thus, the estimates
in panel (a) are less likely to be biased by contamination effects, while those in panel (b) are more likely to
be based on more comparable contracting authorities. ∗ (p < 0.10), ∗∗ (p < 0.05), ∗∗∗ (p < 0.01).

In Table 9, we explore the robustness of the baseline estimates to two concerns: contamination and comparability of the control group observations. The ubiquitous problem
in applying methods like DD to industrial organization problems is the trade off between
28

However, we do not attempt to estimate the causal effect of the introduction and removal of the SR
for three reasons. First, since the transition toward higher performance was essentially done by t5 + 1, the
following period of nearly one and half year between t5 + 1 and the SR’s introduction represents the ideal
setting to study the price effects of higher quality without the additional effects produced by implementation
of the SR on bidding and entry behavior. Second, we know from interactions with market participants that
even before the SR was removed, suppliers held heterogeneous beliefs about its removal and the commitment
of Acea to the hybrid price-only mechanism. Third, since discounts increased in this final period, then the
cost-effectiveness considerations presented in the next section would be further strengthened by the lower
prices experienced by Acea in the long run. The benchmark of a net zero-price effect thus represents a
conservative, but reasonable choice.

30

these two concerns: contracting authorities closer to Acea are more likely to be comparable
to it because, for instance, they use the same suppliers or because their suppliers buy inputs
in the same markets. But, the same forces enhancing comparability, induce contamination
concerns: changes in the suppliers’ technology or behavior triggered by the Acea’s experiment might alter the prices observed in the auctions of other contracting authorities. To
ease these concerns, the estimates in Table 9 partition the control units auctions depending
on whether the contracting authority is located outside Central Italy (top panel) or in it.
Acea being itself located in Central Italy is likely more comparable to the control units in
panel (b), but also less likely to induce contamination in the control units in panel (a). The
comparison of Table 9 estimates with the baseline ones reveals qualitatively identical results.
Finally, there are two additional concerns that we explore through different sets of robustness checks. The first concern is the presence in the sample of auctions entailing specific
regulatory features in terms of either firms’ participation (restricted auctions) or the elimination of abnormally low discounts (average-bid auctions). We thus repeat the baseline
estimates by excluding from the sample either restricted or average-bid auctions (see appendix Table A.4). The second concern regards inference. We evaluate potential problems
with inference by using alternative methods for standard errors calculation correcting for
serial correlation as in Bertrand, Duflo and Mullainathan (2004) or the one-treated unit
problem as in Conley and Taber (2011) (see appendix Table A.5).29 In all cases, the estimates obtained are qualitatively in line with the baseline estimates discussed above.
C. Effects on the external performance measures - We evaluate the impact of
the Acea’s announcement at t1 on the six external performance measures introduced earlier.
This is relevant both as an additional check that multitasking effects are not muting the
benefits of the reform implied by the internal performance measures and as an assessment of
the reform on measures that are highly socially valuable. The estimation strategy is again a

29

The latter is the fact that the level at which the treatment effectively takes place is that of the procurer
and we observe only one procurer, Acea, receiving the treatment. Hence, any shock hitting Acea at t1 biases
the estimate of β1 . Nevertheless, as explained in the appendix, the presence of a large control group allows
us to conduct valid inference under the Conley and Taber (2011) procedure.

31

DID based on the following equation:
Of t = af + bt + cXf t + β0 DAcea∗P ost + f t ,

(6)

where Of t is one of the performance outcomes that we observe at the level of firm, f , and
year, t. On the right hand side of the equation, af and bt are fixed effects for firms and years,
Xf t is a matrix of controls that includes the number of customers and, finally, DAcea∗P ost is
a dummy for Acea’s auctions held after 2007. The coefficient of interest is β0 , which thus
captures the difference in external performance between Acea and other firms, after Acea
announced the change in the adopted award criterion in December 2007.
Table 10: Estimates for the External Performance Measures: Electricity and Water Sectors

β

Observations
Firm & Year FE
R-squared
Sample

(1)
Long-lasting
blackouts

(2)
Length long-lasting
blackouts

(3)
Short-lasting
blackouts

(4)
Programmed
power cuts

-0.325**
(0.163)

-43.272***
(13.350)

-0.922***
(0.296)

0.141*
(0.074)

19.839**
(9.154)

-0.003
(0.010)

0.009
(0.015)

386
YES
0.843
All

386
YES
0.574
All

298
YES
0.826
All

386
YES
0.720
All

386
YES
0.788
All

253
YES
0.816
All

59
YES
0.890
Reduced

(5)
(6)
Length programmed WaterLeakage
power cuts
(full sample)

(7)
WaterLeakage
(above 1m)

Note: The table reports the difference-in-difference estimates for the available external performance measures.
In the first five columns, the outcomes cover the electricity distribution sector, whereas the last two columns
regard the water distribution sector. ACEA is the treated unit and the treatment is the interaction term of
indicators for ACEA and post year 2007. The control units for the electricity sector include all the distributors
with at least 200 thousand clients. For the water sectors, the control units include either all the distributors
(column 6) or only those in charge of geographical areas with at least 1 million customers (column 7). Robust
standard errors in parentheses. Significance: *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.10.

Table 10 reports the estimates. The first five columns cover different measures of the
quality of electricity distribution, while the latter two cover water leakages for both the full
sample of firms and for the subsample of larger firms. These estimates confirm the graphical
evidence provided earlier: for the five outcomes measuring quality in the low-tension electricity distribution sector, the effect of the treatment is to reduce the number and length of
long-lasting blackouts, reduce the number of short lasting blackouts and, on the contrary,
increase programmed power cuts. The latter is most likely a signal of greater maintenance
efforts. For the water sector, where no RI was introduced, Acea did not improve its perfor32

mance (in terms of leakage) relative to other comparable firms. Regardless of whether we
consider all distributors or only the largest players, the finding of no effect remains. Overall,
these estimates confirm the presence of a long lasting performance improvements.

V

Cost-effectiveness Analysis

We now present a back of the envelope cost-effectiveness analysis comparing outcomes under
Acea’s reform and under the status quo absent any reform. An exhaustive cost-benefit (or
welfare) analysis would require assigning a monetary value to the increased compliance on
all quality and safety parameters. In the spirit of the cost-effectiveness approach, we focus
on a subset of specific outcomes associated with the experiment, in terms of both quality
and safety.
We start from the quality dimension. Here we focus on the quality of the service measured
by one of the external measures of performance, the duration of long-lasting blackouts. We
thus convert the estimate in column 2 of Table 10 into a measure of the number of hours of
blackout avoided per year: 43.272 hours on average per client. In the post reform period,
Acea has on average 1,597,066 customers, divided into 1,277,653 residential and 319,413
business customers. From the official statistics of the regulator (Arera),30 we associate a cost
of blackouts of 2.5 euro/hour for residential customers and of 18.75 euro/hour for business
customers. The result is that the reduction in blackouts implies a benefit of 6.623 million
euro, 39 percent of which accrues to business customers and the rest to residential ones.
Next, we look at the safety dimension. Here we focus on the change in the probability
of fatal accidents as implied by improvements in the subset of internal measures covering
safety parameters. Construction and maintenance jobs for electricity generation and transmission are among those with the highest incidence of workplace accidents, including deadly
accidents.31 The occurrence of such accidents has costs for both society and Acea, and the
30

See Arera’s decision n. 172/07 of 12/07/2007.
Electricity is widely recognized as a serious workplace hazard, exposing employees to electric shocks,
burns, fires, and explosions. A search among local newspapers revealed that 4 workers had died in the last
15 years while performing jobs procured by Acea. In the U.S., the Bureau of Labor Statistics recorded a
31

33

public ownership of Acea only increased its management’s concern about these safety risks.
To map the relationship between changes in safety parameter compliance and the occurrence of fatal accidents, we use the statistical model used by Acea’s engineers which is known
as Heinrich’s pyramid and is often used by practitioners in the context of industrial systems
to link accidents of different intensity.32 The pyramid entails the following ratios: 1 fatal
accident to 10 major accidents, to 30 minor accidents, to 600 material damages, and – finally
– to 200,000-300,000 small deviations from safe behaviors. If we assume that each case of
non-compliance in the safety parameters audited by Acea corresponds to a small deviation
in the pyramid, we can estimate a lower bound for the policy benefit of e3-5 million per
year. This is calculated as follows: in a typical audit, 33.08 parameters are assessed, 85.3
percent of which are related to safety (see Table 3). There are on average 43 contracts a
year, with an average duration of 250 working days (see Table 4). Suppose that the same
rate of compliance observed across audits applies to every working day, then the 55 percent
improvement in parameter compliance discussed in sub-section A above implies a reduction
in about 163,000 small deviations per year. Using the 200,000-300,000 figure from the pyramid, this maps into a reduction in the probability of a fatal accident of 0.54-0.82 per year.
Finally, considering an average of 4 workers on the worksite per day and taking the lowest
bound of the OECD (2012) estimates of the “value of a statistical life” of e1.62 million per
life saved,33 the estimated benefit ranges between 3.5 and 5.3 million euro/year.34
Finally, regarding the cost, the baseline estimates in Table 8 imply no changes in the
winning discounts. Since the winning discount in the auctions is the most relevant cost

total of 5,587 fatal electrical injuries between 1992 and 2013, an average of 254 fatal electrical injuries each
year. Death was due either to electrocution or to fires caused by electricity, see Campbell and Dini (2015).
32
See Heinrich (1931), Bird and Germain (1986) and Goodman (2012). See also its usage by modern safety
apps: http://safesiteapp.com/blog/safety/the-safety-triangle-explained/.
33
The number of workers present on the worksite was estimated for us by the same expert engineers who
estimated the variable quick described earlier. The OECD (2012) values are converted to 2007 nominal euro.
We shall also remark that our approach is quite conservative because for benefits we have employed the
lowest OECD estimate of the value of a statistical life. Using the upper bound of the OECD estimate (e5.3
million), the benefits would be in the range of e11.55 -17.33. Furthermore, our benefit calculation excludes
all the additional savings accruing from both reductions in non-fatal accidents associated with better safety
practices and all improvements in quality associated with increased compliance on the quality parameters.
34
This range is not our interval estimate, but the result of using the two bounds of 200,000 and 300,000
small deviations.

34

feature of the reform,35 this no-effect on prices obviously implies that the reform was highly
cost effective relative to the status quo in terms of both quality and safety. This conclusion
is robust to a worst case scenario analysis. For this, we calculate the reform’s effect on
the average winning discount directly from the descriptive statistics by taking the difference
between the pre-announcements average (21.73 percent) and the year 2010 average (11.91
percent).36 This gives a reduction in the winning discount of 9.82 percentage points. At an
average contract value of e516.1 thousand and considering 43 contracts per year, the total
yearly cost increase is then e2.18 million. Hence, we can conclude that, even under a worst
case scenario, the benefits from adoption would exceed the costs.

VI

Discussion: Entry, Selection and Moral Hazard

Learning the drivers of the performance improvement is crucial in order to replicate Acea’s
successful reform in other settings. The literature offers three motives related to bidder
incentives and information for why first price auctions like those used by Acea before the
reform might induce poor contract performance: adverse selection, moral hazard and the
winner’s curse. In our setting, the latter is unlikely to play a major role, as all bidders
are experienced contractors repeatedly bidding in auctions for relatively simple contracts.
Regarding selection and moral hazard, distinguishing between them is valuable as they can
have different implications for how best to design systems to integrate past performance in
procurement.37
In our setting, performance improvements can derive from either more effort in the execution stage by contractors, or better selection of contractors, or a combination of both.
Indeed, Figure 6 presents evidence consistent with both by showing how the cdf of winning
35

Indeed, according to Acea, carrying out the audits under the new system is no more costly than doing
them under the paper-based system.
36
As shown by Figure 4, using the 2010 average discount as representative of the discount level after the
reform is the worst case scenario. If we were to consider the average across the whole period between t5 + 1
and the scoring rule introduction, the level would be higher at 16.19 percent.
37
For instance, consider the length of the memory of the RI (i.e, how far back should the RI look). This
likely needs to be long, possibly infinite, if screening is the concern, but short if moral hazard is predominant;
see Elul and Gottardi (2015), and also Kovbasyuk and Spagnolo (2016) who show that optimal memory might
differ for positive and negative ratings.

35

bids in Acea’s auctions evolves between those held before t1, after t5 + 1, and in between
these two periods. The noteworthy aspect is the disappearance post t1 of right tail discounts,
representing discounts of one third or more relative to the reserve price. It is precisely this
type of abnormally high discount that procurers worry will be associated with poor performance. Since replicating Figure 6 for those firms bidding both before and after t1 leads to a
similar finding of a disappearing right tail after t1, we can conclude that the altered bidding
behavior of these suppliers is compatible with the presence of moral hazard in contractual
performance.

Figure 6: Discount CDF Pre-t1, t1-to-t5 and Post-t5

Note: the plot represents the cdf of the winning bid, dividing bids depending on the timing of
the auction: before t1, between t1 and t5 and post t5 (t5 + 1). Source: Auctions data.

Under a moral hazard paradigm, a stylized model of bidding can then rationalizing our
earlier findings about the dynamics of winning discounts. In a first price, sealed bid auction,
equilibrium bids should depend on two elements: production costs, C(e), which are an
increasing function of the effort e that the bidder expects to exert in the execution stage;
and a strategic markup, M (n), which is inversely proportional to the number of competitors,
n. Prior to t1, each auction exists in isolation - the outcome of an auction does not matter
36

for future auctions.38 Thus, bidders will choose low effort levels to reduce their cost and
maximize their profits. However, from t1, even if the award rule remains the lowest price,
the game played by the contractors becomes dynamic: winning an auction has the additional
advantage of potentially being audited and, hence, an opportunity to modify one’s own RI
while reducing one’s rivals’ chances of improving their RI. This likely implies changes to both
components of the bid relative to the pre-t1 case: if better compliance requires more effort,
then the optimal C(e) will likely be higher. Moreover, the strategic markup now depends
not only on n, but also on the distribution of RI across bidders.39 Finally, the bid now also
incorporates a third element: the continuation value associated with the evolution of the RI.
Indeed, winning today and earning a good RI is expected to produce savings in the stream of
future auctions, once the scoring rule auction is introduced. This continuation value increases
the value of winning today and, hence, balances increases in production costs. Clearly, the
relevance of the continuation value depends on how many auctions suppliers perceive they
will be able to use their good RI for.
It is not a priori obvious how increasing the RI weight in the scoring auction would
affect the outcomes. An increase in this weight helps with the moral hazard problem as
it bolsters the benefits of more effort. However, the effect on bidding during the phase
before the introduction of the scoring rule is ambiguous. There are two effects, which in
a sense correspond to a marginal and an inframarginal effect (alternatively, the intensive
and extensive margin). First, winning lowest price auctions gives bidders the opportunity to
prove themselves and thus increase their RI (marginal effect). Second, if the implementation
of the scoring rule auction is sufficiently delayed that all bidders have the potential to earn
a good RI, then symmetric competition in the (future) scoring rule auction will imply that
many of the rents from a good RI will be competed out, to the point that winning in the
(present) lowest price auctions becomes less attractive (the inframarginal effect).
38

This assumes that there are no links through, for instance, capacity constraints. This is likely to be a
good approximation, since the institutional environment allows for an extensive use of subcontracts that can
relax capacity constraint. See Branzoli and Decarolis (2015) for subcontracting and capacity constraints.
39
That is, even if before t1 the environment could be characterized as a symmetric auction with bidders
being ex ante identical in terms of costs, after t1 firms became asymmetric in terms of their RI stock. This
asymmetry can potentially cause changes in the size of the equilibrium markups, for instance by making
bidders with lower (or no) RI more willing to shade less their true cost.

37

Thus, an explanation for the patterns observed in the data is that, right after t1, the
increase in C(e) was dominated by the changes in the strategic markup and the continuation
value. After contractors accumulated a good RI, however, the value of winning an auction
in the pre-scoring rule period declines as obtaining positive audit reports cannot offer a
competitive edge over rivals. Thus, in this phase the increased production cost dominates.40
In the data, however, the effects of the new system concerned not only bidding and
performance, but also participation choices. Indeed, while the summary statistics show that
the number of bids submitted remains stable and approximately equal to 11 both before and
after t1, the set of bidders changed in Acea’s auctions: while there are 34 suppliers placing
at least one bid both before and after t1, there are other 36 suppliers who place at least one
bid before t1, but no bid afterwards. We refer to the latter group of firms as “exiters” and
to the former as “stayers.” There are also 3 new entrants placing bids only after t1, but
never before then. This implies that the average number of bids placed per bidder doubles;
from 0.16 (i.e, 11/70) to 0.30 (i.e., 11/37). This increased participation is due to the stayers,
not to unusually high bidding frequencies for the 3 new entrants and is likely driven by the
same incentive to earn RI that we discussed when analyzing the evidence on winning bids.
As regards exiters and new entrants, however, their mere presence potentially indicates that
the experiment might have also triggered some selection effects.
If we focus on exiters, however, the data provides only weak evidence of possible selection
effects.41 In particular, Figure 7 shows the timing of the exits does not seem clearly linked
to t1. This figure reports the last date at which each of the exiters (represented by the
numerical identifiers on the vertical axis) placed a bid. The smooth path of exits indicates
40

The intuition for this latter effect is that higher effort pre-scoring rule improves a bidder’s expected
payoff once the scoring rule becomes effective. However, in a symmetric equilibrium, all bidders win the
same number of lowest price auctions and assign the same value to effort. This implies that the equilibrium
payoff once the scoring rule is implemented is independent of the weight it assigns to the RI relative to price;
the only effect of increasing this weight is thus to increase effort early on. But an increase in this effort
decreases the expected payoff from winning an auction pre scoring rule. Finally, this leads bidders uniformly
to bid less aggressively in the pre scoring rule period. This result bears some resemblance to models where
the strategic effect of an exogenous change (in this case, the expected change in the weight assigned to the
RI from zero to 25 percent) more than outweighs any positive direct effect, to the point that equilibrium
payoffs are decreasing in the RI weight (see Cabral and Villas-Boas (2005)). We are grateful to Luis Cabral
for helping us to elucidate this unintuitive and important element of the strategic environment.
41
For the 3 new entrants, the type of analysis performed below for the exiters cannot be replicated as
only one of them could be matched to the firm registry described below.

38

more of a gradual process than a sharp drop at t1.
Figure 7: Last auction date participated (exiters)

Note: each bar represents the time until the supplier last bids. The figure is drawn for the
sample of exiters only. The numbers appearing on the vertical axis are anonymized identifiers
of the different firms. Source: Auctions data.

Furthermore, as illustrated by Figure 8, if we compare the cdf of winning bids by both
exiters and stayers (in the pre-t1 auctions), we do not observe significant differences. Finally, even in terms of characteristics, exiters do not seem to be substantially different from
stayers. In the appendix, Table A.6 reports summary statistics for the subset of exiters
and stayers that we could match to the Infocamere database, the Italian firm registry.42
Along most dimensions, exiters are smaller than stayers; this is the case for revenues, profits and capital. The average number of employees is also lower, but in this case the median
is nearly identical. For both groups, the wide variation in characteristics among firms means
that the differences in the averages are not statistically significant and it is not obvious how
to interpret the results. Thus, to benchmark them we present in panel (b) the analogous
statistics obtained for the suppliers active in the auctions of the multi-utility company of
the city of Turin. This is the multi-utility company that awards most contracts within the
DD control group. Analogously to what was done for Acea, we partition its suppliers into
42

The registry covers nearly all Italian firms; for a description see Conley and Decarolis (2016).

39

Figure 8: Bid CDF for exiting and incumbent firms

Note: the plot represents the cdf of winning bids for both exiters and stayers (in the pre-t1
auctions). Source: Auctions data.

those bidding both before and after t1 (stayers) and those bidding only before t1 (exiters).
The comparison of the two groups leads to similar conclusions to those found for Acea’s
suppliers: the average revenues, profits and capitals are higher among stayers. But the data
are again characterized by many extreme observations and the result is reversed for revenues
and profits when looking at the median.
We conclude that, overall, there is no strong evidence that the pool of exiters in Acea’s
auctions is selected in any particular way relative to the typical exit behavior in the market.
Thus, the effects that we uncovered in the earlier sections are likely driven to a large extent
by changes in the behavior of Acea’s contractors. Perhaps, this is not surprising given that
the slow switch to scoring rule auctions allowed most contractors to undertake the steps
needed to improve their contractual performance. In turn, this might also be part of the
reason why competition remained high in Acea’s auctions, thus contributing to limit price
increases. In the light of this conclusion, it is interesting to note that most of the policy
debate referenced earlier in this paper focuses around issues of supplier selection and most
often ignores the potential disciplining effects of reputational mechanisms on moral hazard.
40

VII

Conclusions

This paper has studied the merits of using past performance to spur greater efforts from
contractors when executing public works. The evaluation of the evidence from an experiment undertaken by Acea, a large utility company, has shown strong improvements in both
the safety and quality of the works after Acea announced its intention to use past performance scores to award future contracts. To some extent this may resemble the well-known
Hawthorne effect. However, contrary to the Hawthorne effect, the improvement was not
short-lived, despite the fact that the contractors could have stopped trusting Acea over the
delayed implementation of the new award rule, and that it was easier for contractors to improve their score when the starting point was lower rather than later, when the marginal cost
of improving increased. Improvements involve all parameters and suppliers, are long-lasting
(for at least 10 years after the initial experiment) and are reflected in higher service quality
by the utility. Regarding prices, we find some evidence of an initial drop in prices followed by
a moderate price increase. Overall, price effects appear negligible when compared to the substantial improvement in performance, as confirmed by a cost effectiveness analysis involving
both the duration of blackouts (quality) and the incidence of deadly accidents (for safety).
We argue that these results can all be explained by the fact that a reputational mechanism
based on objective past performance can effectively curtail supplier moral hazard.
The empirical evidence in this paper points at the very large benefits from imple-menting
reputation mechanisms in public procurement for the government and tax-payers. An extension we plan to pursue in future work would involve exploring in greater depth overall welfare
implications, which will require building and estimating a structural model. Furthermore,
although several different mechanisms might explain how suppliers changed their behavior
by increasing their quality and safety performance, it is interesting to note that the explanation offered by the management of Acea is that most of the gains came from improvements
in management practices within contractors. Thanks to new data on management practices
collected in the last ten years through the World Management Survey (Bloom et al., 2014),43
there has been increased attention on the role of management in explaining productivity dif43

See: http://worldmanagementsurvey.org.

41

ferences. In this respect, exploring the details of the managerial changes implemented by the
suppliers would be useful to understand how (the announcement of) new procurement rules
triggered an improvement in management. Regarding this, it is also important to highlight
that, while we have stressed the public procurement implications of our analysis, our findings
are also relevant to private procurement practices, where the use of vendor rating systems is
widespread, but little is known about their effectiveness.
Once the merits of this kind of reputation mechanism in improving contractor performance are proven, many aspects remain open and offer room for future research; for example,
how to optimize the parameter weights, how to discipline the rating for new entrants, how
to structure the weights in the award criteria, and how to choose the optimal “memory” of
the indicator (i.e. how long should be the window of time over which the RI is calculated,
and how heavily should older information be discounted). Even the ideal speed at which the
switch to a reputation system should occur is an interesting, but little studied problem.
Finally, we conclude by stressing the policy relevance of our findings. There is an ongoing
policy debate in both Europe and the US on the use of the past performance of contractors
in public procurement. In the US, with the Federal Acquisitions Streamlining Act of 1994,
federal agencies started to record past contractor performance evaluations and to share
them through common platforms for use in future contractor selection.44 Interestingly, the
EU follows a very different system, essentially barring the use of past performance with the
exception of extremely severe types of misbehaviour sanctioned by the judiciary (Gordon
and Racca, 2014). Indeed, the use of reputational mechanisms based on past performance
has been one of the most contentious issues in the debate leading up to the 2004 and 2014
EU Procurement Directives.45 To this debate, our results offer a clear empirical illustration
of the potential benefits of a reputational mechanism based on objective and clearly targeted
past performance measures.
44

The reform was pushed by Steven Kelman when he served as Administrator of the Office of Federal
Procurement Policy in the Office of Management and Budget from 1993 to 1997, playing a lead role in the
Administration’s “reinventing government” effort that led, among other things, to the Federal Acquisition
Streamlining Act of 1994 and the Federal Acquisition Reform Act 1995, see Kelman (1990).
45
Curiously enough, current EU regulation acknowledges the importance of reputation for some types of
procurement. For example, the European Research Council (ERC) funds research (including this study)
through peer review, and the track record of the principal invetigator is one of the main selection criteria.

42

References
Bajari, Patrick, and Steven Tadelis. 2001. “Incentives versus Transaction Costs: A
Theory of Procurement Contracts.” RAND Journal of Economics, 32(3): 387–407.
Bajari, Patrick, Robert S. McMillan, and Steven Tadelis. 2009. “Auctions Versus
Negotiations in Procurement: An Empirical Analysis.” Journal of Law, Economics and
Organization, 25(2): 372–399.
Banerjee, Abhijit V., and Esther Duflo. 2000. “Reputation Effects and the Limits
of Contracting: A Study of the Indian Software Industry*.” The Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 115(3): 989–1017.
Banfield, Edward C. 1975. “Corruption as a Feature of Governmental Organization.”
Journal of Law and Economics, 18(3): 3.
Bertrand, Marianne, Esther Duflo, and Sendhil Mullainathan. 2004. “How Much
Should We Trust Differences-in-Differences Estimates?” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 119(1): 249–275.
Bird, Frank E, and George L Germain. 1986. Practical loss control leadership. Loganville, Ga. Institute Publications.
Bloom, Nicholas, Renata Lemos, Raffaella Sadun, Daniela Scur, and John
Van Reenen. 2014. “The New Empirical Economics Of Management.” Journal of the
European Economic Association, 12(4): 835–876.
Brandon, Alec, Paul J. Ferraro, John A. List, Robert D. Metcalfe, Michael K.
Price, and Florian Rundhammer. 2017. “Do the Effects of Social Nudges Persist? Theory and Evidence from 38 Natural Experiments.” NBER Working Paper, wp23277: 271–
280.
Branzoli, Nicola, and Francesco Decarolis. 2015. “Entry and Subcontracting in Public
Procurement Auctions.” Management Science, 61(12): 2945 – 2962.
43

Burguet, Roberto, Juan Jose Ganuza, and Ester Hauk. 2012. “Limited Liability and
Mechanism Design in Procurement.” Games and Economic Behavio, 76(1): 15–25.
Cabral, Luis M. B., and Miguel Villas-Boas. 2005. “Bertrand Supertraps.” Management Science, 51(4): 599–613.
Calzolari, Giacomo, and Giancarlo Spagnolo. 2009. “Relational Contracts and Competitive Screening.” CEPR Discussion Papers 7434.
Campbell, Richard B., and David A. Dini. 2015. “Occupational Injuries from Electrical
Shock and Arc Flash Events.” Fire Protection Research Foundation Final Report 1.
Carril, Ricardo. 2019. “Rules Versus Discretion in Public Procurement.” Working Paper.
Chassang, Sylvain, and Juan Ortner. 2016. “Collusion in Auctions with Constrained
Bids: Theory and Evidence from Public Procurement.” Working Paper.
Colonnelli, Emanuele, and Mounu Prem. 2017. “Corruption and Firms: Evidence from
Randomized Audits in Brazil.”
Conley, Timothy G., and Christopher R. Taber. 2011. “Inference with Difference
in Differences with a Small Number of Policy Changes.” The Review of Economics and
Statistics, 93(1): 113–125.
Conley, Timothy G., and Francesco Decarolis. 2016. “Detecting Bidders Groups in
Collusive Auctions.” American Economic Journal: Microeconomics, 8(2): 1–38.
Coviello, Decio, Andrea Guglielmo, and Giancarlo Spagnolo. 2016. “The Effect of
Discretion on Procurement Performance.” Management Science, Forthcoming.
Coviello, Decio, Andrea Guglielmo, and Giancarlo Spagnolo. 2017. “The effect of
discretion on procurement performance.” Management Science, 64(2): 715–738.
Decarolis, Francesco. 2014. “Awarding Price, Contract Performance and Bids Screening:
Evidence from Procurement Auctions.” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics,
6(1): 108–132.
44

Decarolis, Francesco, Raymond Fisman, Paolo Pinotti, and Silvia Vannutelli.
2020. “Rules, Discretion, and Corruption in Procurement: Evidence from Italian Government Contracting.” mimeo.
Djankov, Simeon, Oliver Hart, Caralee McLiesh, and Andrei Shleifer. 2008. “Debt
Enforcement around the World.” Journal of Political Economy, 116(6): 1105–1149.
Doni, Nicola. 2006. “The Importance Of Reputation In Awarding Public Contracts.” Annals of Public and Cooperative Economics, 77(4): 401–429.
Elul, Ronel, and Piero Gottardi. 2015. “Bankruptcy: Is It Enough to Forgive or Must
We Also Forget?” American Economic Journal: Microeconomics, 7(4): 294–338.
Giacomelli, Silvia, and Carlo Menon. 2016. “Does weak contract enforcement affect firm
size? Evidence from the neighbours court.” Journal of Economic Geography, 17(6): 1251–
1282.
Goodman, William M. 2012. “Measuring Changes in the Distribution of IncidentOutcome Severities: A Tool for Safety Management.” Case Studies in Business, Industry
and Government Statistics, 5(1): 32–43.
Gordon, Daniel I., and Gabriella M. Racca. 2014. “Integrity Challenges in the EU
and U.S. Procurement Systems.” Integrity and Efficiency in Sustainable Public Contracts.
Corruption, Conflict of Interest, Favoritism and Inclusion of Non-Economic Criteria in
Public Contracts, Gabriella M. Racca & Christopher R. Yukins, eds., Bruylant.
Heinrich, Herbert William. 1931. Industrial accident prevention: a scientific approach.
McGraw-Hill.
Hiriart, Yolande, David Martimort, and Jerome Pouyet. 2004. “On the Optimal
Use of Ex Ante Regulation and Ex Post Liability.” Economics Letters, 84(2): 231–235.
Jofre-Bonet, Mireia, and Martin Pesendorfer. 2003. “Estimation of a Dynamic Auction Game.” Econometrica, 71(5): 1443–1489.
45

Kang, Karam, and Robert A. Miller. 2019. “Winning by Default: Why is There So
Little Competition in Government Procurement?” Mimeo.
Kelman, Steven. 1990. Procurement and Public Management: The Fear of Discretion and
the Quality of Government Performance. AEI Studies.
Kim, In-Gyu. 1998. “A model of selective tendering: Does bidding competition deter
opportunism by contractors?” The Quarterly Review of Economics and Finance, 38(4).
Kolstad, Charles D., Thomas S. Ulen, and Gary V. Johnson. 1990. “Ex Post Liability for Harm vs. Ex Ante Safety Regulation: Substitutes or Complements?” The American
Economic Review, 80(4): 888–901.
Kovbasyuk, Sergei, and Giancarlo Spagnolo. 2016. “Memory and Markets.” mimeo.
Lazear, Edward P. 2000. “Performance Pay and Productivity.” American Economic Review, 90(5): 1346–1361.
Levitt, Steven D., and John A. List. 2011. “Was There Really a Hawthorne Effect at
the Hawthorne Plant? An Analysis of the Original Illumination Experiments.” American
Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 3: 224–238.
Lewis-Faupel, Sean, Yusuf Neggers, Benjamin A. Olken, and Rohini Pande. 2016.
“Can Electronic Procurement Improve Infrastructure Provision? Evidence from Public
Works in India and Indonesia.” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, Forthcoming.
Liebman, Jeffrey B., and Neale Mahoney. 2016. “Do Expiring Budgets Lead to Wasteful Year-End Spending? Evidence from Federal Procurement.” Mimeo.
List, John A., and David Reiley. 2008. “The New Palgrave Dictionary of Economics,.” In
Field Experiments. , ed. Steven N. Durlauf and Lawrence E. Blume. Palgrave Macmillan.
Manelli, Alejandro M, and Daniel R Vincent. 1995. “Optimal Procurement Mechanisms.” Econometrica, 63(3): 591–620.
46

Marion, Justin. 2017. “Affirmative Action Exemptions and Capacity Constrained Firms.”
American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 9(3): 377–407.
OECD. 2012. Mortality Risk Valuation in Environment, Health and Transport Policies.
OECD Publishing.
Olken, Benjamin A. 2007. “Monitoring Corruption: Evidence from a Field Experiment
in Indonesia.” Journal of Political Economy, 115(2).
Rose-Ackerman, Susan. 1991. “Regulation and the Law of Torts.” The American Economic Review, 81(2): 54–58.
Shavell, Steven. 1984. “A Model of the Optimal Use of Liability and Safety Regulation.”
The RAND Journal of Economics, 15(2): 271–280.
Spulber, Daniel F. 1990. “Auctions and Contract Enforcement.” Journal of Law, Economics and Organization, 6(2): 325–44.
Tadelis, Steven. 2016. “ The Economics of Reputation and Feedback Systems in ECommerce Marketplaces.” IEEE Internet Computing, 20(1): 12–19.
Zheng, Charles Z. 2001. “High Bids and Broke Winners.” Journal Economic Theory,
100: 129–171.

47

For Publication on the Authors’ Web Page
Web Appendix

I

Data

The data used in the paper come from three main sources, plus several ancillary ones.
The Audit data come directly from the firm implementing the experiment, Acea (https:
//www.gruppo.acea.it/en). They were released to us for research and study purposes. The
Auction data come from the database on public works of a private company, http://www.
telemat.it/. This is a major information entrepreneur (IE) and its main activity is selling
information about public contracts to construction firms. For the subset of auctions held
by Acea, we also have the internal Acea’s records regarding these auctions. The Regulatory
Reports data come from the public authority the yearly reports of the Italian Regulatory Authority for Energy, Networks and Environment (ARERA, https://www.autorita.energia.
it/it/inglese/). Additional data were obtained from the Observatory on Public Contracts
of the Italian Anticorruption Authority http://www.anac.it, from which we take the data
on time delays and cost overruns in contract execution. Furthermore, for the cost effectiveness analysis, the value of a statistical life figures come from the OECD (https://www.oecd.
org/environment/mortalityriskvaluationinenvironmenthealthandtransportpolicies.
htm), while those for the economic cost of 1 hour of blackout, separately for business and
residential customers come from Table 11 in the AREA’s decision n. 172/07 of 12/07/2007.

II

Additional Results

In this appendix section, we present a series of additional results supplementing the various
analyses presented in the main text.
• The estimates in Table A.1 explore the behavior of suppliers when they become aware
of the new scoring auction. We do so by focusing on the audit data in the period
i

before the introduction of the scoring rule and further partitioning this sample into
two subsamples: audits held before and after t1. For each of these subsamples, we
estimate a series of probit regressions performed at the level of each individual audited
parameter. We estimate the following probit model for the probability of the score
being 1 (i.e., compliant) on features of parameters, contracts and suppliers:

P r(compliant) = Φ[t + f + α weight + θ quick + γj

12
X

categoryj ],

(7)

j=2

where Φ is the normal cdf, compliant is the score (0 or 1) taken by the parameter
audited, t and f are fixed effects for the year and contractor, weight is the weight
associated with the parameter, quick is a dummy for whether the parameter can be
adjusted within one month at a small cost and categoryj are dummies for the category
to which the parameter belongs.
We are particularly interested in the coefficient on weight as this has the potential to
reveal the strategic nature of supplier responses. Table A.1 shows the probit marginal
effects for two separate samples: audits held in the period before t1 (first four columns),
and audits held after then (last four columns). We find that the sign of the coefficient
on weight changes from negative to positive. Thus, after t1, suppliers become more
compliant in those parameters with the strongest potential to bolster their RI. This
switch in the coefficient sign is evident across all specifications, as we move from a
baseline model, controlling only for weight, and we expand the model to incorporate
parameter, contract and firm features.46
Regarding the other coefficients in Table A.1, the one on quick is useful to assess the
potential for collusion between suppliers and monitors. Indeed, performance might
be improving because the repeated interaction allows the parties to learn how to collude under the new system. However, this interpretation of the data would seem less
plausible if the improvements were concentrated on those parameters that should be
faster to effectively adjust. With the help of expert engineers, we created a dummy
46

All estimates in Table A.1 are based on the subset of parameters that are audited at least once both
before and after t1. The results remain qualitatively the same for the post-t1 sample if all audits are included.

ii

variable, quick, that is equal to 1 if the transition from a score of not compliant to
one of compliant can be reasonably achieved within a one month time frame without
incurring extraordinary costs. For instance, examples of parameters with quick equal
to 1 are those involving the adequacy of “personal protection tools” (mostly helmets)
or the presence of signs warning of ongoing works nearby. Instead, the adequacy of
the machinery is an example of a parameter with quick equal to zero. While clearly
arbitrary, this dummy variable is helpful to test the reasonableness of the performance
response observed in our data. Indeed, the finding that the coefficient on quick is positive (and that its significance increases post t1) is suggestive of suppliers effectively
changing their behavior. This interpretation is further strengthened by what we report below with regard to the behavior in the auctions. However, it is relevant here
that while it is impossible to fully rule out the possibility of collusion/corruption, the
system of random rotation of auditors and of random selection of the sites to inspect
was explicitly meant to curtail these types of risks. Indeed, Acea never expressed to us
concerns about episodes of corruption or collusion during the period our data cover.
• In Table A.2, we complement the Bai-Perron tests in Table 6 with a series of Chow
tests for the presence of one break at t1 (odd numbered columns) and five breaks, at
t1, ..., t5 (even numbered columns). For all six tests, we reject the null of no breaks in
favor of the alternative of breaks at the specified dates.
• In Table A.3, we explore a different way to look at the heterogeneity across firms in
the announcement response is to exploit the audit randomness. Since at every point
in time the choice of which contract to audit is random, we can compare whether the
compliance in the very first audit that a firm receives post t1 is different between firms
audited and those not audited prior to t1. In the data, 33 firms receive at least 1 audit
post t1, with 26 of these audited only post t1 and 7 also having already been audited
before then. Table A.3 reports the results of linear regressions of the share of compliant
parameters in the first audit (post t1) on an indicator of whether the firm was already
audited prior to t1 and other controls.47 Both when compliance is unweighted (first
47

The regressions include controls for the share of safety parameters among those audited (in models

iii

three columns) and when it is weighted through the parameters’ weight in the RI
formula (last three columns), the results indicate a lack of any statistically significant
difference between the two supplier groups. Although the small sample size requires
interpreting this evidence with caution, this result is also in line with the saliency of
the first announcement highlighted by the earlier findings.
• Table A.4 presents robustness checks for the baseline DD estimates involving the award
process specifications. All sample auctions share many characteristics, but there are
nevertheless subtleties in the regulations defining the precise mechanisms for the contract award that might affect outcomes. Across auctions, differences in both auction
procedures and awarding methods exist. Auctions where a restricted set of bidders is
invited to bid can be used under certain conditions, and indeed this method is used for
87 out of the 330 auctions held by Acea.48 Panel (a) reports estimates excluding these
87 auctions. Regarding the award criterion, 42 out of the 330 auctions are awarded
via modifications of the lowest price rule. All modifications entail automatically eliminating abnormally low bids (i.e., discounts considered “too good to be true”).49 Panel
(b) eliminates from the sample all Acea’s auction run with the automatic elimination
of the lowest bids. For both panel (a) and (b), the estimates are qualitatively similar
to those in the baseline regressions.
• In Table A.5, we evaluate potential problems with inference by using alternative methods for standard errors. The four columns report 95 percent confidence interval estimates corresponding to models (2), (3), (5) and (6) of Table 8. The rows indicating
(2),(3),(5) and (6)), a dummy for whether the contract is for public illumination (in models (2),(3),(5) and
(6)), fixed effects for the quarter of the year (in models (2),(3),(5) and (6)) or dummy variables for being
past each of the breaks t2, ..., t5 (in models (3) and (6)) and to account for the increasing compliance over
time (in models (2),(3),(5) and (6)).
48
The Code refers to these auctions based on invitations as “negotiated procedures.” They are studied in
Coviello, Guglielmo and Spagnolo (2016).
49
Acea used the flexibility given to it by the Code to experiment with three alternatives to the lowest price
rule. One method entailed awarding the contract to the contractor with the discount closest to the average
discount offered, increased by 20 percent. A second method entailed using a trim mean disregrading 10
percent of the highest and lowest discounts (Decarolis, 2014). The third method entailed randomly deciding
after the bids were submitted whether the criterion to be used was the highest discount or the discount
closest to an average of the submitted discounts (either their simple average or their trim mean). The award
criterion is always specified in the call for tenders, so bidders knew these 42 auctions were different and this
might have altered their bidding.

iv

“CA-Year” report estimates where the clustering is at the year and CA level, as in Table
8. The other rows in the table present two alternatives. The rows “CA” use clustering at the CA level only. As is well known from Bertrand, Duflo and Mullainathan
(2004), this can serve to correct for overestimation of the significance of the treatment
effect driven by autocorrelation in the data. The table reveals that this correction has
no qualitative implications for our results: relative to the baseline estimates, for all
models involving both β1 and β2 there are no changes, while significance increases for
models involving β1 only. The latter models indicate a negative and significant effect
at the 95 percent level. Since the clustering at CA and year is preferable to account
for time variation, however, we prefer to rely on our more conservative baseline estimates. The second concern regarding inference is the fact that the level at which
the treatment effectively takes place is that of the procurer and we observe only one
procurer, Acea, receiving the treatment. Hence, any shock hitting Acea at t1 biases
the estimate of β1 . As argued by Conley and Taber (2011), if the shocks potentially
hitting Acea and the control CAs belong to the same distribution, and if a sufficiently
large number of control CAs are observed, valid inference can still be conducted by
adjusting the standard errors. Since we have many control CAs, we use the Conley
and Taber (2011) method to assess how significance changes relative to our baseline
estimates. The “Conley-Taber” rows are indeed different from the baseline ones: in
columns (3) and (4), β1 loses significance, while β2 loses significance in model (4) when
the largest set of control CAs is used. Overall, this indicates that we should be cautious
in interpreting the findings in Table 8 about significant and opposite signs of β1 and β2 .
Hence, as before, a more conservative interpretation is that there are no statistically
significant price changes throughout the sample.
• In Table A.6, reports balance sheet summary statistics from Infocamere, the registry
of Italian firms. The data is reported separately for exiters and stayers.
• In Figure A.1, we present the evolution over time of additional external performance
measures: the number and duration of planned power cuts.
• Figures A.2, A.3, A.4 and A.5 explore the heterogeneity in the composition of the audits
v

over time. We begin by looking separately at parameters in the quality and safety
classes. Figure A.2 reports for each month the total weight (averaged across all audits
in the month) of parameters relating to these two classes. Safety parameters always
carry a higher total weight, but their proportion relative to the quality parameters
remains rather stable over time. Indeed, the evolution of the monthly average weighted
parameters in these two classes reported in Figure A.4 confirms a clear upward trend for
both of them. As the latter four columns of Table 6 show, breaks in both series occur
at t1, but the dates of the other breaks are not all identical. This is also related to the
speed of adjustments in compliance, as we will discuss below. Before that, we complete
the graphical analysis of the composition issue by taking an even more disaggregated
view of the performance measures through their grouping into categories. As Figure
A.3 shows, the number of parameters audited per month is quite heterogenous, but
Figure A.5 reassures us that the compliance increase over time is quite homogenous
across categories.50 Similarly, while there is heterogeneity in how many audits each
contractor receives,51 performance increases are rather homogenous across contractors.

50

To make the figure easier to interpret, we reported only the 4 most audited categories, but the increase
is present essentially in all 12 categories, as also revealed by the summary statistics in Table 3.
51
Ranging from nearly 200 audits for the most audited contractor to zero audits for a few contractors.

vi

Table A.1: Probability of Compliant Parameter

Weight

(1)
-0.026∗∗∗
(0.005)

Pre-announcement
(2)
(3)
-0.024∗∗∗ -0.024∗∗∗
(0.007)
(0.007)

(4)
-0.025∗∗∗
(0.007)

(5)
0.011∗∗∗
(0.001)

Post-announcement
(6)
(7)
0.013∗∗∗ 0.013∗∗∗
(0.001)
(0.001)

(8)
0.013∗∗∗
(0.001)

0.077∗
(0.036)

0.077∗
(0.036)

0.074∗
(0.036)

0.066∗∗∗
(0.006)

0.065∗∗∗
(0.006)

0.066∗∗∗
(0.006)

C2-Documentation

-0.412∗∗∗
(0.053)

-0.412∗∗∗
(0.053)

-0.440∗∗∗
(0.055)

-0.284∗∗∗
(0.010)

-0.268∗∗∗
(0.010)

-0.270∗∗∗
(0.010)

C3-Works Execution

-0.518∗∗∗
(0.062)

-0.518∗∗∗
(0.062)

-0.523∗∗∗
(0.064)

-0.189∗∗∗
(0.010)

-0.189∗∗∗
(0.010)

-0.192∗∗∗
(0.010)

C7-Underground works

-0.302∗∗∗
(0.051)

-0.302∗∗∗
(0.051)

-0.296∗∗∗
(0.052)

-0.291∗∗∗
(0.009)

-0.288∗∗∗
(0.009)

-0.286∗∗∗
(0.009)

C9-Personnel

-0.308∗∗∗
(0.069)

-0.308∗∗∗
(0.069)

-0.332∗∗∗
(0.069)

-0.349∗∗∗
(0.011)

-0.359∗∗∗
(0.011)

-0.365∗∗∗
(0.011)

C10-Works site regularity

-0.673∗∗∗
(0.054)

-0.673∗∗∗
(0.054)

-0.680∗∗∗
(0.056)

-0.449∗∗∗
(0.009)

-0.443∗∗∗
(0.009)

-0.441∗∗∗
(0.009)

C11-Works site safety

-0.381∗∗∗
(0.056)
No
No
1,374

-0.381∗∗∗
(0.056)
Yes
No
1,374

-0.405∗∗∗
(0.057)
Yes
Yes
1,374

-0.272∗∗∗
(0.010)
No
No
44,653

-0.272∗∗∗
(0.010)
Yes
No
44,653

-0.275∗∗∗
(0.010)
Yes
Yes
44,653

Quick

Year Fixed Effects
Firm Fixed Effects
N

No
No
1,702

No
No
56,085

This table reports the marginal effects of probit regressions. The dependent variable is the score on the parameter:
1 if compliant and 0 if not compliant. The first four columns regard the subsample of scores assigned in the audits
held before t1, while the latter four columns regard audits that occurred after t1.

vii

Table A.2: Breakpoints in the Internal Performance Measures (Chow Tests)
Weighted Compliance
1 break
5 breaks
at t1
at t1-5

Quality
1 break 5 breaks
at t1
at t1-5

Safety
1 break 5 breaks
at t1
at t1-5

Note: The table reports the results of Chow tests. The variable is the monthly weighted average compliance,
measured on all audited parameters (first two columns) or on the subset of quality parameters (next two
columns) or safety parameters (latter two columns).

Table A.3: Compliance at the First Audit
Unweighted
(1)
(2)
(3)
Audited before t1 -0.205 -0.220 -0.219
(0.138) (0.135) (0.133)

(4)
-0.208
(0.141)

Weighted
(5)
(6)
-0.223 -0.222
(0.137) (0.135)

Safety share

0.411
(0.356)

0.464
(0.335)

0.461
(0.362)

0.508
(0.339)

Object (PI)

-0.160
(0.124)
33
Yes
No

-0.155
(0.124)
33
No
Yes

-0.161
(0.126)
33
Yes
No

-0.155
(0.125)
33
No
Yes

N
Quarter FE
Breaks

33
Yes
No

33
Yes
No

Standard errors in parentheses
∗
p < 0.10, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01

The sample consists of the 33 firms audited at least once post t1. Out of these 33 firms,
26 firms were never audited pre t1 and 7 firms had already been audited before then.
The table reports OLS coefficients for regressions of the share of complaint parameters
during the first audit on a dummy for whether the firm was already audited pre t1, and
other controls. The set of controls changes across columns and includes combinations
of: quarter fixed effects, the share of safety parameters in the first audit and dummy
variables for both the dates of the breaks and whether the contract audited is for public
illumination. In the first three columns, the compliance measure is unweighted, while
in the latter three it is weighted by the weights in the RI formula.

viii

Table A.4: Robustness Checks: Award Process Specifications

β1

Panel (a): No Restrictions to Open Competition
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
4.75∗∗ 4.95∗∗ 4.80∗∗ 5.40∗∗∗ 5.64∗∗∗
(1.61) (1.53) (1.56) (1.45)
(1.36)
-2.32∗∗∗
(0.63)
4392
0.48

-2.14∗∗∗
(0.63)
4392
0.48

Panel (b): No Variations to the Lowest Price Criterion
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
3.70
3.62
3.43
6.52∗∗∗ 6.46∗∗∗
(2.51) (2.53) (2.38) (1.36)
(1.38)

(6)
6.02∗∗∗
(1.39)

β2
4392
0.48

N
R2

β1

4392
0.48

4392
0.48

β2
N
R2
Reserve Price FE
Object & Res.Pr. FE

3531
0.43
No
No

3531
0.43
Yes
No

3531
0.43
Yes
Yes

-2.21∗∗∗
(0.65)
4392
0.48

(6)
5.43∗∗∗
(1.42)

-6.02∗∗∗
(0.78)
3531
0.43
No
No

-6.04∗∗∗
(0.78)
3531
0.43
Yes
No

-5.50∗∗∗
(0.80)
3531
0.44
Yes
Yes

This table contains results to evaluate the robustness of the baseline DD estimates in Table 8 with respect to tender specifications.
Panel (a) reports estimates excluding auctions with restricted participation. Panel (b) reports estimates excluding auctions where
the price-only award criterion involves the automatic elimination of abnormally low tenders.

Table A.5: Robustness: Inference
Panel (a): All Contracting Authorities
VARIABLES
PA-Year
PA
Conley-Taber
PA-Year
PA
Conley-Taber

(1)
W.Discount

(2)
W.Discount

(3)
W.Discount

(4)
W.Discount

(-15.1;5.8)
(-5.7;-3.6)
(-7.7;-1.2)

(-14.9;5.6)
(-5.7;-3.7)
(-7.6;-1.2)

(1.4;8.8)
(4.2;6.0)
(1.5;7.2)
(-22.8;-6.2)
(-15.7;-13.4)
(-36.7;-9.4)

(1.3;8.4)
(4.0;5.8)
(1.3;7.0)
(-22.5;-5.8)
(-15.4;-12.9)
(-36.0;-9.0)

Panel (b): Contracting Authorities in Central Regions
VARIABLES
PA-Year
PA
Conley-Taber
PA-Year
PA
Conley-Taber

(1)
W.Discount

(2)
W.Discount

(3)
W.Discount

(4)
W.Discount

(-13.1;4.2)
(-7.1;-1.8)
(-9.2;-1.5)

(-13.2;3.7)
(-7.5;-2.0)
(-8.9;-1.8)

(3.1;9.2)
(4.0;8.2)
(1.0;6.0)
(-23.0;-9.2)
(-18.8;-13.4)
(-21.8;-6.7)

(2.2;8.5)
(3.3;7.4)
(1.1;5.5)
(-22.3;-8.4)
(-18.1;-12.6)
(-21.4;-6.5)

The table reports 95 percent confidence interval estimates for the same regression models presented in columns (2), (3), (5) and (6) of Table 8.
The estimates in the three rows use different methods to compute standard errors: the top row uses clustering at the year and CA level and is
thus identical to the point estimates in Table 8. The second row uses clustering at the CA level to account for autocorrelation. The third row uses
the Conley-Taber adjustment for a small number of treatment units.

ix

Table A.6: Summary stats: Exiting and Incumbent firms
Panel (a): Contractors Entering Acea’s
Exiters
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
Mean p50
SD
N
Revenues
8,283 2,458 14,615 24
Profits
-21
6
697
24
Capital
391
36
788
24
Number of Employees
10.3
5
11.1
24
Number of Managers
4.96
2
7.57
24
Proportion Female Managers 0.07
0
0.11
24
Public Company
0.96
1
0.21
23

Auctions
(5)
Mean
8,934
32
998
51.7
3.38
0.12
0.88

Stayers
(6)
(7)
p50
SD
5,660 9,401
5
73
47
2699
4.50
180.4
2
2.55
0
0.26
1
0.34

(8)
N
16
16
16
16
16
16
16

Panel (b): Contractors Entering Turin’s IRIDE Auctions
Exiters
Stayers
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
Mean p50
SD
N Mean
p50
SD
N
7,121 4,795 7,127 18 50,860 2,645 152,410 15
Revenues
Profits
30
15
256
18
736
9.69
2,283
15
Capital
298
40
505
26 10,319
40
43,370 19
Number of Employees
9.04
9.50
5.53
26
15.1
8
15.8
19
Number of Managers
4.35
3
2.96
23
8.11
5
9.45
19
Proportion Female Managers 0.03
0
0.06
26
0.09
0
0.15
19
Public Company
0.71
1
0.46
24
0.72
1
0.46
18
Firm-level summary statistics. Panel (a) refers to the contractors active in Acea’s auctions, while panel (b) refers to the contractors bidding in the auctions
of Turin’s multi-utility company (IRIDE). Across all multi-utilities in the DD control group, this is the one for which we observe most contracts during
the sample period. For both Acea and IRIDE, we indicate as exiters those contractors observed bidding at least once before t1, but never after then, and
as stayers those bidding at least once both before and after t1. For each of the 4 sets, the columns Mean, p50 and SD report the average, median and
standard deviation taken across all firms in the set. Column N reports the number of firms considered. Acea characteristics considered are averaged over
the years 2006-2010. They are: revenues, profits and capital (all expressed in e1,000), the number of all dependent workers (Number of Employees and
Number of Managers), the fraction of female managers over all managers (Proportion of Female Managers) and the share of public companies.

Figure A.1: Evolution of Discounts and External Performance Measures

Note: The figure illustrates external performance measures for both Acea (in green) and other providers (in
blue). In all graphs, the red, vertical line indicates the t1 announcement date.

x

Figure A.2: Safety and Quality: Average Weights across Audits

Source: Audits data. The plot represents the total weight, by audit, of parameters
relating to Quality dimensions (grey bar) and Safety dimensions (black bar).

Figure A.3: Number of Parameters Audited

Source: Audits data. The bars represent the total number of parameters checked
throughout the month of reference, distinguishing the compliant parameters (in black)
from the not compliant ones (in grey).

xi

Figure A.4: Safety and Quality: Evolution of Compliance over Time

Source: Audits data. Monthly average compliance calculated separately for Safety and
Quality on all parameters inspected in the month of reference, weighting each parameter
by its weight in the RI. The vertical lines identify each announcement date.

Figure A.5: Parameters Audited: Evolution of Compliance over Time

Source: Audits data. The lines show the progress of the reputation index calculated
on a monthly basis for each of the four most audited Safety and Quality dimensions.

xii

