NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

COMPLEMENTARITY WITHOUT SUPERADDITIVITY
Steven Berry
Philip Haile
Mark Israel
Michael Katz
Working Paper 22811
http://www.nber.org/papers/w22811

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 2016

The authors served as consultants to AT&T in its merger with DIRECTV. Early versions of the
results presented here were discussed in filings with the U.S. Department of Justice and Federal
Communications Commission on behalf of AT&T. We thank Joshua Gans for helpful comments
and Wayne Gao for research assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and
do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2016 by Steven Berry, Philip Haile, Mark Israel, and Michael Katz. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Complementarity without Superadditivity
Steven Berry, Philip Haile, Mark Israel, and Michael Katz
NBER Working Paper No. 22811
November 2016
JEL No. L13,L4
ABSTRACT
The distinction between complements, substitutes, and independent goods is important in many
contexts. It is well known that when consumers’ conditional indirect utilities for two goods are
superadditive, the goods are gross complements. Generalizing insights in Gans and King (2006)
and Gentzkow (2007), we show that superadditivity between one pair of goods can also introduce
complementarity between competing pairs of goods. One implication is that lower prices can
result from a merger between producers of goods that themselves offer no superadditivity.

Steven Berry
Yale University Department of Economics
Box 208264
37 Hillhouse Avenue
New Haven, CT 06520-8264
and NBER
steven.berry@yale.edu
Philip Haile
Department of Economics
Yale University
37 Hillhouse Avenue
P.O. Box 208264
New Haven, CT 06520
and NBER
philip.haile@yale.edu

Mark Israel
Compass Lexecon
1101 K Street NW
8th Floor
Washington, DC 20005
misrael@compasslexecon.com
Michael Katz
UC, Berkeley
Haas School of Business
545 Student Services #1900
Berkeley, CA 94720-1900
katz@haas.berkeley.edu

1

Introduction

Whether two good are complements is often of interest. For example, if two goods are
complements, a merger of their producers tends to reduce prices because the merged firm
will internalize the benefits that lowering the price of one good has on demand for the other.1
A sufficient condition for two goods to be complements is that they have superadditive
conditional indirect utilities. Sources of such superadditivity include direct consumption
synergies, bundle discounts, convex loyalty rewards, price club memberships, convex shipping
discounts (e.g., Amazon Prime), and benefits of one-stop shopping. We show that, whatever
the source, superadditivity between one pair of goods creates complementarity, not only
between that pair but also between pairs of competing goods. An important implication is
that a merger between producers of goods that exhibit no superadditivity can lead to lower
prices.
To suggest why, consider two categories of goods, apples and beer, with no intrinsic complementarities in consumption: once purchased, the value a consumer places on consuming a
good from each category is the sum of the values she places on consuming each good alone.
Apples are offered by a greengrocer; beer by a liquor store. A supermarket offers both apples
and beer. A consumer experiences travel cost t from each visit to one of these sellers. Consider a consumer who buys apples from the greengrocer and beer from the liquor store but,
at current prices, finds this only slightly preferable to her second-best option of buying both
from the supermarket. If the liquor store raises its beer price, this consumer will switch to
purchasing both goods from the supermarket, because doing so saves t in travel cost. This
is the only response to the price change affecting the greengrocer’s apple sales. Thus, an
increase in the price of beer at the liquor store reduces demand for the greengrocer’s apples.
Symmetrically, an increase in the greengrocer’s apple price reduces demand for the liquor
store’s beer. Therefore, these two goods are gross complements.
Our result generalizes an observation in Gans and King (2006), who studied pricing in a
stylized “linear city” model with no outside good, assuming that all consumers purchase one
good from each of two product categories. They note that a key force in their analysis is the
fact that bundle discounts offered for one pair of goods create negative cross-price elasticities
between the goods of competing firms. We focus on this phenomenon itself and show that
it extends to a much more general random utility model, with no restriction on the form of
competition or the source of superadditivity in consumers’ preferences.

2

Baseline: Two Goods

We begin with the two-good random utility model of Gentzkow (2007), dropping his functional form and distributional assumptions. Consider a market with two goods, A and B,
and a continuum of consumers with mass normalized to one. Each consumer desires at most
one unit of each good. A given consumer i obtains conditional indirect utility (“utility”)
1

See Cournot (1838) and Economides and Salop (1992)).

1

ai when purchasing A alone, and bi from purchasing B alone. Each utility accounts for the
good’s price; thus, for example, an increase in the price of A corresponds to a reduction in
ai for every consumer. Throughout we normalize the utility of the outside good to zero.
Consumer i’s utility from purchasing both goods is
ai + b i + ∆
where ∆ ≥ 0 and, for simplicity, ∆ is constant across consumers. When ∆ > 0, consumers
have superadditive utilities.
To ease notation, we henceforth drop the superscript i from utilities. Let F denote the
joint distribution of (a, b) across consumers. For expositional convenience, we assume F has
support R2 and is absolutely continuous with respect to the Lebesgue measure.
Consumers in different regions of R2 will make different choices. As in Gentzkow (2007),
an examination of how price changes alter the measure of consumers in each choice region
demonstrates that superadditivity leads to complementarity.
Proposition 1. Goods A and B are strict gross complements if ∆ > 0, and independent
goods if ∆ = 0.
Proof. A is purchased (alone or with B) whenever a > 0. When a ≤ 0, A is purchased if
and only if both −∆ ≤ a ≤ 0 and a + b + ∆ ≥ 0.2 Total demand for A is therefore
Z 0
1 − FA (0) +
Pr (a + b + ∆ ≥ 0|a) dFA (a),
(1)
−∆

where FA denotes the marginal distribution of a. An in increase in the price of good B
implies a reduction of b in terms of first-order stochastic dominance; if ∆ > 0, this means
that demand for good A falls. If ∆ = 0, however, (1) does not depend on b.

Figure 1 illustrates the product choice regions with ∆ > 0.3 The thick diagonal line
segment shows the set of consumer utilities producing indifference between the AB “bundle”
and the outside good. For consumers whose utilities are bounded away from this line segment,
a small change in b has no effect on the decision to purchase A. However, when the price of
good B increases, a mass of consumer utilities just above this locus of indifference will move
downward across the line segment, leading the associated consumers to switch from AB to
the outside good.

3

Competing Varieties

The equivalence between complementarity and superadditivity of the conditional indirect
utilities breaks down when consumers can choose from multiple varieties within each product
2

We ignore ties since these occur with probability zero and therefore have no effect on demand.

3

This figure is also found as the “∆ > 0” panel of Figure 1 in Gentzkow (2007).

2

Figure 1: Two-Good Case
b

B
-∆

a

0
A+B

Outside good
-∆
A

category. Let goods (A1 , . . . , AJ ) denote different varieties in category A, with (B1 , . . . , BK )
denoting varieties in category B. Each consumer again values at most one unit from each
category.4 For example, a consumer might wish to have both home television service (category A) and home internet service (category B), but does not benefit sufficiently from a
second variety of either category of service to offset its price.
Each consumer has (conditional indirect) utilities for the standalone goods given by aj
and bk . As before, utilities are net of prices and vary randomly across consumers. Let H
denote the joint distribution of (a1 , . . . , aJ , b1 , . . . , bK ). We assume H has support RJ × RK
and is absolutely continuous. As a notational convention, we introduce a0 ≡ 0 and b0 ≡ 0.
The utility from purchasing A1 and B1 is superadditive, equal to
a1 + b 1 + ∆

(2)

where ∆ is nonnegative and, for simplicity, constant across consumers.5 For the remaining
combinations of goods, utilities are additive.6 Thus, by Proposition 1, for j 6= 1 and k 6= 1,
4

Formally this is a restriction on the utilities of consumer choices involving more than one unit of A or
B. This places no restriction on the joint distribution H defined below.
5

Our result extends to the case of more than one pair of goods with superadditive utilities by letting
a1 + b1 + ∆ represent a consumer’s maximum utility among all superadditive pairs and, in the proof,
considering j and k from the goods not part of any superadditive pair.
6

The asymmetry in superadditivity modeled here arises naturally when ∆ reflects, e.g., one-stop shopping,

3

Aj and Bk would be independent goods in a market without competing varieties. However,
in the multi-variety setting, superadditive utilities for A1 and B1 induce complementarity
between these Aj and Bk as well.7
Proposition 2. For all j 6= 1 and k 6= 1, Aj and Bk are strict gross complements iff ∆ > 0.
Proof. Take j 6= 1 and k 6= 1 and consider the effect of a change in the price of Bk on demand
for Aj (a symmetric argument applies to the effect of Aj ’s price on demand for Bk ). Aj is
purchased by a consumer if and only if both
aj ≥ max
aj 0
0

(3)

aj + max
bk0 ≥ a1 + b1 + ∆.
0

(4)

j

and
k

If ∆ = 0, (3) implies (4), so that the values of bk have no effect on demand for Aj . Now
suppose ∆ > 0. If the price of Bk rises by δ ∈ (0, ∆), all consumers for whom aj = maxj 0 aj 0 ,
bk = maxk0 bk0 , and
aj ∈ (a1 + b1 + ∆ − bk , a1 + b1 + ∆ − bk + δ)
will switch from purchasing Aj (along with Bk ) to purchasing A1 (along with B1 ). Our
support assumption guarantees that there is a positive measure of such consumers. No other
consumers will alter their choices with respect to Aj.

Figure 2 illustrates in the case J = K = 2. The figure shows choice regions in the
space of (a2 , b2 ), with (a1 , b1 ) held fixed at particular values, ā1 , b̄1 . In general different
values of (a1 , b1 ) create different graphs and product choices.8 For Figure 2 we have selected
ā1 , b̄1 such that the pair (A1 , B1 ) is preferred to the outside good and either A1 or B1
alone. Note that A2 is never purchased when a2 < 0; but when a2 > ā1 + ∆, A2 is purchased
regardless of b2 . Consumers in the lower left region choose (A1 , B1 ) ; those in the upper
right region choose (A2 , B2 ). The thick diagonal line segment represents the consumers who
are indifferent between the two pairs. Substitution between these pairs creates the strict
complementary between A2 and B2 .
bundle discounts, convex shipping discounts, or loyalty rewards. Less extreme asymmetry may sometimes
arise in the case of intrinsic consumption synergies between different varieties of A and B, e.g., due to varying
aesthetic or technological compatibility.
7

To reconcile these observations, consider the case J = K = 2 and note that one cannot construct the
total demand for good A2 from the demand for A2 , B2 , A2 B2 and outside option “all other goods.” For
example, the option A2 B1 would be then be part of the outside option.
8

Although Figure 2 has a form similar to Figure 2 in Gans and King (2006), there are important differences. Because Gans and King (2006) assume that every consumer purchases either A1 or A2 and either
B1 or B2 , a consumer chooses among only four options rather than 9 (more generally, (J + S) × (K + S),
where S denotes the number of pairs exhibiting superadditivity). And in their two-dimensional linear city
model, a single two-dimensional diagram fully characterizes the map from consumer types to the four choice
probabilities.

4

Figure 2: Four-Good Case.
b2

B2 only

ā1 + b̄1 + ∆
A2 and B2
A1 and B1

b̄1
ā1

0

ā1 + ∆

A2
and
B1

a2

References
Cournot, A. (1838): Researches into the Mathematical Principles of the Theory of Wealth.
New York: Macmillan, translation (1897) by Nathaniel Bacon.
Economides, N., and S. C. Salop (1992): “Competition and Integration Among Complements, and Network Market Structure,” The Journal of Industrial Organization, 40,
105–123.
Gans, J. S., and S. P. King (2006): “Paying for Loyalty: Product Bundling in Oligopoly,”
The Journal of Industrial Economics, 54, 43–62.
Gentzkow, M. (2007): “Valuing New Goods in a Model with Complementarities: Online
Newspapers,” American Economic Review, 97, 713–744.

5

