NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

ON A WORLD CLIMATE ASSEMBLY AND THE SOCIAL COST OF CARBON
Martin Weitzman
Working Paper 22813
http://www.nber.org/papers/w22813

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 2016

For helpful comments, but without implicating them in errors or interpretations, I am indebted to
Joseph Aldy, Geir Asheim, Daniel Bodansky, Patrick Bolton, John Broome, Dallas Burtraw,
Daniel Cole, Vincent Crawford, Stephen DeCanio, Duncan Foley, Jeffrey Frankel, Roger
Guesnerie, Gilbert Metcalf, Juan Moreno-Cruz, Ian Parry, John Roemer, Richard Schmalensee,
Joseph Shapiro, Thomas Sterner, Massimo Tavoni, Gernot Wagner, David Weisbach. The views
expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2016 by Martin Weitzman. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.

On a World Climate Assembly and the Social Cost of Carbon
Martin Weitzman
NBER Working Paper No. 22813
November 2016
JEL No. F51,H41,K23,Q54,Q58
ABSTRACT
This paper postulates the conceptually useful allegory of a futuristic “World Climate
Assembly” (WCA) that votes for a single worldwide price on carbon emissions via the basic
democratic principle of one-person one-vote majority rule. If this WCA framework can be
accepted in the first place, then voting on a single internationally-binding minimum carbon price
(the proceeds from which are domestically retained) tends to counter self-interest by incentivizing
countries or agents to internalize the externality. I attempt to sketch out the sense in which each
WCA-agent's extra cost from a higher emissions price is counter-balanced by that agent's extra
benefit from inducing all other WCA-agents to simultaneously lower their emissions in response
to the higher price. The first proposition of this paper derives a relatively simple formula relating
each emitter's single-peaked most-preferred world price of carbon emissions to the world “Social
Cost of Carbon” (SCC). The second and third propositions relate the WCA-voted world price of
carbon to the world SCC. I argue that the WCA-voted price and the SCC are unlikely to differ
sharply. Some implications are discussed. The overall methodology of the paper is a mixture of
mostly classical with some behavioral economics.

Martin Weitzman
Department of Economics
Harvard University
Littauer 313
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
mweitzman@harvard.edu

1

Introduction

Climate change is a global public-goods externality whose formal resolution requires an
unprecedented degree of international cooperation and coordination. This international
climate-change externality has frequently been characterized as the most di¢ cult public
goods problem that humanity has ever faced. I concentrate in this paper on carbon dioxide
(CO2 ), which is by far the most important greenhouse gas (GHG), but in principle the
discussion could be extended to emissions of all relevant GHGs. Throughout the paper I
blur the distinction between carbon dioxide and carbon because the two are linearly related.1
The core problem confronting the political economy of climate change is an inability to
coordinate global social outcomes to overcome the obstacles associated with free-riding on
a very important international public good. The ‘international’ part is signi…cant. Even
within a nation, it can be di¢ cult to resolve public-goods problems. But at least there is a
national government, with some governance structure, able to exert some control over externalities within its borders. A national government can (at least in principle) impose targets
on national public goods. With climate change there is no overarching global governance
mechanism capable of coordinating the actions necessary to overcome the international problem of free-riding. Instead, instruments of control, such as prices and/or quantities, must
be negotiated among sovereign nations.
My point of departure throughout this paper is the critical centrality of the international
free-rider problem as the cause of negotiating di¢ culties on climate-change emissions. Negotiators here are playing a game in which self-interested strategies are a crucial consideration.
Negotiating rules “frame”an important part of the game, and can thereby “frame”the form
that self-interest takes, for better or for worse.
Throughout this paper I basically argue that a uniform global tax-like price on carbon
emissions, whose revenues each country retains, can provide a focal point for a reciprocal
common commitment, whereas quantity targets, which do not nearly as readily present such
a single focal point, have a tendency to rely ultimately on individual commitments.2 As a
consequence, negotiating a uniform minimum global carbon tax or price can help to solve
the externality problem while individual quantity caps tend to incorporate it. I will try to
explain why negotiating or voting a uniform minimum carbon price embodies what I will
call a “countervailing force” against narrow self-interest by automatically incentivizing all
1

One ton of carbon equals 3.67 tons of carbon dioxide. My default unit is metric tons of carbon dioxide
(CO2 ).
2
The price-tax would be levied within the country that actually burns the carbon and releases the CO2
emissions into the atmosphere. For convenience, this carbon price-tax should probably be levied as far
upstream as possible within the country that actually combusts the carbon and produces the CO2 emissions.

2

negotiating parties to internalize, at least approximately, the global warming externality.
The basic challenge, as I see it, is to construct a relatively simple, familiar, transparent,
and acceptable one-dimensional international quid-pro-quo mechanism, which automatically
aligns world interests by embodying the principle of “I will if you will.”3
The style of this paper is a sometimes awkward blend of classical with some behavioral
economics, which seems unavoidable in discussing actual attempts to resolve the free-rider
problem associated with the international public good (or bad) of climate change. The
paper postulates and analyzes the conceptually useful allegory of a futuristic “World Climate
Assembly” (WCA) that votes for a single worldwide minimum price on carbon emissions
via the basic democratic principle of one-person one-vote majority rule. If this WCA
framework can be accepted in the …rst place (as a kind of a “worldwide plebiscite”), then
voting on a single internationally-binding minimum carbon price, the proceeds from which
are domestically retained, tends to counter self-interest by incentivizing countries or agents
to internalize the externality. Toward the end of the paper I discuss what might entice
countries to entertain a WCA-voted majority-rule price of carbon and why countries might
uphold the results of this WCA-voted outcome.4
Some of the themes presented here have been preliminarily explored in previous papers.5
The principal novelty of these notes is to develop relatively simple closed-form expressions relating each emitter’s single-peaked most-preferred world price of carbon to the world “Social
Cost of Carbon”(SCC) and also relating the WCA-voted price of carbon to the SCC. Using
some new results, the paper argues that the WCA-voted majority-rule carbon price and
the SCC are unlikely to di¤er sharply. An extremely simpli…ed numerical exercise roughly
supports this conclusion. Some implications of the paper’s main results are discussed.

2

Brief Background History of Climate Negotiations

From the actual entering into force of the Kyoto Protocol in February 2005 to the Paris
COP21 agreement of December 2015 (and perhaps afterwards), the world seemed mired in
what has been called “global warming gridlock.”6
3

For more about the intellectual coherence of this quid-pro-quo price mechanism, see MacKay, Cramton,
Ockenfels and Stoft (2015).
4
In particular, I discuss the possible relationship between this paper’s proposed WCA and the “climate
club” proposed by William Nordhaus (2015).
5
See Weitzman (2014) and Weitzman (2015).
6
Global Warming Gridlock is the title of a book by David Victor (2011), who popularized the phrase.
For more information on the Kyoto Protocol, see the Wikipedia entry for “Kyoto Protocol” and the many
other relevant references cited there. For more information on the Paris COP21 Accords, see the Wikipedia
entry for “Paris Agreement” and the many other relevant references cited there. A balanced evaluation of
COP21 is Keohane and Oppenheimer (2016).

3

The Kyoto agreement, negotiated in December 1997, began by dividing the world into
two huge blocs under the so-called “principle of common but di¤erentiated responsibility
and respected capabilities.” The “Annex I” bloc of countries included most of the world’s
high-income advanced industrial nations. The rest of the world, the “non-Annex I” bloc of
countries, included most of the world’s low-income developing nations. In a gesture towards
the principle of top-down coordination, the Annex I countries agreed to “legally binding”
average emissions reductions in 2008-2012 of approximately 5% relative to their baseline
emissions of 1990. The non-Annex I countries were not constrained by “legally binding”
emissions reductions, but otherwise agreed to cooperate.
In reality, the “legally binding”emissions reductions of the Kyoto Protocol were anything
but, because there was no provision for a mechanism to enforce compliance. There was no
provision for a mechanism to enforce compliance because, essentially, at the end of the day,
the parties did not really want to be bound by such a mechanism.
Almost from the beginning, the United States and Australia refused to ratify the Kyoto
treaty (ostensibly on the grounds that the non-Annex I countries were unfairly exempt from
responsibilities). Subsequently, Canada, Japan, and Russia pulled out of their part of the
agreement and refused to take on future commitments.
I think it is fair to say that the “spirit” of Kyoto was a top-down intended adherence
to something like the following scenario. The Annex I countries would agree to show good
faith …rst by voluntarily lowering their emissions in 2010 by about 5% relative to their 1990
emissions. Then, in a second stage, after around 10 years (approximately by 2012 or so),
the hope was that the non-Annex I countries would be impressed by the good faith e¤ort
shown over the previous decade by the Annex I countries and would hopefully join the e¤ort
by pledging something like, say, an emissions reduction target of about 5% in 2020 (relative
to 1990 emissions), while the Annex I countries would agree to a more stringent emissions
reduction target of, say, about 10%. In reality, no such second stage of synchronized
ratcheted-up commitments ever materialized.
The recently concluded Paris COP21 Agreement of December 2015 (by contrast with
Kyoto) made no formal distinction between developed and developing countries. In principle, all nations were treated symmetrically. The Paris Accord nominally covered countries
currently accounting for some 95% of world carbon dioxide emissions. Countries agreed
to make voluntary pledges, now named euphemistically (in realpolitik diplomatic language)
“Intended Nationally Determined Contributions”(INDCs). The INDCs aspired to be transparent in the sense that monitoring, reporting, and veri…cation would in principle be subject
to uniform standards. COP21 committed countries to report INDC compliance every …ve
years or so and to set new (and hopefully more ambitious) INDCs for the next …ve-year pe4

riod, a policy sometimes labeled “pledge and review.” There was also provision for possible
international linkages via the euphemistically named “Internationally Transferred Mitigation
Outcomes”(ITMOs).
All in all, it seems fair to say that the COP21 Accord, which is as yet not fully tried,
represents movement in a direction that may slow GHG emissions. A critically important
…rst step achieved in COP21 is the near-universal acceptance of the repeated …ve-year cycle:
pledge-verify-review-repledge-etc. At the end of the day, COP21 appears to me to be
essentially a gamble that the relatively modest voluntary bottom-up reductions in emissions
may buy enough time for the world to develop inexpensive future carbon-free technologies.
This seems a risky bet. (Remember, it is stabilized atmospheric stocks of GHGs at low levels
that matter for limiting climate change damages, which requires zero net ‡ows of emissions –
a vastly more ambitious goal than stabilizing GHG ‡ows per se.) In any event, it will take
maybe a decade or so to sort out the e¤ectiveness of the Paris COP21 Agreement. So far, at
least, the modest voluntary reductions in emissions seem not nearly enough to keep global
warming on a track below the stated goal of no more than a worldwide average temperature
increase of 2 C.7
The core weakness of the COP21 Paris Accord is essentially the same as the core weakness
of the Kyoto Protocol. Neither approach addresses the central problem of free-riding on
an international public good of great importance. With COP21, there is no penalty for
voluntarily setting under-ambitious national targets, and furthermore there is also no penalty
for non-compliance by a country with its own voluntary self-announced targets. The only
mechanism countering under-ambition or non-compliance is “blame and shame,”which seems
to me like a weak incentive for cutting back signi…cantly on the free-riding associated with
global carbon emissions.
I think the INDC label says a lot, even granting that the language was constrained by
realpolitik diplomatic compromises. The contributions are chosen by each country. These
COP21 contributions are intended and nationally-determined.8 It is hard for me to envision
how the labels could more strongly emphasize the strictly voluntary nature of the entire
exercise. This does not seem likely to overcome free-riding in the international public goods
problem that is central to climate change policy.
Consider the following hypothetical science-…ction-like thought experiment. In the U.S.
clean air amendments of 1990, the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) essentially
assigned the initial caps on sulfur dioxide (SO2 ) emissions to various power-plant emitters and
7

Much less the virtually-impossible 1:5 C goal also mentioned in the Paris COP21 agreement.
When a state formally submits its instrument of rati…cation to the UNFCC Secretariat, it is supposed
to include its NDC (no I). Even so, I think the term NDC is revealing.
8

5

allowed (or even encouraged) a cap-and-trade system. Suppose, instead of assigning initial
caps on SO2 emissions, the EPA allowed power plants or companies or states or regions to
voluntarily negotiate between themselves their own initial caps on SO2 emissions. Suppose
further that no penalties were imposed by the EPA for either under-ambitious voluntary
targets or under-ful…llment of these under-ambitious voluntary targets. Everyone would
conclude that this was a crazy idea that stood e¤ectively no realistic chance of curtailing
U.S. SO2 emissions. Yet this is essentially the way that COP21 proposed to deal with CO2
emissions on a worldwide scale via the INDC approach. Maybe this is an unfair comparison
because COP21 is much better than no international agreement at all. It remains to be
seen whether COP21 can evolve into a worldwide system with penalty-teeth that actually
“bite”but, again, it seems to me like a risky bet.
If the Paris COP21 approach fails to halt “dangerous anthropogenic global warming” –
in the form of a perception of an impending climate catastrophe that is felt on a worldwide
grassroots level – then I think there may be more pressure on creating a top-down international mechanism with actual sanctions that actually work. Desperate times demand
desperate measures. If climate change becomes su¢ ciently threatening to an “average”citizen of the world on a grassroots level, then public opinion may support relinquishing some
national sovereignty in favor of the greater good. Opportunities for comprehensive topdown solutions will likely arise (probably in response to future perceptions of climate-linked
catastrophes) and we should be ready beforehand by thinking through the consequences
now. This paper is futuristic in the sense that it is targeted towards the eventuality of a
meaningful top-down climate change treaty that goes well beyond the narrow volunteerism
of COP21.9

3

A World Climate Assembly

The inspiration behind the line of reasoning in this paper is the perception of a strong need for
some radical rethinking of international climate policy. As a possibly useful conceptual guide
for what negotiations might accomplish, I ask the reader to temporarily suspend disbelief by
considering what might happen in a futuristic “World Climate Assembly”(WCA) that votes
for a single harmonized worldwide minimum price on carbon emissions, which will apply for
everyone, via the basic democratic principle of one-person one-vote majority rule.10 In this
9

As will be explained in the concluding section, the WCA can be made to cohere with a top-down “climate
club” along the lines of Nordhaus (2015).
10
In principle, one could consider alternative voting rules, such as one vote per country, or one vote per
dollar of GDP, or so forth. In these alternatives there is no good analogue of the basic propositions of this
paper. Furthermore, I think the inherent democracy of one-person one-vote is an attractive feature in and

6

conceptualization, nations would vote along a single price dimension for their desired level
of emissions stringency on behalf of their citizen constituents, but the votes are weighted
by each nation’s population. An important part of this setup is that each nation retains
internally the proceeds from the internationally harmonized price-tax, which in the model
will be assumed to be revenue neutral for the nation as a whole.
The idea of a WCA should be viewed as an idealized attempted solution of the free-riding
problem. Right now, anything like a WCA seems hypothetical and hopelessly futuristic. It
presumes a state of mind where the climate-change problem has become su¢ ciently threatening on a grassroots level that world public opinion is ready to consider novel governance
structures, which involve relinquishing some national sovereignty in favor of the greater good.
What might be the justi…cation for a new international organization like the WCA? The
ultimate justi…cation is that big new problems may require big new solutions.
In a future world searching for some e¤ective solution to the important externality of
climate change, perhaps it is at least worth considering establishing a new organization along
the lines of a WCA. After all, even were the world to agree to focus on a one-dimensional
harmonized carbon price, it is useful to have some concrete fallback decision mechanism
behind vague “negotiations”because there are bound to be disagreements, whose resolution
is unclear, about what that common carbon price should be. I essentially assume that it
is in the interest of enough nations to forfeit their free-rider rights to pollute in favor of a
WCA voting solution of the global warming externality. This is truly a heroic assumption at
the present time because a WCA does not correspond to any currently-existing international
body. Taken less literally, the thought experiment of a hypothetical WCA can still help us to
concentrate our thinking and intuition on what negotiations should be trying to accomplish.
In other words, I am hoping that the …ction of a WCA might be useful in indicating what
might be the outcome of less-formal international negotiations.11
It could be objected that a “consensus” voting rule, not a majority voting rule, is employed in negotiations under the UN Framework on Climate Change. This “consensus”
voting rule has been widely interpreted as requiring near-unanimity. With such a restrictive
voting rule, signi…cant progress on resolving the global warming externality seems virtually
impossible. Surely, a less restrictive voting-like rule, such as majority rule, would render
of itself, thereby perhaps easing acceptance of WCA participation.
11
As a possible example of movement in this direction, the World Bank (2015) is currently attempting to
apply a worldwide SCC of $30/tCO2 in its program evaluations, rising over time to $80/tCO2 in 2050.
Several countries have adopted a carbon price for evaluating regulatory impacts of domestic policies –
including Canada, Finland, France, Germany, Italy, Mexico, Netherlands, Norway, Sweden, United States,
United Kingdom. The U.S. Government currently uses a carbon price of $40/tCO2 as a point estimate
for cost-bene…t analysis of environmental regulations (see Interagency Working Group on the Social Cost of
Carbon (2015)).

7

progress more likely, and is at least worth considering.
One aspect should perhaps be emphasized above all others at the outset. The global
warming externality problem is unlikely to be resolved without a binding agreement on, and
enforcement of, some overall formula for dividing emissions responsibilities among nations.
Voluntary altruism alone will almost surely not solve this international public-goods problem.
Of necessity there must be some impingement on national sovereignty in the form of an
international mechanism for determining targets, verifying ful…llment, and punishing noncompliance. The question then becomes: which collective-commitment frameworks and
formulas are more promising than which others? Again, any “answer” must come in an
unavoidable mixture of behavioral and classical economic analysis.
I try to explain why voting on (or, perhaps hopefully, even just negotiating) a uniform
minimum carbon price empowers what I will call a “countervailing force” against narrow
self-interest by automatically incentivizing all parties to internalize, at least approximately,
the global warming externality. Again, the basic challenge, as I see it, is to construct a
relatively simple, familiar, transparent, and acceptable one-dimensional international quidpro-quo mechanism, which automatically embodies the principle of “I will if you will.”

4

Theory of Negotiating a Uniform Carbon Price

In this paper I examine the theoretical properties of a natural one-dimensional focus on
negotiating a single worldwide binding price on carbon emissions, the proceeds from which
are domestically retained. For expositional simplicity, I identify this single binding price on
carbon as if it were an internationally-harmonized, nationally-collected carbon tax. At a
theoretical level of abstraction, I blur the distinction between a carbon price and a carbon
tax. However, in actuality, the important thing is acquiescence by each nation to a common
binding minimum price on carbon emissions, not the particular mechanism by which this
common binding minimum price is attained by a particular nation. At …rst I merely assume
the acquiescence by each nation to a common binding minimum price on carbon, the proceeds
from which are domestically retained. Toward the end of this paper I investigate mechanisms
and sanctions that might be used to induce or even compel membership in a World Climate
Assembly that votes for a single worldwide price on carbon emissions via the basic democratic
principle of one-person one-vote majority rule.12
A system of uniform national carbon taxes with revenues kept in the taxing country is a
12

In particular, my proposed WCA solution will be linked there to William Nordhaus’s (2015) proposed
idea of a “climate club.”

8

relatively simple and transparent way to achieve internationally-harmonized carbon prices.13
But it is not necessary for the conclusions of this paper. Nations or regions could meet
the obligation of a minimum price on carbon emissions by whichever internal mechanism
they choose – a tax, a cap-and-trade system, a hybrid system, or whatever else results in
an observable price of carbon not below the internationally-agreed minimum. I elaborate
further on this issue later.
The collected revenues from an internationally harmonized carbon tax remain within each
country, and could be used to o¤set other taxes or even be redistributed internally as equal
lump sum payments to each citizen.14 This, I think, is a desirable property. I will assume
that the net e¤ect of taxing carbon and rebating the tax returns domestically is essentially
revenue-neutral. By contrast, the revenues generated from an internationally harmonized
cap-and-trade system ‡ow as highly visible (and highly variable) external transfer payments
across national borders, which might be politically intolerable for countries required to pay
other countries very large (and highly variable) sums of taxpayer-…nanced money to buy
permits.15 We economists, I fear, have failed to su¢ ciently convince the public that there
is an important distinction between a self-collected national tax on carbon emissions and an
external tax-like price imposed as if by a third party, which siphons tax-like revenues away
from the home country.16
13

There is actually a fair-sized literature on a carbon-tax (or carbon-price) approach. See, e.g., Metcalf
and Weisbach (2009), Cooper (2010), Cramton, Ockenfels and Stoft (2015), Nordhaus (2013), and the many
further references cited in these works. In some of these references the question of exactly who collects the
carbon tax or price is left somewhat vague.
14
An attempt at an equitable redistribution was done in the Canadian province of British Columbia, which
is widely viewed as having a highly successful carbon-tax program. For a balanced evaluation of the B.C.
carbon tax experience, see, e.g., Harrison (2013).
15
Of course, persuading nations to commit to negotiating a uniform price of carbon in the …rst place might
well involve some “greenfund” equity transfers. Because the imposed “carbon tax” is internally retained
within each nation, then, at least for small changes, the green-fund transfers needed to o¤set increased
costs of compliance for price changes are deadweight-loss second-order Harberger triangles of the relatively
modest form ( P
Q)=2. The corresponding international transfers in a cap-and-trade system (which
can be either positive or negative, depending, among other things, on initial cap assignments) are …rst-order
immodest rectangles of the form P
Q. I am unsure about the signi…cance of this argument for non-small
changes. Goulder and Schein (2013), among others, discuss the potential for very large revenue ‡ows from
the nations purchasing allowances to the nations selling them.
16
Several economists have argued that retained carbon taxes o¤er a “double dividend” in the sense that
overall distortions from taxes on labor and capital can be reduced enough that there is a net bene…t after
wisely recycling carbon tax revenues. Other things being equal, this would be an argument in favor of a
higher price-tax. (For surveys on the literature of the double dividend, see Goulder (2002) or Jorgenson et
al (2013).) One could also argue the opposite position – that increased tax revenues will be squandered
by some governments, thereby yielding a “negative dividend.” Other things being equal, this would be an
argument in favor of a lower price-tax. In this paper I assume, as a starting point, net revenue neutrality
of a carbon tax. Later I indicate how, if there were a constant net tax-o¤set revenue-recycling e¤ect of
the type described here, it could be incorporated into the relevant damages coe¢ cient and all of the theory
would go through.

9

There already exists a sizable “traditional”literature comparing carbon-emissions taxes
with a cap-and-trade system.17 Arguments can be made on both sides. In my opinion,
one of the most important “traditional” advantages of carbon-emissions taxes over a capand-trade system is the elimination of price volatility, which is extremely poorly tolerated
by businesses, politicians, and the public, all of whom desire to rely on a known stable price
of CO2 emissions. Borenstein (2016) surveys existing cap-and-trade systems for carbon
emissions and concludes that price volatility is “a major ‡aw in cap-and-trade” because
“a major predictor of variation in GHG emissions is [the state of] the economy” and “the
probability of hitting a middle ground – where allowance prices are not so low as to be
ine¤ective and not so high as to trigger a political backlash –is very low.”18
In this paper I revisit the debate of “prices versus quantities” from a di¤erent, nontraditional, angle. Going back to basics, I would suggest that the instruments of negotiation
for helping to resolve the global warming externality by curtailing GHG emissions should
ideally possess three desirable properties.
1. Induce cost-e¤ectiveness.
2. Be of one dimension based on a “natural”focal point to facilitate …nding an agreement
with relatively low transaction costs.
3. Embody “countervailing force” against narrow self-interested free-riding by automatically incentivizing all negotiating parties to internalize the externality via a simple transparent formula that embodies a common climate commitment based on principles of reciprocity,
quid-pro-quo, and I-will-if-you-will.
Using these three desirable theoretical properties as criteria, I will brie‡y compare and
contrast an idealized binding harmonized tax-like price with an idealized binding cap-andtrade system.
On the …rst desirable property, in principle both a carbon price and tradable permits
achieve cost-e¤ectiveness (provided agreement can be had in the …rst place).
The second desirable property (low dimensionality) argues in favor of a one-dimensional
harmonized tax-like carbon price over an n-dimensional harmonized cap-and-trade system
among n nations. Alas, this argument is elusively di¢ cult to formulate rigorously, or even to
17

See, e.g., the survey by Goulder and Schein (2013) and the many further references they cite. Ease of
administration (and avoidance of stealing) is one consideration that emerges from this literature. Relative
price stability is another. A third desideratum is minimal payments traversing international boundaries,
because such payments potentially represent a politically explosive issue.
18
The in‡uence of so-called “complementary policies” (such as aggressive sector-based targets like low
carbon fuel standards) can play a role in making the price elasticity of demand for carbon allowances low,
resulting in large price ‡uctuations within a cap-and-trade system. In the presence of a binding cap-andtrade regime, aggressive sector-based targets can have the perverse e¤ect of relocating CO2 emissions to
other sectors, but not reducing net total emissions. See, e.g., the discussion in Goulder and Schein (2013).

10

articulate coherently. My argument here is necessarily, at least in part, behavioral or psychological, and relies on empirical counterexamples. In this situation two important empirical
counterexamples are the breakdown of the quantity-based top-down Kyoto approach and the
under-ambitious quantity-based bottom-up “intended nationally determined contributions”
actually volunteered by most nations under the COP21 Paris Accord.
With n di¤erent national entities, a quantity-based treaty involves assigning n di¤erent
emissions quotas (whether tradable or not). Treaty making can be viewed as a coordination
game with n di¤erent players. Such a game can have multiple solutions, often depending delicately on the setup, what is being assumed, and, most relevant here, the choice of negotiating
instrument. In the case of Kyoto, the world had in practice arrived at a bad quantity-based
free-rider solution that essentially devolved to regional volunteerism. The ultimate outcome
of the COP21 Paris Accord remains to be seen, but so far the INDCs actually volunteered
by the parties seem underwhelming, even leaving aside the near-impossibility of achieving
the stated goal of keeping global warming below 2 C.
Thomas Schelling introduced and popularized the notion of a focal point in game-theoretic
negotiations.19 As applied to the setup of this paper, a focal point of an n-party coordination
game is some salient feature that reduces the dimensionality of the problem and simpli…es
the negotiations by limiting bargaining by the parties to some manageable subset, hopefully
of one dimension. The basic idea is that by limiting bargaining to a salient focus, there may
be more hope of reaching a good outcome. In a somewhat circular de…nition, a focal point
is anything that provides a focus of convergence. The “naturalness”or “salience”of a focal
point is an important aspect of Schelling’s argument that is di¢ cult to de…ne rigorously and
is ultimately intuitive because, ultimately, a focal point is whatever people believe is a focal
point. While I think that Schelling’s focal-point argument is a very important behavioralpsychological insight into how the world works, it is di¢ cult to model rigorously, and actual
applications seem to be as much of an art as a science.20
The concept of “transaction cost” is associated with the work of Ronald Coase.21 The
19

Schelling (1960). See also the special 2006 issue of the Journal of Economic Psychology devoted to
Schelling’s “psychological decision theory,” especially the introduction by Colman (2006). Three of the
seven articles in this issue concerned aspects of focal points, testifying to the lasting in‡uence of the concept.
20
David Weisbach suggested to me the following analogy for judging whether a focal point is more or
less “natural.” Consider cap-and-trade compared with a price-tax. In each case, the natural focal point is
equality for the salient feature of the respective regulatory system. For cap-and-trade, the natural focal point
is equal per-capita assignment of allowances. This would involve very large taxpayer-…nanced trans-border
revenue ‡ows from the nations purchasing allowances to the nations selling them, which would generate
massive con‡ict and has no realistic chance of being accepted. For a price-tax, the natural focal point is
“equal tax rate, keep the revenues,” which by comparison seems much more tolerable. This is not a proof,
but I believe that Weisbach’s insight is a helpful behavioral-economic intuition.
21
Coase himself apparently did not invent or even use the term “transaction cost” but he prominently
employed the concept. For an application of the transaction cost approach to controlling greenhouse gas

11

basic idea is that n parties to a negotiation can be prevented from attaining a socially
desirable outcome by the costs of transacting the agreement among themselves. One could
argue behaviorally that, other things being equal, transaction costs increase monotonically
with the number of parties n.
Negotiating a one-dimensional uniform price with single-peaked preferences has the signi…cant additional property of allowing a simple majority-rule voting equilibrium in the form
of the median-voter result of Duncan Black. Importantly here, the one-dimensional case of a
single price (with single-peaked preferences) avoids the Arrow impossibility theorem, which
states, loosely speaking, that no consistent social choice mechanism exists for making group
decisions involving multiple dimensions.22
In the case of international negotiations on climate change, I believe that both Schelling’s
concept of a salient focal point and Coase’s concept of transaction costs (as well as Black’s
median-voter result and Arrow’s impossibility theorem) can be used as informal arguments to
support negotiating a single harmonized carbon price whose proceeds are nationally rebated.
Put directly, it is easier to negotiate one price than n quantities. The “law of one price”is
already a familiar salient feature of competitive markets, whereas there is no such thing as
a “law of one quantity.”23 I cannot defend the salience of one price rigorously. At the end
of the day, this is more of a plausible behavioral conjecture than a rigorous theorem.
The third desirable property is that the instrument or instruments of negotiation should
embody a “countervailing force” against narrow free-riding self-interest by incorporating
incentives that automatically internalize the externality. Such incentives should ideally take
the form of a simple, reciprocal, common climate commitment based on the quid-pro-quo
principle of “I will if you will.” I believe this third property is arguably the most important
property of all. This “countervailing force” property is inherently built into a price-based
harmonized system of emissions charges, but it is absent from a quantity-based international
cap-and-trade system, at least as traditionally formulated.
If I am assigned a cap on emissions, then it is in my own narrow free-riding self-interest to
want my cap to be as large as possible (regardless of whether or not my cap will be tradable
as an allowance permit). The self-interested part of me wants maximal leniency for myself.
Other than altruism, there is no countervailing force on the other side encouraging me to
lower my desired emissions cap because of the externality bene…ts I will be bestowing on
others.
emissions, see Libecap (2013).
22
Mas-Collell, Whinston, and Green (1995) contains a textbook treatment of the Black median-voter result
and the Arrow impossibility theorem.
23
One could also try to argue that one price is “fair” in the sense that it induces equal (marginal) e¤ort
among the parties. I am unsure how convincing this argument is, but it might carry some weight.

12

Within a nation, the government assigns binding caps. But among sovereign nations,
binding caps must be negotiated. I believe this is a crucial distinction for the success
or failure of a cap-and-trade regime. A quantity-based international system fails because
no one has an incentive to internalize the externality and everyone has the self-interested
incentive to free-ride. What remains is essentially an erratic pattern of altruistic individual
volunteerism that is far from a socially optimal resolution of the problem.
An internationally-harmonized, domestically-collected, carbon price is di¤erent. If the
price were imposed on me alone, then I would wish it to be as low as possible so as to limit
my abatement costs. But when the price is uniformly imposed, it embodies a countervailing
force that internalizes the externality for me. Counterbalancing my desire for the price to
be low (in order to limit my abatement costs) is my desire for the price to be high so that
other nations will restrict their emissions, thereby increasing my bene…t from worldwide total
carbon abatement. A binding uniform minimum price of carbon emissions has a built-in
self-enforcing mechanism that countervails free-riding.
In previous work, I have tried to model formally the role of this third “countervailing
force” property of an internationally-harmonized but nationally-collected carbon price.24 I
constructed a basic model indicating an exact sense in which each agent’s extra cost from
a higher international minimum emissions price is counter-balanced by that agent’s extra
bene…t from inducing all other agents to simultaneously lower their emissions via the higher
international minimum price. The key insight from this way of looking at things is that in
voting on (or more generally negotiating) a universal minimum carbon price, various nations
are, to a greater or lesser degree, internalizing the externality. Loosely speaking, an “average”nation is fully internalizing the externality because its extra cost from a higher emissions
price is exactly o¤set by its extra bene…t from inducing all other nations to simultaneously
lower their emissions via the higher price.
This paper extends previous work by deriving a relatively simple formula that relates each
emitter’s single-peaked most-preferred world price of carbon to the world e¢ ciency-price of
carbon emissions (aka SCC). Also new here is a detailed analysis of the relationship between
the WCA-voted price of carbon and the world SCC. Some implications for majority-rule
voting in a WCA are discussed.
24

See Weitzman (2014, 2015).

13

5

The Model

The formulation here is at a heroic level of abstraction.25 I wave away innumerable “practical” considerations to focus on a theoretical model. I beg the reader’s indulgence for a
willing suspension of disbelief while the basic argument is being developed.
The analysis is made cleanest and most transparent when the fundamental unit is the
person, so that everything is normalized per capita. In reality, of course, people belong
to some larger entity, here called a “nation,” that (hopefully or presumably) acts on their
behalf with respect to carbon price negotiations, enforcement, and revenue recycling. The
nation here is an elastic concept, since for the purposes of this paper it might be more
appropriate to consider a regional bloc like the European Union as if it comprised a single
nation.26 In this paper it is not really necessary to assume that all of the individuals in one
nation (or jurisdiction) are the same.27 However, it is easiest to start o¤ by conceptualizing
that all of the people belonging to one nation are identical individuals whose tastes and
technology are representative of that nation. Thus, for clarity, I am e¤ectively assuming
that a representative agent stands in for the nation. For an individual belonging to a nation
everything – emissions, costs, damages – is expressed in per-capita terms for that nation.
(Inversely, one could take costs and damages on the national level as given primitives and
impute to each citizen the corresponding per-capita costs and damages as a function of percapita abatement or emissions, being careful to ensure that the imputed per-capita costs and
damages aggregate consistently to the given national costs and damages.28 )
The nation here is e¤ectively an entity that enforces the imposition of an internationallyharmonized minimum carbon price on the CO2 it emits and recycles internally the domestic
revenues raised by the tax-like price. I assume that this recycling is e¢ cient, as if by revenueneutral lump sum internal transfers, so there is zero net national loss (or gain) from the
internally-imposed carbon price per se. (The only real cost of a carbon price is the increased
cost of emitting less carbon.) Additionally, when it comes to voting or negotiating a carbon
price for some particular time period, the nation e¤ectively votes or negotiates on behalf
25

The general formulation of this section is an adaptation and expansion of the framework in Weitzman
(2014) to this paper. The really novel contribution of these notes comes in the following sections of the
paper, which obtain neat, intuitive, closed-form expressions for the case of linear approximations.
26
For some purposes it might be appropriate to consider states or provinces of a large country as the
relevant entity.
27
For example, the theory would go through if the nation were subdivided into independent voting blocs
with population-weighted voting power in the WCA.
28
When it comes to quantifying bene…ts or costs, it is unclear to me whether it is easier to think primarily
in terms of representative agents converted to nations or nations converted to representative agents. In
any event, the two approaches are essentially equivalent. However, as noted, the analysis and notation are
made cleanest and most transparent when the fundamental unit is the person and everything is expressed
in per-capita terms.

14

of its citizens in accordance with their preferences. These assumptions are vulnerable, but
they may make sense as an abstraction and can serve as a point of departure for further
discussion.
The total world population is m. Each person is indexed by i = 1; 2; :::; m. In what
follows I abstract away from dynamics in favor of a static-‡ow analysis. I assume agents
can convert their wishes about desired stock levels of GHGs into wishes about corresponding
GHG ‡ows for the period under consideration.29
Let Ei stand for the level of carbon emissions of person-agent i. The cost of attaining
emissions level Ei for person i is given by the function Ci (Ei ), where Ci0 (Ei ) < 0 and Ci00 (Ei ) >
0. If the price on carbon emissions is P , then the pro…t-maximizing response (or reaction
function, or “demand for carbon emissions”) of individual i is Ei (P ), where, for each i =
1; 2; :::m, agent i is minimizing over Ei the expression P Ei +Ci (Ei ), resulting in the …rst-order
condition
Ci0 (Ei (P )) = P:
(1)

The total worldwide emissions level corresponding to (1) is
E(P ) =

m
X

Ei (P ):

(2)

i=1

Condition (1) holding for all i for the same price P guarantees worldwide cost-e¤ectiveness,
meaning that the total world emissions E(P ) are being produced at least total cost.
The damage of total worldwide emissions level E for agent i is given by the damages
function Di (E), where Di0 (E) > 0 and Di00 (E) 0.
The loss to agent i of an imposed carbon price of P is
Li (P ) = Di (E(P )) + Ci (Ei (P ));

(3)

where the price-tax of P does not appear directly in (3) because it is assumed to be recycled
in a revenue-neutral fashion.
29

This is not a trivial assumption. Intuitively, it seems to me to be OK for purposes of simpli…ed modeling
to initially consider the static case as representing a single period in a string of periods. However, I must
confess that I do not know exactly how to rigorously convert a dynamic multi-period analysis into a static
reduced-form one-period analysis.

15

The world social loss of imposing a carbon price P is
L(P ) =

m
X
i=1

m
X
Li (P ) =
[Di (E(P )) + Ci (Ei (P ))]:

(4)

i=1

The world SCC is the price P that minimizes the world social loss function (4).30 The
corresponding …rst-order condition can be expressed as an analogue of the classic Samuelson
public-goods condition for a situation where everyone is simultaneously a consumer and
a producer of the public bad. This analogue of the Samuelson Pareto-e¢ ciency formula
appropriate to the setup here is
P =

m
X

Di0 (E(P ));

(5)

i=1

where (1) holds simultaneously for each i at P = P .
It should be noted that the world SCC (or, equivalently, the world e¢ ciency price of
carbon P ) loses much of its welfare justi…cation in the case of climate change because it is
di¢ cult to argue, for such a unique one-o¤ event involving present and future generations,
that the winners might actually compensate the losers by lump-sum transfers, which would
ensure that the Pareto-e¢ cient solution is actually attained. Nevertheless, such a Paretoe¢ cient price P has an almost iconic status within economics and it will be fruitful to
compare it, e.g., with the majority-rule voting outcome of a WCA. Thus, I am thinking of
the world SCC of P as a benchmark or point of departure for what follows.
Consider next what is the optimal level of an internationally-harmonized carbon price
from the narrow perspective of agent i. Because revenues from the carbon price-tax are
nationally collected and assumed to be e¢ ciently recycled by the nation to which i belongs,
there is presumed to be no net tax burden per se. (The only real burden to i here is the
cost Ci incurred by obeying condition (1)).
The worldwide emissions-price level that i
would most prefer solves the problem of minimizing over P the loss function Li (P ) given
by expression (3). The solution Pi satis…es the …rst-order condition L0i (Pi ) = 0, which, from
(3), can be rewritten as
Di0 (E(Pi )) E 0 (Pi ) =

Ci0 (Ei (Pi )) Ei0 (Pi ):

(6)

Preferences of i for a worldwide price P are given by the convex loss-function expression
(3). It can readily be shown (from convexity of Di (E) and Ci (Ei )) that preferences of i for
30
Note that I am de…ning the SCC as the shadow price of carbon in the Pareto-optimal solution. Sometimes
alternative de…nitions of the SCC are based on given trajectories, such as “business as usual.”

16

price P are single peaked with peak value P = Pi .
Use equation (1) to substitute Pi for Ci0 (Ei (Pi )) in (6) and rewrite the resulting expression as
E 0 (Pi )
Pi = Di0 (E(Pi ))
:
(7)
Ei0 (Pi )
If all m agents are identical, then E 0 (Pi ) = mEi0 (Pi ) for all i and (7) becomes Pi =
mDi0 (Pi ) or Di0 (Pi ) = Pi =m for all i. Furthermore, with identical agents, all Di0 (P ) are
equal for all i and all Pi are equal for all i. Some re‡ection reveals that these symmetry
conditions, when plugged into (5), imply that Pi = P for all i. In this identical-agent situation, therefore, a majority-voting rule automatically resolves the social coordination problem
(since every agent i would vote for Pi = P ), resulting in a …rst-best Pareto optimum.
For the more general case where agents di¤er, majority-rule voting does not necessarily
yield the …rst-best Pareto optimum. In previous work (Weitzman (2014)) I attempted
to elaborate further the meaning and implications of condition (7). Unfortunately, the
exposition there was more clumsy and less complete than it needed to be. In the next section
I will make two basic linearity assumptions that seem to me to be relatively innocuous. These
linearity assumptions will allow for a closed-form expression of (7) that is more elegant and
easier to interpret in terms of the linear parameters. This closed-form expression will clarify
the relationship of the world price that i would most prefer, Pi , to the world SCC= P , and
will further clarify the relationship between the WCA-voted price and the SCC=P .

6

Two Linearity Assumptions

To make further progress on understanding most clearly the expression (7), we need to put
some more structure on the problem. I now make two simplifying linearity assumptions that
will allow a closed-form expression in place of (7). These two linearity assumptions might be
accepted at face value, or treated as Taylor-theorem approximations that hold increasingly
accurately in the neighborhood of small changes. In any event, I believe the two linearity
assumptions represent only a little sacri…ce of generality relative to the clari…cation and
understanding they bring to the more general expression (7).
The …rst assumption is that, throughout the period for which the analysis is intended to
apply, damages are linear in emissions within the relevant range, having the reduced form
Di (E) =

17

i

+ di E;

(8)

where di > 0. Equation (8) means that the marginal damage for each agent i is a constant
Di0 (E) = di

(9)

for some positive coe¢ cient di that is allowed to di¤er for di¤erent i.31 I feel that (9) is
reasonably accurate for small time periods because emissions are a ‡ow, whereas damages
are a function of the accumulated stock of GHGs, and for carbon dioxide the ‡ow-stock ratio
is small over a …ve or ten year period. Note that the marginal damage coe¢ cients fdi g can
di¤er among di¤erent agents i, while still being constant for each particular agent i.
An immediate consequence of (9) combined with (5) is that
P =

m
X

(10)

di ;

i=1

independent of the cost functions {Ci (Ei )}. This decomposition property (that the global
e¢ ciency-price of carbon is independent of emissions costs) greatly simpli…es the analysis
without, I hope, losing too much realism.
Another immediate consequence of (9), this time from combining it with (7), is that
E 0 (Pi )
Ei0 (Pi )

Pi = d i

;

(11)

for all cost functions {Ci (Ei )}.
The reaction function Ei (P ) relating emissions of agent i to an imposed carbon price of
P is given implicitly by condition (1). The second simplifying linearity assumption is that,
throughout the period for which the analysis is intended to apply, this reaction (or “demand
for emissions”) function Ei (P ) in P is of the linear reduced form
Ei (P ) =

i

si P;

(12)

where i and the reaction coe¢ cient si are both positive and the relevant range of P here is
0 P
i =si .
The linearity assumption (12) is essentially ad hoc, but it might be defended as a sim31

If there were a constant net tax-o¤set revenue-recycling enhancement (or diminution) per unit of tax for
i, it could be incorporated into the marginal damages coe¢ cient di and all of the theory would go through.
The “double dividend” e¤ectively makes di higher, whereas the “negative dividend” e¤ectively makes di
lower. Otherwise, the theory goes through.

18

plifying approximation that gives some valuable insights. Note from (12) that
Ei0 (P ) =

(13)

si ;

so that the reaction of Ei to a unit change in price is conveyed by si , which, while constant
for each given i, is allowed to di¤er for di¤erent i. The reaction coe¢ cient si is a measure
of the (price) sensitivity of emissions Ei ( P ) to a change in price P .
Comparing (12) with (1), linearity in P of the reaction function (12) is equivalent to a
marginal cost function Ci0 (Ei ) that is linear in emissions level Ei , of the form
Ci0 (Ei ) =

Ei

i

(14)

si

throughout the relevant range 0
Ei
i . Comparing (12) with (14) shows that the
coe¢ cient si does double duty. In (12), si is interpretable as a sensitivity-reaction coe¢ cient
to price changes. In (14), 1=si is interpretable as a measure of the marginal cost of emissions
reductions. Other things being equal, when si is large (small) the marginal cost of emissions
reduction is small (large).
A third, and perhaps the most important, interpretation of the price-sensitivity coe¢ cient
si is that it represents the distortionary deadweight loss associated with a positive carbon
price-tax change. If the price-tax change is P , then, from (12), the induced emissions
change is Ei = si P . The associated deadweight loss here is ( E)( P )=2, or
( P )2
2

DW Li ( P ) = si

:

(15)

Equation (15) is the appropriate version here of the famous Ramsey-type principle that
raising taxes on a relatively elastically-demanded good is more distortionary and more damaging than raising taxes on a relatively inelastically-demanded good.
The worldwide average sensitivity-reaction coe¢ cient to a change in price is
s

Pm

i=1

si

m

:

(16)

The worldwide average marginal damage coe¢ cient is
d

Pm

i=1

m

di

:

(17)

This concludes the description of the linearity assumptions, which will be used to simplify
greatly the analysis of (7) by expressing Pi in terms of a readily-interpretable closed-form
19

equation.

7

A First Main Result

A new result in this paper is the following proposition.
Proposition 1 Under the linearity assumptions (8) and (12), the relationship between the
world carbon-price level Pi that i would most prefer and the world SCC of P is given by the
expression
s
di
:
(18)
Pi = P
si
d
Proof. Start by rewriting terms in the right hand side of equation (11) as functions of the
linearity parameters.
From (13), it follows that
Ei0 (Pi ) = si ;
(19)
From (2), it follows that
0

E (Pi ) =

m
X

Ei0 (Pi ):

i=1

which, when combined with (16) and (19), can be rewritten as
E 0 (Pi ) =

m s:

(20)

Combining (17) with (10) implies
P = m d:

(21)

Multiply numerator and denominator in the right hand side of (11) by d.
Then use
(19), (20), and (21) to replace symbols in the right hand side of the resulting expression.
This yields a main new result of this paper, expressing Pi in terms of the closed-form equation
(18).
Equation (18) is a relatively clean and simple expression. Basically, the world carbonprice level Pi that i would most prefer is the world e¢ ciency-price of carbon P scaled up
or down by the two multiplicative factors di =d (representing i’s proportional deviation of its
damages from average damages) and s=si (representing one over i’s proportional deviation
of its price sensitivity from average price sensitivity).
If there is an “average” agent j with dj = d and sj = s, then (18) implies that Pj =P
From this it follows immediately that in the hypothetical extreme case where all agents are
20

identical, then Pi =P for all i. In the general case, Pi is “adjusted” from P by the two
multiplicative scaling factors di =d and ( s=si ) that appear in (18).
Note from (18) what agent i is not doing here. Agent i is not equating its marginal cost
of abatement Ci0 to the narrow marginal bene…t from one less unit of its own emissions di ,
which would be the analogue here to the condition for a narrowly-self-interested voluntary
provision of public goods, and which would result in a free-riding way-too-low provision of the
public good. Instead, as will be explained, agent i is making some kind of a partial-goldenrule-like imputation of what would be the corresponding world e¢ ciency-price of carbon if
all other agents had the same parameter values as i, namely di and si .
For the sake of decomposing the meaning of (18), suppose hypothetically that all of
the price-sensitivity coe¢ cients are identical, so that s=si for all i. Then equation (18)
simpli…es to
di
Pi = P
:
(22)
d
Expression (22) means that when all price-sensitivity coe¢ cients si of the agents are the
same, then the ratio Pi =P is exactly equal to the ratio di =d. Here Pi is “adjusted”from P
by the multiplicative scaling factor di =d, which makes sense. Thus, Pi di¤ers multiplicatively
from P in (22) by the extent to which di di¤ers multiplicatively from d. Higher (lower)
values of marginal damages di –relative to the worldwide average value d –cause agent i to
want relatively higher (lower) values of its most-preferred world price Pi :
Making use of (21), equation (22) can alternatively be expressed as
(23)

Pi = mdi :

Equation (23) is describing what the e¢ ciency-price of carbon would be in a hypothetical
world where everyone has the same marginal damage as i, namely di . The favorite world
price of agent i is as if i is behaving like a partially-benevolent dictator by imposing its own
marginal damage di on the rest of the world and calculating what the world e¢ ciency-price
mdi would then be. E¤ectively, the favorite price Pi of agent i is its own marginal damage
scaled up by m into a kind of partial-golden-rule-like imputation of what would then be the
corresponding world e¢ ciency-price of carbon if everyone had marginal damage di .
Next, and again for the sake of decomposing the meaning of (18), this time suppose
hypothetically that all of the marginal damages of the agents are identical, so that di = d for
all i. Then expression (18) simpli…es to
s
si

Pi = P

21

:

(24)

Expression (24) means that when all of the marginal damages of all of the agents are
the same, then the ratio Pi =P must be adjusted by the ratio s=si . Even though marginal
damages are identical, here Pi is “adjusted”from P =mdi =md by the multiplicative scaling
factor s=si . Thus, Pi di¤ers multiplicatively from P here by the extent to which s di¤ers
multiplicatively from si . An interpretation of (24) (in light of (15)) is along the following
lines. When the price-sensitivity coe¢ cient si is relatively low, the self-imposed carbon
tax is less distortionary with lower deadweight loss and, other things being equal, agent i
therefore favors a relatively higher value of Pi . Conversely, when the reaction coe¢ cient si
is relatively high, the self-imposed carbon tax is more distortionary with higher deadweight
loss and, other things being equal, agent i therefore favors a relatively lower value of Pi .
Plug (21) and (16) into (24) (along with di = d for all i). This yields the expression
Pi = d

Pm

i=1

si

si

= d

dE
dEi

:

(25)

P
From (25), the factor ( si =si ) is in the form of a multiplier indicating the ratio of the
change in total global emissions dE=dP divided by the change in agent i’s emissions dEi =dP ,
along the lines of equation (11). For each unit positive change in its preferred price, agent i
is “spending”the cost consequences of abating an extra amount dEi =dP but it is “buying”
the bene…t of worldwide total emissions abatement dE=dP . Equation (25) signi…es that
agent i is here reacting by applying a multiplier that scales up the e¤ect of its own narrow
marginal cost by however many times greater is the value of the world’s marginal emissions
response (to a price change) than i’s own marginal emissions response (to a price change).
This concludes the discussion of the meaning of the basic formula (18). Hopefully the
reader now has some sense of what determines the preferred worldwide price Pi of i and its
relationship to the world SCC (aka e¢ ciency price of carbon) P . Equation (18) conveys
an exact sense in which an internationally harmonized but nationally retained carbon price
is internalizing the global warming externality for agent i. The basic underlying idea is that,
at its preferred worldwide price Pi , each agent i’s extra cost from a higher uniform emissions
price is counterbalanced, via (18), by that same agent’s lessened damage from inducing all
other agents to simultaneously lower their emissions in response to that higher price.
The next section discusses some aspects of the application of (18) to the outcome of
majority-rule voting in a World Climate Assembly.

22

8

Relating the WCA-voted Price to the SCC

Let Z represent a collection of m values of fZi g for i = 1; 2; :::; m.
e Thus,
fZi g will be denoted (using the ‘tilde’symbol) as Z.
Ze

The median value of

median (fZi g):

In what follows, I will make use of the mathematical property that if Zi > 0 for all i,
then
g
1
1
= :
(26)
Z
Ze

The World Climate Assembly (WCA) votes on pairwise alternatives for the desired level
of a uniform carbon price, based on the principle of one person, one vote. By the median
voter theorem, the outcome of WCA voting is the median value of fPi g, denoted Pe, where
Pi is given by (18).32 It is not actually necessary to do multiple pairwise voting on multiple
binary price alternatives. A shortcut is available. If each agent i submits its most-preferred
price Pi , then Pe can be centrally calculated as the median of the centrally collected values of
fPi g. This centrally calculated value of Pe will defeat by majority vote any other proposed
price P .
The median voter result signi…es that half of the world’s population wants a uniform
price of carbon greater than the WCA-majority-voted Pe, whereas the other half of the world’s
population wants a uniform price of carbon less than the WCA-majority-voted Pe. Intuitively
or heuristically, this might be considered as a not-bad stand-alone outcome in and of itself
for a world where we are unsure in the …rst place what is the best actual welfare measure.33
The following proposition helps elucidate the relationship between Pe and P .
Proposition 2 The WCA-voted majority-rule price Pe can be expressed as
Pe = P

s
d

g
s
:
d

(27)

Proof. From (18) and the median voter theorem, the outcome of WCA majority rule Pe can
32

It was already noted that preferences of i for price P are single peaked with peak value P = Pi .
Recall that the world e¢ ciency-price of carbon P loses much of its welfare justi…cation anyway in the
case of climate change because it is di¢ cult to argue (for such a unique one-o¤ intergenerational event)
that the winners will actually compensate the losers by lump-sum transfers, which would ensure that the
Pareto-e¢ cient solution P is actually attained. One could attempt to argue on a heuristic basis that, in
such a situation, the median voting-equilibrium price Pe is approximately as good a welfare measure as the
SCC of P – just because of the attractive symmetry that half of the world wants a higher price and the
other half wants a lower price.
33

23

be expressed as
Pe = P

s
d

Making use of (26) yields the following equation
g
d
=1
s

g
d
:
s

g
s
:
d

(28)

(29)

Plug (29) into (28), yielding (27)
In the most general case, the value of the WCA-voted outcome Pe given by (27) depends
on the distribution of the coe¢ cients fdi g and fsi g and how they interact. In principle,
almost anything could emerge. Nevertheless, I think there is some “hint”from (27) that Pe
might be tolerably close to P . After all, (s=d) is some (imperfect) measure of the central
] is also some (imperfect) measure of the central tendency of
tendency of fsi =di g, while (s=d)
fsi =di g. With a bit of wishful thinking, these two (imperfect) measures of central tendency
might almost equal each other, in which case they almost cancel each other in (27) and Pe is
unlikely to be too-too sharply di¤erent from P .34
I now look at some special cases of the distribution of fdi g and fsi g that will give more
precise outcomes. The easiest case is where all agents are identical, in which case (27)
implies that Pi =Pe= P .
Consider a situation where there is more variability in fdi g relative to the variability of
fsi g. As an extreme case, suppose that all price-sensitivity response coe¢ cients fsi g are
the same, so that s=si for all i. In this case (28) becomes
!
de
:
d

Pe = P

(30)

From (30), the majority-rule carbon price Pe is close to the world SCC (aka world e¢ ciency
price of carbon) P when the median marginal damage de is close to the mean marginal
damage d. This is as good a result as one might hope for from a voting solution. The mean
and the median are both measures of central tendency. At this level of abstraction I …nd
it di¢ cult to argue whether the mean marginal damage of emissions per capita should be
greater or less than the median marginal damage of emissions per capita. If the two are equal
34

I have found it very di¢ cult to say much more analytically about the expression (27) because it is
di¢ cult to decompose it further in the general case. As noted, there is some “hint”from (27) that Pe might
be tolerably close to P because the two (imperfect) measures of central tendency might cancel each other.
To make further progress on understanding condition (27), I turn to special cases and a very crude numerical
example.

24

in (30), then majority voting for Pe obtains the world SCC or e¢ ciency price of carbon P . If
the two are unequal, the analysis provides a measure of how far away from Pareto optimality
is majority rule. Of course this is just a model with quite restrictive assumptions, but in
a world of stalemated negotiations I …nd attractive the image of a WCA-style populationweighted median carbon price as being a useful point of departure that holds out some
prospect of coming “close enough”to the world SCC (aka world e¢ ciency price of carbon).
Back to the more general case, I now attempt to examine the outcome of a speci…c type
of systematic randomness in this framework. Suppose the ratios fsi =di g are independently
identically distributed (iid) random variables. Strictly speaking, I am abusing terminology
here because the result of the following proposition depends on the law of large numbers and
would only hold in the limit of a large sample. De…ne
xi =

si
;
di

(31)

meaning that xi is the ratio of si over di , which will be treated as a random variable.
Proposition 3 Suppose the following data generating process (dgp). The random variables
xi and di are each (separately) iid and
si

di

xi :

(32)

Then (in the limit of a large sample size)
x
:
x
e

Pe = P

(33)

Proof. From the independence assumption and (32),
s=d

x;

which can be rewritten as
s
= x;
d

(34)

From (31),
g
s
=x
e;
d
Plugging (34) and (35) into (27) yields the desired conclusion (33).

(35)

The result (33) indicates that, with the postulated dgp, Pe=P is the ratio of the mean of
25

x (=x) divided by the median of x (=e
x). Once again here, outcomes of Pe=P are whittled
down to a possible fractional di¤erence between two measures of central tendency. I see no
e.
reason o¤hand to believe here that the mean x is substantially di¤erent from the median x
This is about as far as pure theory can take us. I think it is fair to say that the formal
WCA voting model is hinting that there may be some tendency for the majority-voted price
Pe to be “close” to the world e¢ ciency price of carbon P (=SCC) – or at least that the
WCA-voted price Pe and the world SCC of P are unlikely to di¤er sharply.

9

A Crude Numerical Exercise

The empirical evidence on the world SCC (or P ) comes almost exclusively from so-called
Integrated Assessment Models (IAMs). The U.S. Interagency Working Group estimated a
value of the SCC to be used in U.S. regulatory impact assessments as $40 per ton of CO2 (in
2014 dollars).35 The number $40/tCO2 is the mean-value outcome of highly-variable results
from three di¤erent IAMs with various parameter settings, evaluated at a 3 percent annual
discount rate.
It is di¢ cult to deny that there is a very high degree of fuzziness in this estimate of SCC
(=P ). At one extreme, Pindyck (2015) argues that IAMs have ‡aws that render them close
to useless as tools for policy analysis. Even without such an extreme position, estimates of
P (equivalently SCC) from various other studies can easily range from less than $10/tCO2
to over $100/tCO2 .36 Defenders of the $40/tCO2 estimate of SCC (=P ) typically do not
deny the extreme uncertainty of this number, but defend it on the basis that the reality of
the political process requires some defensible number, however fuzzy, over no number.37
P
From (10), P =
di . Estimated values of fdi g represent another exercise with fuzzy
numbers. Nordhaus (2015) makes a constructive e¤ort by …rst dividing the world into
15 regions, including the largest countries and aggregates of the other countries.
He
then e¤ectively estimates the 15 values of fdi g corresponding to his 15 regional divisions,
while admitting that evidence is sparse to nonexistent outside of high-income regions. He
demonstrates substantial di¤erences in the 15 values of fdi g from the 3 di¤erent IAMs used
in the U.S. Interagency Working Group “average”estimate of P =$40/tCO2 . Because the
national estimates are so poorly determined, for his central national estimates Nordhaus
e¤ectively assumes that national values of damages are proportional to national GDPs.
35

See Interagency Working Group on Social Cost of Carbon, United States Government Technical Update
of the Social Cost of Carbon for Regulatory Impact Analysis Under Executive Order 12866, revised July
2015.
36
This range is cited in Nordhaus (2015).
37
See, for example, Metcalf and Stock (2016).

26

The marginal cost functions that appear in (14) are of the reduced linear form Ci0 (Ei ) =
(Ei
Nordhaus (2015) e¤ectively estimates the relevant parameters in (14) by
i )=si .
combining a global estimate from his DICE-2013 model with detailed regional estimates
from an engineering model by McKinsey Company (2009). My impression here is that these
numbers are a bit fuzzy because the McKinsey regional estimates are based on an engineering
approach that may not be terribly reliable.
Using the Nordhaus (2015) numbers (scaled up by a factor of two), Kotchen (2016) attempts to compare (in the notation of this paper) P with Pe. His P is selected as $40/tCO2 .
The Pe of this paper corresponds to his “population weighted majority voting rule,” which
he calculates as Pe = $51=tCO2 .38 Readers are free to make their own interpretation of this
estimated di¤erence between P and Pe. Considering the very large degree of uncertainty in
the underlying numbers, I would interpret this result as indicating that the WCA majorityvoted value Pe=$51/tCO2 is essentially indistinguishable from the world SCC estimate of
P =$40/tCO2 – in the sense that the di¤erence between the two numbers is considerably
smaller than the scope of measurement error. Thus, I think there is license to pretend from
this very crude numerical exercise that Pe P .

10

Concluding Remarks

At the end of the day, there is no airtight logic in favor of a negotiated carbon-emissions price
over negotiated carbon-emissions quantities, only a series of partial arguments. A desirable
feature, I have argued, is the natural focal salience and the relatively low transaction costs
of negotiating one price as against negotiating multiple quantities, which, while somewhat
imprecise, in my opinion constitutes an important behavioral-psychological distinction. As
was pointed out, negotiating a one-dimensional uniform price with single-peaked preferences
has the signi…cant additional property of allowing a majority-rule voting equilibrium, thereby
avoiding the Arrow impossibility theorem (which casts a negative shadow on the ability of
a social decision rule to resolve di¤erences involving multiple dimensions).
A key argument in favor of a price over quantities is the self-enforcement mechanism
that constitutes a main theme of this paper, namely the built-in “countervailing force” of
a uniform price of carbon against narrow self-interested free-riding. There is simply no
politically-acceptable one-dimensional emissions-quantity analogue to Pe that has this important “countervailing force” property! 39 The countervailing force of a single price au38

What I am calling here (and in previous work Weitzman (2014)) i’s “most preferred price of carbon” –
namely Pi –Kochen (2016) relabels as i’s “strategic social cost of carbon.”
39
In past papers (Weitzman (2014, 2015)) I discussed in torturous detail negotiating one worldwide aggregate emissions target or aggregate cap contingent upon a previous-round linear subdivision formula with

27

tomatically incentivizes all negotiating parties to internalize the externality via a simple
understandable formula that embodies a common climate commitment based on principles
of reciprocity, quid-pro-quo, and I-will-if-you-will. This tends towards internalizing the externality and gives national negotiators an incentive to o¤set their natural impulse to otherwise
bargain for a low price. The model of a WCA in this paper tried to formalize this aspect. I
think the paper is suggesting that the majority-rule-voted WCA price on carbon emissions
of Pe might come tolerably close to the world SCC of P . Several special cases supported
this tentative conclusion, as did a very crude numerical example.
My argument here is su¢ ciently abstract that it is open to enormous amounts of criticism on many di¤erent levels. There are so many potential complaints that it would be
incongruous to list them all and attempt to address them one by one. These many potential criticisms notwithstanding, I believe the argument here is exposing a fundamental
countervailing-force argument that deserves to be highlighted.
Because the formulation is at such a high level of abstraction, it has blurred the distinction
between a carbon price and a carbon tax. As was previously noted, the important thing
is acquiescence by each nation to a binding minimum price on carbon emissions, not the
particular internal mechanism by which this obligation is met. An international system of
equal national carbon taxes with revenues kept in the taxing country is a relatively simple
and transparent way to achieve internationally-harmonized carbon prices. But it is not
absolutely necessary for the conclusions of this paper. In principle, nations or regions
could meet the obligation of a uniform minimum price on carbon emissions by whatever
internal mechanism they choose – a tax, a cap-and-trade system with a price ‡oor, some
other hybrid system, or whatever else results in an observable price of carbon not below the
uniform minimum.40
2n linear coe¢ cients, set, for example, by a preceding agreement among the n countries on various target
reductions from various baselines. (Think, e.g., of negotiated percentage reductions of emissions from negotiated status-quo base levels, where the parties vote on the aggregate emissions level and then disaggregate it
according to the previously-agreed-upon linear formula.) A system based on voting for aggregate emissions
(given a linear subdivision formula) could, in principle, embody some countervailing force against the global
warming externality. But, I concluded that negotiating the extra layer of 2n …rst-round linear subdivision
coe¢ cients would likely founder politically when applied on a worldwide scale.
I further concluded that, even with seemingly symmetric formulas for the initial quantity allotments,
such a quantity-based system seemed far more complicated, baroque, and objectionable in the international
context than an internationally-harmonized carbon price. For example, equal per-capita initial assignment of
caps would generate huge (and highly variable) post-trade international transfers in a cap-and-trade system,
which would be politically unacceptable to countries buying the permits. (On this aspect, see also footnote
20.) Goulder and Schein (2013) discuss the potential for very large trans-border revenue ‡ows from the
countries purchasing the allowances to the countries selling them.
40
A worldwide uniform minimum carbon price could theoretically be attained in a worldwide cap-and-trade
system by setting it as a ‡oor, which could be enforced by making it a reserve price of permits actualized
by a hypothetical international agency that buys up excess permits whenever the price falls below the ‡oor.
Alas, such a mechanism invites its own free-rider problem, because each nation has an incentive not to spend

28

Of course any nation or region could choose to impose a carbon tax or price above the
international minimum, for reasons of public health, tra¢ c congestion, or something else.41
The hope is that even a low positive initial value of a universal minimum carbon tax or price
could be useful for gaining con…dence and building trust in this price-based international
architecture.
The purpose of this paper is primarily expository and exploratory. Any serious proposal
to resolve the global warming externality will face a seemingly overwhelming array of practical administrative obstacles and will need to overcome powerful vested interests. That
is the nature of the global warming externality problem. The theory of this paper seems
to suggest that negotiating a uniform minimum price on carbon emissions can have several
desirable properties, including, especially, helping to internalize the global warming externality. To fully defend the relative “practicality” of what I am proposing would probably
require a book-length treatment, not a paper. In any event, this paper is not primarily
about practical considerations of international negotiations. I leave that important task
mostly to others.42 However, I do want to mention just a few real-world considerations that
have been left out of my mental model yet seem especially pertinent.
It might be argued that the real problem with a WCA is getting parties to agree to
participate in it in the …rst place. If n greenfund transfer payments are required to get
n countries to agree in the …rst place to vote on a uniform carbon price, then it might
be argued that this constitutes an n-dimensional negotiating problem akin in complexity
to assigning n allowance caps (with n transfer payments) in a worldwide cap-and-trade
system. Considering the many behavioral-psychological-economic arguments favoring a
single carbon price that have been made throughout this paper, I simply …nd it di¢ cult to
believe this argument. My tentative (if non-airtight) conclusion: it is di¢ cult to get nations
to agree to anything seriously blocking free-riding on climate change, but negotiating one
universal price is relatively easier than negotiating n quantities. Note also that the WCA
proposal has a built-in voting mechanism for dealing automatically with changes, whereas n
emissions quotas with n transfer payments would have to be renegotiated every time there
is a signi…cant change.
A truly critical issue is that a binding international agreement on a WCA-voted uniform
its own money, but for other nations to spend their money to buy up excess permits. Alternatively, a
hypothetical worldwide consignment auction for carbon permits with a uniform reserve price might work
in theory but seems highly impractical in practice. Again here, there is a marked distinction between the
simplicity of a one-dimensional price-tax and the complexity of negotiating a multidimensional quantitybased binding agreement among many di¤erent nations.
41
Parry (2016) argues that the national e¢ ciency price of carbon emissions, even without accounting for
climate change, is substantial for many countries.
42
See, e.g., Bodansky (2010) or Barrett (2005).

29

minimum carbon tax or price requires some serious mechanism to induce participation and
compliance. Perhaps greenfund transfer payments might help (and there is no contradiction
in having a WCA with such side payments), but these, like mandatory quantity targets,
would likely involve tricky multidimensional multinational negotiations where it is di¢ cult
to avoid self-interested free-riding. For enforcement, to make sure the uniform WCA pricetax is actually imposed, perhaps there is no practical alternative to using the international
trading system for applying tari¤-based penalties on imports from non-complying nations.
Cooper (2010) has argued for an expansive interpretation whereby the internationally agreed
charge on carbon emissions would be considered a cost of doing business, such that failure to
pay the charge would be treated as a subsidy that is subject to countervailing duties under
existing provisions of the World Trade Organization.43
Remember, the top-down WCA approach of this paper is predicated in the …rst place
on a future situation where the climate change problem has become su¢ ciently threatening
on a worldwide grassroots level that world public opinion is ready to condone truly novel
world governance structures. The ultimate justi…cation of the WCA approach is that big
new problems, like the grave threat of catastrophic climate change, may require big new
solutions. Desperate times demand desperate measures. Tampering with free trade via
tari¤-based penalties on countries that refuse to participate in the WCA should be seen as
a unique exception to the basic principle of free trade, which exception is predicated on a
widespread perception that climate change is edging towards bringing catastrophic e¤ects.
In a far-sighted paper, William Nordhaus (2015) advocates a uniform border tari¤ on
imports from non-member countries imposed by a voluntary “climate club” of member nations. Members of the climate club agree to impose on themselves a harmonized carbon
price, along with free trade amongst themselves, accompanied by a sti¤ ad valorem tari¤
on imports from outsiders. The climate club is thus a kind of customs union because this
trade bloc is composed of a free trade area with a common external tari¤ on the rest of
the world.
Nordhaus argues empirically that a price of $25 per ton of CO2 along with
an ad valorem border tari¤ of 5% achieves high participation rates where an overwhelming
majority of emitting nations, acting in their own self-interest, will wish to join the climate
club.44
The WCA proposal of this paper can …t well with the Nordhaus climate-club idea. A
perhaps loose end in the Nordhaus approach concerns what should be the negotiated universal club price of carbon emissions. As has already been pointed out, it is useful to have some
43

See also the discussion of the legality of such sanctions under WTO provisions in Metcalf and Weisbach
(2009).
44
A climate club with less than total world participation of major CO2 emitters will under-supply abatement, but if Nordhaus (2015) is correct, the actual participation rate is likely to be close to 100%.

30

concrete fallback decision mechanism behind vague “negotiations” because even with the
focus on a one-dimensional harmonized carbon price, there are bound to be disagreements,
whose resolution is unclear, about what that common price should be. A WCA addresses
this issue concretely and allows for a ‡exible price by majority rule as conditions change and
circumstances warrant.
I close by recapitulating here the basic premise of this paper: a uniform global tax-like
price on carbon emissions, whose revenues each country retains, can provide a focal point for
a reciprocal common commitment, whereas quantity targets, which do not nearly as readily
present such a single focal point, have a tendency to rely ultimately on individual commitments. After the perceived failure of a Kyoto-style top-down approach, the world has seemingly given up on a comprehensive global design, focusing instead in the 2015 Paris COP21
Accord on essentially voluntary bottom-up nationally determined contributions. Perhaps,
as this paper has emphasized, a quantity-based focus on negotiating emissions caps embodies a bad design ‡aw.
The arguments of this paper suggest that a uniform-price-based
international negotiating or voting mechanism might thwart the free-rider climate change
problem by empowering an “I will if you will”approach.

References
[1] Barrett, Scott (2005). Environment and Statecraft: The Strategy of Environmental
Treaty Making. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
[2] Bodansky, Daniel (2010). The Art and Craft of International Environmental Law. Cambridge: Harvard University Press.
[3] Borenstein,
Severin (2016). “Fixing a major ‡aw in cap-and-trade.”
https://energyathaas.wordpress.com/2016/08/15/…xing-a-major-‡aw-in-cap-andtrade/
[4] Colman, A. M. (2006). “Thomas C. Shelling’s psychological decision theory: Introduction to a special issue.” Journal of Economic Psychology, 27: 603-608.
[5] Cooper, Richard N. (2010). “The Case for Charges on Greenhouse Gas Emissions.”
In Joseph Aldy and Robert Stavins (eds), Post-Kyoto International Climate Policy:
Architectures for Agreement, Cambridge University Press.
[6] Cramton, Peter, Axel Ockenfels, and Steven Stoft (2015). “An International CarbonPrice Commitment Promotes Cooperation.” Economics of Energy & Environmental
Policy, 4(2): 37-50.
31

[7] Goulder, Lawrence H. (2002). Environmental Policy Making in Economies with Prior
Tax Distortions. Amherst MA: Edward Elgar.
[8] Goulder, Lawrence H., and Andrew R. Schein (2013). “Carbon Taxes vs. Cap and
Trade: A Critical Review.” Climate Change Economics 4(3): 1-28.
[9] Harrison, Kathryn (2013). “The Political Economy of British Columbia’s Carbon Tax.”
OECD Environment Working Papers, No. 63, OECD Publishing.
[10] Interagency Working Group on Social Cost of Carbon (2015). United States Government
Technical Update of the Social Cost of Carbon for Regulatory Impact Analysis Under
Executive Order 12866, revised July 2015.
[11] Jorgenson, D. W., R. J. Goettle, M. S. Ho, and P. J . Wilcoxen (2013). Double Dividend:
Environmental Taxes and Fiscal Reform in the United States. Cambridge MA: MIT
Press.
[12] Keohane, Robert O., and Michael Oppenheimer (2016): “Paris: Beyond the Climate
Dead End through Pledge and Review?”; forthcoming in Politics and Governance
(http://belfercenter.ksg.harvard.edu/…les/dp85_keohane-oppenheimer.pdf)
[13] Kotchen, Matthew J. (2016). “Which Social Cost of Carbon? A Theoretical Perspective.” NBER Working Paper No. 22246.
[14] Libecap, Gary D. (2013). “Addressing Global Environmental Externalities: Transaction
Costs Considerations.” Journal of Economic Literature, 52(2): 424-79.
[15] MacKay, D. P., P. Cramton, A. Ockenfels and S. Stoft (2015). “Price carbon –I will if
you will.”Nature 526, 315-316.
[16] Mas-Collell, Andreu, Michael Whinston, and Jerry Green (1995). Microeconomic Theory. New York: Oxford University Press.
[17] McKinsey Company (2009). Pathways to a Low-Carbon Economy: Version 2 of the
Global Greenhouse-Gas Abatement Cost Curve. Available at www.mckinsey.com.
[18] Metcalf, Gilbert E., and David Weisbach (2009). “The Design of a Carbon Tax.”
Harvard Environmental Law Review 33.2: 499-556.
[19] Metcalf, Gilbert E., and James Stock (2015). “Integrated Assessment Models and the Social Cost of Carbon: A Review and Assessment.” Available at
http://works.bepress.com/gilbert_metcalf/114/.
32

[20] Nordhaus, William D. (2013). The Climate Casino: Risk, Uncertainty, and Economics
for a Warming World. New Haven: Yale University Press.
[21] Nordhaus, William D. (2015). “Climate Clubs: Designing a Mechanism to Overcome
Free-riding in International Climate Policy.”American Economic Review 105 (4); 13391370.
[22] Parry, Ian (2016). “Re‡ections on the International Coordination of Carbon Pricing.”
CESifo Working Paper No. 5975.
[23] Pindyck, Robert S. (2015). “The Use and Misuse of Models for Climate Policy.” NBER
Working Paper No. 21097.
[24] Schelling, Thomas C. (1960). The Strategy of Con‡ict. Harvard University Press.
[25] Victor, David (2011). Global Warming Gridlock. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.
[26] Weitzman, Martin L. (2014). “Can Negotiating a Uniform Carbon Price Help to Internalize the Global Warming Externality?” Journal of the Association of Environmental
and Resource Economists 1(1/2): 29-49.
[27] Weitzman, Martin L. (2015). “Voting on Prices vs. Voting on Quantities in a World
Climate Assembly.” NBER Working Paper No. 20925.
[28] World Bank (2015). Integrating Climate Concerns into World Bank Group Actions.
Available at worldbank.org/en/topic/climatechange/brief/integrating-climate-changeworld-bank.

33

