NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

EXCHANGE TRADED FUNDS (ETFS)
Itzhak Ben-David
Francesco Franzoni
Rabih Moussawi
Working Paper 22829
http://www.nber.org/papers/w22829

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 2016, September 2017

The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2016 by Itzhak Ben-David, Francesco Franzoni, and Rabih Moussawi. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Exchange Traded Funds (ETFs)
Itzhak Ben-David, Francesco Franzoni, and Rabih Moussawi
NBER Working Paper No. 22829
November 2016, September 2017
JEL No. G12,G14,G15
ABSTRACT
Over nearly a quarter of a century, ETFs have become one of the most popular passive
investment vehicles among retail and professional investors due to their low transaction costs and
high liquidity. By the end of 2016, the market share of ETFs topped over 10% of the total market
capitalization traded on US exchanges, while representing more than 30% of the overall trading
volume. ETFs revolutionized the asset management industry by taking market share from
traditional investment vehicles such as mutual funds and index futures. Because ETFs rely on
arbitrage activity to synchronize their prices with the prices of the underlying portfolio, trading
activity at the ETF level translates to trading of the underlying securities. Researchers found that
while ETFs enhance price discovery, they also inject non-fundamental volatility to market prices
and affect the correlation structure of returns. Furthermore, ETFs impact the liquidity of the
underlying portfolios, especially during events of market stress.
Itzhak Ben-David
Department of Finance
Fisher College of Business
The Ohio State University
2100 Neil Avenue
Columbus, OH 43210
and NBER
bendavid@fisher.osu.edu
Francesco Franzoni
Swiss Finance Institute
Via G. Buffi 13
6904, Lugano - Switzerland
and University of Lugano
francesco.franzoni@usi.ch

Rabih Moussawi
Villanova University
800 Lancaster Ave,
Bartley 1003
Villanova, PA 19085
Rabih.Moussawi@villanova.edu

1

Introduction
Since the mid-1990s, exchange traded funds (ETFs) have become a popular investment

vehicle due to their low transaction costs and intraday liquidity. ETF sponsors issue securities that
are traded on the major stock exchanges, and, for the most part, these instruments aim to replicate
the performance of an index. ETFs have shown spectacular growth. By the end of 2016, they
represented over 10% of the market capitalization of securities traded on US stock exchanges,
more than 30% of the overall daily trading volume, and around 20% of the aggregate short interest.
This article synthesizes the academic literature on ETFs with a focus on trading and
markets. First, we provide a brief overview of the mechanics of ETFs. Second, we analyze the
research that explores the popularity of passive asset management in general and ETFs in
particular. Third, we survey the literature discussing the effects of ETFs on the quality of financial
markets.
In the first part of this article, we describe how ETFs work and what distinguishes them
from other pooled investment vehicles. ETFs either hold a basket of securities passively (physical
replication) or enter into derivative contracts delivering the performance of an index (synthetic
replication), or they do a mix of the two. They issue securities that are claims on the underlying
pool of securities.1 ETF shares are traded on stock exchanges, and investors can take either long
or short positions. Two mechanisms keep ETF prices in line with those of the basket that they aim
to track: primary and secondary market arbitrage. The first mechanism involves the creation and
redemption of ETF shares by special intermediaries called authorized participants (APs). When
ETF prices and the prices of the underlying securities diverge, APs typically buy the less expensive
asset (ETF shares or a basket of the underlying securities) and exchange it for the more expensive
asset, leading to the creation or redemption of ETF shares. The second mechanism, is arbitraging
ETFs and their underlying portfolios (through long and short positions) by market participants, in
an attempt to benefit from the closing of price discrepancies between the two assets. The price

1

Exchange traded pooled investment vehicles are collectively designated as exchange traded products (ETPs). These
include ETFs; exchange traded notes (ETNs), which are senior debt notes and do not invest in a portfolio of securities
or a portfolio of derivatives on those securities; and exchange traded commodities (ETCs), which provide investors
exposure to individual commodities or baskets and can be structured as funds or notes. In this review article, we
restrict our attention to ETFs, which have been the main focus of the literature, given that they represent 95% of the
ETP value in the United States.

2

pressure from the trades leads to convergence of prices. Since such trading involves the risk that
in any finite time horizon prices will not converge, it is an arbitrage only in a loose sense.
The second part of this article describes the rise of passive investment and the role of ETFs
in the passive asset management space. Passive asset management has expanded in recent decades,
raising questions about what is driving this phenomenon and its implications for financial markets
and investors. While some researchers view this trend as evidence that financial markets are
becoming more efficient, others warn that passive investments may have adverse effects on price
efficiency and welfare. Several studies document that ETFs capture market share that was
previously taken by traditional passive investment vehicles like index mutual funds, closed-end
funds, and index futures.
The third part of the article focuses on how ETFs impact financial markets. In general,
researchers disagree about the effects of ETFs on the securities market. In principle, the positive
and negative effects of ETFs are not necessarily mutually exclusive. Some researchers argue that
ETFs have little adverse effects on financial markets and even present some evidence of improved
price efficiency, while others present evidence that ETFs lead to negative consequences to markets
by increasing non-fundamental return volatility, altering correlation patterns, and reducing the
liquidity of securities. In particular, scholars have raised the concern that the mechanical basket
arbitrage trading that characterizes ETFs can propagate liquidity shocks across markets, and thus
deteriorate the quality of prices. This concern is especially acute given that ETFs are traded by
high-turnover investors, who potentially generate liquidity shocks into prices at high frequencies.
Also, ETF ownership appears to induce excessive correlation of the securities in their baskets.
Finally, recent episodes of extreme market turbulence (e.g., the Flash Crash on May 6, 2010, and
the events of August 24, 2015) have revealed that the liquidity provision in ETFs is subject to
sudden dry-ups.
Overall, ETFs have transformed the asset management world by introducing low-cost
investment vehicles that are traded continuously. The academic literature acknowledges this
financial innovation but also points to some potential weaknesses that appear to be sufficiently
important to draw regulatory scrutiny.

3

2

The Mechanics of ETFs
ETFs are investment entities that issue securities that trade continuously on public

exchanges. Most ETFs are legally structured as open-ended investment companies,2 and the
majority aims to track a securities index. Unlike mutual funds, which only allow investors to
acquire or redeem shares at the end of the trading day, ETF enable investors to trade their shares
continuously throughout the trading day.
ETFs combine features of both open- and closed-end funds. Like open-ended mutual funds,
ETFs allow the creation and redemption of shares in the fund. Like closed-end funds, the shares
of ETFs are traded on exchanges. However, the open-ended property creates a much greater
opportunity for effective arbitrage in ETFs than in closed-end funds, which explains the
significantly smaller deviations of ETF prices from the net asset value (NAV) than occurs with
closed-end funds (see Lee, Shleifer, and Thaler 1991, Pontiff 1996).
There are two major types of ETFs that differ in how they replicate of the underlying index:
physical ETFs and synthetic ETFs. Physical ETFs attempt to closely follow the return of their
benchmark index by holding all or a representative sample of the index stocks in their portfolios,
with weights to closely mimic those in the index. In contrast, synthetic ETFs track an index by
entering into derivative contracts, such as total return swaps on the benchmark index. The creation
of ETF shares occurs most often in kind for physical ETFs and in cash for synthetic ETFs. The
synthetic ETFs are more popular in Europe than in the United States.
The two types of ETFs are subject to different sources of counterparty risk. Physical ETFs
engage in security lending (see, e.g., Blocher and Whaley 2016), which exposes the fund to the
risk of default of the security borrower. Synthetic ETFs are exposed to the risk of default of the
counterparty in the derivative contract. Of course, both types of agreements require collateral.
The popularity of ETFs has skyrocketed in recent years. ETF daily trading volume
exceeded 36% of overall stock market trading volume in the first half of 2016, despite the fact that
ETFs’ capitalization is about 10% of the market (see Figures 1 and 2). ETFs are also popular

2

Some ETFs are classified as unit investment trusts (such as the SPY, the ETF on the S&P 500 sponsored by State
Street). Unit investment trusts may not engage in security lending of their portfolio securities, which is one the main
differences with other ETFs organized as open-ended investment companies.

4

instruments for short-selling purposes (hedging or directional bearish bets), with about 20% of the
overall short interest on US exchanges being in ETF shares (see Figure 3).3
The market price of ETF shares often diverts from the NAV of the underlying basket due
to asynchronous trading of the ETF and the underlying assets. This fact can generate an opportunity
for arbitrage between the ETF shares and the underlying basket of securities when the discrepancy
exceeds the transaction costs. Two types of market participants are poised to benefit from such
differences in prices: authorized participants (APs) and secondary market arbitrageurs.4
APs are a small group of institutions that are allowed to trade directly with the ETF sponsor
in the primary market. These transactions typically take place in kind, with securities being
exchanged for ETF shares. The APs help to eliminate price discrepancies by purchasing the
cheaper asset on the market and selling the more expensive one. When the ETF price is lower than
the NAV, the APs purchase ETF shares and redeem them for the underlying securities. When the
ETF units are priced above the NAV, the APs purchase the underlying securities and exchange
them for newly issued ETF shares. Finally, the APs turn back to the market and sell either the
underlying securities that they received or the newly issued ETF notes. These trades apply
downward pressure on the prices of the expensive asset and upward pressure on the lower price,
so that price discrepancy is kept under narrow bounds.5 Arbitrageurs can monitor the ETF price as
well as the intraday indicative net asset value (IIV or INAV) of the ETF basket during the day on
most financial platforms. ETF INAVs are computed using the intraday dollar values of the ETF
creation baskets and are published every 15 seconds for underlying baskets that trade continuously
in US markets.
The primary market transactions to create or redeem ETF shares occur in large blocks
called creation units. While more than 70% of the ETFs traded in the United States have creation
units with blocks of 50,000 ETF shares, a few ETFs have larger creation units, equivalent to more
than 100,000 shares. A daily “creation basket” provides information about the specific list of

3

SPY is considered the most traded security in the world, with an average daily volume of more than 115 million
shares in 2017.
4
These could be market makers or other investors like hedge funds and proprietary trading desks.
5
Broman (2016b) estimates the distribution of the extent of the discrepancy between ETF prices and the NAV values
based on the ETF mid-points quotes at the end of the day over the 2006–2012 period. He documents that the standard
deviation of the discrepancy is about 0.10% for large ETFs and 0.15% for small ETFs. See also Petajisto (2017).

5

names and quantities of securities or other assets designed to track the performance of the portfolio
as a whole, and which the APs need to deposit in exchange for an ETF creation unit.6 The AP
generally pays all of the trading costs associated with the operation along with an additional
creation/redemption fee paid to the ETF sponsor. This fee averages $1,047 per creation unit, with
a median fee of $500 per creation unit (less than 1bp for most ETFs). According to Antoniewicz
and Heinrichs (2014), there are, on average, 34 APs per ETF. Some AP firms also function as ETF
market markers by providing continuous quotes and liquidity for the ETF’s shares in the secondary
market. In the process of creating and redeeming ETF shares with domestic underlying securities,
APs are generally not required to post collateral upfront, unless they fail to clear these transactions
within a T+37 settlement date.8 In some cases, certain APs have three additional days to settle
trades (a total of T+6) if their failure to deliver is the result of bona fide market making. Further
details about the mechanics and operation of ETFs are provided in Antoniewicz and Heinrichs
(2014), Hill, Nadig, Hougan, and Fuhr (2015), and Hill (2016).
The second mechanism through which ETF and NAV prices are arbitraged is the trading
activity of market participants. Specifically, secondary market arbitrageurs are market makers or
traders who take a position (long or short) in the ETF and an opposite position in the main
components of the index or a closely related instrument (e.g., another ETF or futures), hoping that
the discrepancy in prices will eventually disappear. This, of course, is not pure textbook arbitrage
because it entails the risk of widening price discrepancy between the ETF and the underlying
securities, and the horizon over which convergence will occur is uncertain (see Shleifer and Vishny
1997). In today’s markets, such trading activity is often performed by hedge funds through
automatic algorithmic trading or by some of the same firms that make the markets for ETFs.

6

In certain cases (e.g., some fixed income ETFs), the creation or redemption basket might contain different
combinations of securities and/or cash relative to the overall ETF portfolio. In other cases, actively managed ETFs,
for example, are required to publish their complete portfolio holdings in addition to their creation and redemption
baskets. See Shreck and Antoniewicz (2012) for further information.
7
The Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) adopted a T+2 settlement cycle effective in September 2017.
https://www.sec.gov/news/press-release/2017-68-0
8
Creation and redemption orders are processed by the National Securities Clearing Corporation (NSCC), a subsidiary
of the Depository Trust & Clearing Corporation (DTCC). The creation and redemption baskets are maintained at the
DTCC on a daily basis by the ETF sponsor.

6

3

The Rise of Passive Investing
Investment managers in the asset management industry can be broadly classified as

engaging in either active or passive investing. Active managers engage in stock-picking securities
and market-timing to beat a benchmark or to generate an absolute return. In contrast, passive
managers construct a portfolio that aims to replicate the performance of an index, such as the S&P
500. While the performance of active investors is typically measured as absolute returns or indexadjusted returns (“alpha”), the performance of passive investors is measured by their ability to
minimize the tracking error with respect to the index. ETFs are passive investment vehicles in
nature; they own a basket of securities that mimics an index. A recent innovation in the ETF space,
active ETFs try to beat their benchmark much like active mutual funds. To date, however, they
represent only 1.8% of the assets under management (AUM) in the US Equity ETF market (see
Table 1).
ETFs began widely trading in the mid-1990s (the first ETF in the US market was the SPY,
which began trading in 1993), and their popularity has expanded rapidly ever since. Table 1
presents time-series statistics about US and foreign stock ownership by active mutual funds,
passive mutual funds, and ETFs, in addition to ownership by fixed-income funds. In mid-2016,
ETFs directly owned about $1.35 trillion of the US common stock market, compared with the
approximately $6.8 trillion owned by mutual funds.9 Table 1 shows that the growth rate of AUM
is dramatically different across fund types. From 1999 to 2016, US equity index mutual funds grew
from $0.3 trillion to $1.8 trillion, and actively managed US equity mutual funds grew from $2.6
trillion to $5.0 trillion. In contrast, US equity ETFs grew from $0.03 trillion to $1.3 trillion. Trends
are similar for foreign equity funds and fixed-income funds.

3.1

Migration from Active to Passive Investment
In recent decades, index investing has become popular among both individual investors

and institutions. This change has prompted researchers to attempt to explain trends in the asset

9

Authors’ calculation. These figures show ownership by ETFs and mutual funds that are traded in the United States.
In other words, they exclude commodities, futures-based instruments, fixed income, global equities, leveraged ETFs,
and short bias.

7

management space and explore their implications on market quality (French 2008, Stambaugh
2014).
There could be multiple reasons for the migration from active to passive investments.
Investors could have realized that the market is more efficient than previously thought, meaning
that low-cost passive investments produce comparable or even superior performance (e.g., Sharpe
ratio) to after-fees active funds. Also, index funds provide a cost-efficient way to expose investors
to certain common risk factors (Cong and Xu 2016). Stambaugh (2014) reports a sharp drop in the
share of active funds over the past three decades, and analyzes an equilibrium model in which
active and passive management coexist. Active management benefits from exploiting the noise in
prices that retail traders create. In equilibrium, the remainder of capital is invested in passive funds.
The increase in passive investment means that arbitrage opportunities disappear, indicating that
the market is becoming more efficient. Not all researchers share the view that the rise of passive
asset management is an indication of improved market efficiency. Bond and García (2016) present
a model in which indexing reduces investors’ welfare. The rationale is that the cash flows of some
stocks have high exposure to economic shocks, and therefore commend relatively low stock prices.
Given their small relative weight in the index, an indexing investor will have low exposure to these
stocks. However, if an investor is not exposed to the same economic shocks, she will be better off
having greater exposure to these stocks. Thus, indexing may lead to suboptimal portfolio
composition for some investors. Wurgler (2011) warns against the adverse effects of rising
indexation. He argues that indexing can create distortion in securities’ valuations, and provides
examples such as inclusion and deletion effects (e.g., see Shleifer 1986, Kaul, Mehrotra, and
Morck 2002, Wugler and Zhuravskaya 2002, Greenwood 2005), comovement of the stock with
the index (e.g., see Greenwood and Sosner 2007, Basak and Pavlova 2013, 2016, Da and Shive
2014), and higher sensitivity to crashes (because many market participants change their index
exposure based on past performance). Baltussen, Da, and van Bekkum (2016) conduct a crosscountry study and find that the degree of presence of indexing vehicles (futures, ETFs, and index
mutual funds) in the stock market is associated with stronger negative serial correlation of the
underlying indices.
A parallel trend in the marketplace over the last few decades has been an increase in
concentration in the asset management space. A likely explanation is the economies of scale that

8

passive investment managers enjoy, which makes consolidation attractive. This trend is discussed
in Ben-David, Franzoni, Moussawi, and Sedunov (2015). The researchers find that the top ten
investment managers owned about 5% of the US stock market in 1980, and that this share had
increased to over 23% by the end of 2014. The authors hypothesize that concentration increases
the volatility of the underlying securities due to shocks at the investment firm level. For example,
an investment firm may affect prices through its correlated trading activity for non-fundamental
reasons, such as a change in firm-wide investment policies, the departure of an executive that leads
to outflows, or a computer glitch. The authors find that the ownership share of the largest investors
is associated with higher volatility in the underlying stocks. To establish causality, the authors
show that higher institutional ownership due to geographic proximity results in higher volatility
and that mergers of large institutional investors lead to higher volatility in the underlying stocks.
The rise in passive investment also has implications for corporate policies as the nature and
composition of institutional investors change. Bradley and Litan (2011a, 2011b) argue that ETFs
and index funds are poor at corporate governance. Consequently, private firms are reluctant to list
on stock exchanges because passive investors, and primarily ETFs, slow down price discovery and
eventually jam value signals to managers. Empirical studies have generally found results
contradicting this claim. Boone and White (2015) use the change in the ownership of institutional
investors following index reconstitution to test the information production of firms. When a stock
moves from being at the bottom of the Russell 1000 index to the top of the Russell 2000 index,
there is a sharp increase in institutional ownership, primarily among passive indexers. They find
that as ownership by index funds increases, firms become more transparent in their reporting.
Appel, Gormley, and Keim (2016) use a similar natural experiment to measure the effects of
ownership by passive investors on corporate governance. They show that, in fact, passive investors
actively promote strong corporate governance. Ownership by passive investors has a positive
causal effect on a host of issues in corporate governance, such as the removal of poison pills,
restrictions on shareholders’ ability to call special meetings, fewer dual-class share structures, and
more independent directors.

3.2

Can ETFs Coexist with Traditional Investment Vehicles?

9

Empirical studies find that ETFs gained market share at the expense of traditional indexing
products. Agapova (2011) studies mutual funds and ETFs in the 2000–2004 period and finds
evidence for both substitution and clientele effects. While ETFs and mutual funds provide similar
investment index exposure and thus are substitutes, the products may appeal to different types of
investors. ETFs may be more tax efficient and therefore may appeal to tax-sensitive investors.
Furthermore, mutual funds may appeal to short-term investors due to the absence of commission
fees, while ETFs may appeal to long-term investors due to lower management fees. Ben-David,
Franzoni, and Moussawi (2013) test these propositions and find opposite results: Investors in ETFs
have significantly shorter horizons. Barnhart and Rosenstein (2010) present evidence that as ETFs
gained market share in the United States, the discounts of closed-end funds widened and their
trading volume declined. Market participants argue that ETFs are aggressively competing with
futures to win big investors, with many ETFs having lower fees than the futures roll costs.10
Several researchers argue that ETFs and mutual funds have distinct features and therefore
appeal to different audiences. Guedj and Huang (2009) propose a model that explores whether
ETFs and open-ended mutual funds can coexist in equilibrium. In their model, ETFs are more
efficient indexers but are exposed to liquidity shocks due to continuous trading. In contrast, mutual
funds are less sensitive to liquidity shocks and therefore valued by investors who are averse to
such exposure. In equilibrium, ETFs offer a cheaper investment option for investors who are
willing to bear the liquidity shock risk, and mutual funds provide implicit insurance against such
shocks. Madhavan, Marchioni, Li, and Du (2014) argue that ETFs are a superior investment
alternative for fully funded investors over index futures, because ETFs provide low transaction
costs and avoid the mispricing that often occurs around the futures rolling dates.
Sponsors of ETFs also compete with traditional asset managers for fees. In addition to the
management fees that are charged to the ETF fund, sponsors of ETFs benefit from fees generated
from lending the securities owned by the fund. Blocher and Whaley (2016) report that lending fees
are as important as management fees and that when managers of stock ETFs have discretion, they
tilt their portfolio holdings toward stocks with higher lending fees. This practice raises the concern
that ETFs are exposed to collateral risk, which could occur when borrowers of shares fail to deliver
10

Because futures contracts have an expiration date, one must renew the position every time the futures expires, an
action that involves a cost. Joe Rennison, “Low-cost ETF challengers eat into derivatives market,” Financial Times,
September 11, 2016. Rochelle Toplensky, “Investors replace futures with ETFs,” Financial Times, March 23, 2016.

10

promised shares at the same time that the ETF is required to redeem its own shares (Mackintosh
and Lin 2011). Evans, Moussawi, Pagano, and Sedunov (2017) report evidence that recent
increases in ETF settlement failures are mainly related to the creation/redemption process when
APs/market makers delay the creation and delivery settlement of ETF creation units for several
days after supplying the ETF shares in the secondary market, a phenomenon called “operational
shorting.” The authors find that high levels of ETF operational shorting and settlement failures are
associated with subsequent increases in the financial stress index. Hurlin, Iseli, Pérignon, and
Yeung (2014) investigate this claim among European ETFs during six months in 2012 and find no
evidence of this buildup in risk during the studied period. It is important to note, however, that the
universe that they study is limited in both time and scope; thus, their results do not necessarily
extend to other economic situations, such as market stress.
The substitution of traditional investment vehicles with ETFs has additional implications
for investors. Bhattacharya, Loos, Meyer, Hackethal, and Kaesler (2017) report that retail traders
who invest in ETFs perform worse than retail traders who stick with traditional funds. They argue
that the ease of ETF trading leads retail investors to attempt to time the market. Because retail
investors are bad traders in general (Barber and Odean 2000, Frazzini and Lamont 2008), this
behavior results in poor performance. In the same vein, Goetzmann and Massa (2003) find that
index mutual fund investors appear to chase returns: Flows are stronger following positive past
returns; these flows do not have predictive power about future returns. Clifford, Fulkerson, and
Jordan (2014) and Broman (2016a) conduct similar analyses using more recent ETF data and find
essentially similar patterns. While the phenomenon of chasing returns by investors is known from
active mutual funds (Berk and Green 2004), where it is often attributed to responding to news
about managerial skill, it appears irrational for investors to chase the returns of a passive index.

4

Do ETFs Impact Asset Prices? Theory and Empirical Evidence
Through the continuous arbitrage between ETFs and the underlying securities, ETFs create

an additional layer of liquidity on top of the underlying assets. This design could cause two
apparently-opposite effects. The additional liquidity that ETFs add can enhance price discovery in
the underlying securities hence making them more informationally efficient. At the same time,

11

non-fundamental trades at the ETF could propagate to the underlying securities leading to
mispricing. It is entirely plausible that these two effects coexist.

4.1

Price Discovery and Liquidity
Due to their low costs and high liquidity, many investors may view ETFs as their preferred

investment vehicle for taking directional bets on the index (Stratmann and Welborn 2012, and
Broman and Shum 2016), therefore introducing index-related information into ETF prices. In turn,
APs and arbitrageurs ensure that the prices of the underlying securities do not diverge from those
of the ETF. The result is that this trading activity helps transmit systematic information from the
ETF to the underlying securities and provides liquidity to the underlying securities. Thus, ETFs
could potentially improve price discovery at the index level and enhance liquidity at the level of
the underlying securities.
Madhavan (2016), Lettau and Madhavan (2016), and Madhavan and Sobczyk (2016)
advance the view that ETFs enhance the functioning of financial markets. The researchers argue
that because ETFs provide a cost-effective tool for investors who wish to make directional bets on
the index, they will reflect the new information before the underlying securities. These researchers
claim that, as long as arbitrage is frictionless, ETFs do not propagate shocks into securities, but
rather expedite price discovery. In other words, the price discovery at the ETF level leads to price
discovery at the underlying securities level.
Several studies confirm empirically that ETFs enhance price discovery. Richie, Daigler,
and Gleason (2008) compare the comovement of S&P 500 futures, the main ETF on this index
(the Standard and Poor’s Depository Receipt, SPDR, ticker: SPY), and the underlying portfolio.
They conclude that prices deviate little between the futures contract and ETFs, but that there are
larger deviations from the underlying portfolio. Glosten, Nallareddy, and Zou (2016) find that
stocks incorporate information more quickly once they are in ETF portfolios. They argue that some
of the increased comovement of stocks with indices that has been documented by other researchers
(see below) can be explained by better incorporation of systematic information into stock prices.
Also Wermers and Xue (2015)11 report an enhanced price discovery at the ETF level. Their goal
is to separate informed trading from noise trading in ETFs. Their identifying assumption is that
11

Study sponsored by Lyxor Asset Management.

12

informed investors trade the ETF or futures. Therefore, on days when ETFs lead the underlying
securities portfolio, informed trading dominates. In contrast, on days when ETFs lag the index, the
ETF is primarily traded by noise traders. Using this identification strategy, they find that price
movements driven by informed traders dominate and are permanent. Price movements driven by
noise traders reverse on average. Also, Marshall, Nguyen, and Visaltanachoti (2013) find that
ETFs move ahead of the underlying portfolio, especially when the liquidity of the underlying
securities is low. Li and Zhu (2016) present another mechanism through which ETFs may enhance
price efficiency. They argue that arbitrageurs use ETFs to circumvent short-sale constraints at the
stock level. The authors use short interest of ETFs data to compute the indirect short interest that
is applied to each individual stock through ETFs that hold it. They document that this measure of
stock-level short interest predicts stock returns and conclude that ETFs help improve market
efficiency through this channel.
Other researchers present evidence suggesting that ETFs degrade informational efficiency
of the securities in their baskets. Da and Shive (2014) document an increased comovement in
returns in the stocks that are part of an index. They argue that when investors trade on news related
to the index, they trade the ETF more actively. The mechanical basket trading of the underlying
securities tied to the ETF through arbitrage exhibits higher return comovement with the index and
lower degree of idiosyncratic volatility. Therefore, individual stock response is expected to be less
timely and less sensitive to idiosyncratic earnings news. An implication of this result is that the
lagged response to idiosyncratic shocks may exacerbate certain anomalies (e.g., post-earnings
announcement drift). Israeli, Lee, and Sridharan (2017) show that stocks owned by ETFs have
higher trading costs; have higher comovement with the index; exhibit lower informational
efficiency, measured as lower future earnings response coefficients; and receive less analyst
coverage. Bradley and Litan (2011a, 2011b) argue that private firms are reluctant to list on stock
exchanges because passive investors, primarily ETFs, slow down price discovery. Broman (2016b)
and Brown, Davies, and Ringgenberg (2016) document that the degree and direction of mispricing
between ETFs and their underlying securities comove across ETFs. Both groups conclude that
ETFs attract short-horizon noise traders with correlated demand across investment styles. Broman
(2016c) provides further evidence that ETFs attract sentiment-driven noise traders. He examines

13

ETFs that trade on multiple countries and documents that country-specific ETF mispricings are
correlated with the country-specific stock market.
Another strand of empirical studies find that ETFs have conflicting effects on liquidity
provision to the underlying securities. In one direction, as argued above, ownership by ETFs can
increase liquidity in the underlying securities. This happens due to the arbitrage trades that take
place between the ETF and the underlying securities. Marshall, Nguyen, and Visaltanachoti (2015)
document patterns that illustrate the activity of arbitrageurs. They find that the liquidity of ETFs
is correlated with the liquidity of the underlying stocks. The more liquid the underlying stocks are,
the greater the ability of arbitrageurs to engage in arbitrage trades, making the ETF liquid as well.
Agarwal, Hanouna, Moussawi, and Stahel (2016) document that the liquidity of ETFs comoves
with the liquidity of the assets in the ETF baskets. The authors show that higher ETF ownership is
associated with higher comovement of liquidity12 among large and small stocks alike. They further
document that this comovement of liquidity has increased in recent years and that it is greater
during crisis versus non-crisis periods. In the mutual funds market, Schultz and Shive (2016) show
that ownership by mutual funds increases the liquidity of the underlying bonds due to flows to and
from the mutual funds, which induce trading.
Conversely, some argue that ETFs can decrease the liquidity of the underlying securities.
Specifically, because ETFs provide an inexpensive way to trade, they can crowd out traders from
the underlying assets and decrease liquidity. Petajisto (2017) finds a significant deviation of ETF
prices from those of the underlying assets, especially for illiquid assets. Piccotti (2014) documents
that in some ETFs, the deviation from the value of the underlying assets is permanent, which he
argues may be the result of market segmentation. Investors may be willing to pay a premium for
access to assets with greater liquidity. Dannhauser (2016) finds that the introduction of corporate
bond ETFs leads to a decrease in the liquidity of the underlying bonds, suggesting a crowding out
effect. Pan and Zeng (2016) propose a complementary effect: Because APs have a dual role in
financial markets—APs and market makers—they may occasionally consume more liquidity than

12

This study is related to two previous papers. Coughenour and Saad (2004) test whether liquidity provision is
correlated across stocks that are assigned to the same NYSE specialists. The idea is that capital constraints are common
per specialist. Koch, Ruenzi, and Starks (2016) provide evidence that stock-level liquidity is correlated across stocks
with common mutual ownership.

14

they provide. This may happen when there is selling pressure by investors during times of market
stress. APs may not be willing to engage in arbitrage when the underlying securities are illiquid.
The authors present evidence that APs’ trading volume declines when market volatility (captured
by the VIX) is high, suggesting that APs operate like arbitrageurs who have limited capital,
withdrawing from the market when volatility is high (Ben-David, Franzoni, and Moussawi 2012,
Nagel 2012).

4.2

Propagation of Demand Shocks to Underlying Securities
The additional layer of liquidity that ETFs may also serve as a transmission mechanism to

non-fundamental shocks from ETFs to the underlying securities. Malamud (2015) develops a
model for ETFs in which APs create and redeem ETF shares. He shows that the
creation/redemption mechanism propagates temporary liquidity shocks into the underlying
securities. The model also indicates that as the liquidity of the underlying securities increases, the
degree of shock propagation increases.
A key component in the proposed mechanism for noise transmission is the existence of
demand shocks at the ETF level. In recent years, ETFs have seen high share turnover (see Figure
2) and are traded by traders with short horizons (Ben-David, Franzoni, and Moussawi 2013). Many
of these investors tend to make directional bets and hold the securities for a short period of time.
As such, they may use ETFs as low-cost investment conduits for these bets. Stratmann and
Welborn (2012) and Broman and Shum (2016) find evidence to support this conjecture. They
document that investors use ETFs as a way to take short-term directional bets on the market.
Previous literature on short-term investors shows the adverse effects of investors with a short
horizon. Stein (1987) argues that the entry of short-term speculators lowers the informational
efficiency of prices, deterring long-term investors from participating in the market. Cella, Ellul,
and Giannetti (2013) find that the presence of short-horizon institutional investors during market
turmoil exacerbates price drops, because these investors exit the market. This evidence is
consistent with Ben-David, Franzoni, and Moussawi (2012), who show that hedge funds, which
on average have higher turnover than other investors, exited the stock market during the financial
crash of 2008-2009.

15

Some studies have tested whether ETF ownership causes higher volatility at the underlying
securities. Ben-David, Franzoni, and Moussawi (2013) propose that a demand shock can move the
ETF price away from the fundamental value (Figures 4a and 4b). If there is limited liquidity in the
underlying securities’ market, the underlying securities’ prices are temporarily pushed away from
the fundamental value (Figure 4c). In the long run, liquidity flows back into the market, and both
the ETF price and the underlying securities’ prices revert back to their fundamental value (Figure
4d). The repeated arrival of demand shocks in the ETF market, through a mechanism like the one
just described, can create a link between ETF ownership of stocks and return volatility. Ben-David,
Franzoni, and Moussawi (2013) identify the causal effect of ETF ownership on stock volatility
using an exogenous shift in ETF ownership that occurs annually through the Russell 1000/2000
reconstitution. Stocks which switch indices experience a sharp change in ETF ownership. The
Russell 1000 and Russell 2000 indices are based on stock market capitalization: the Russell 1000
includes the largest 1,000 traded stocks in the United States, and the Russell 2000 tracks the
performance of the next 2,000 smaller stocks. Once a year, Russell reconstitutes the indices, and
some stocks switch membership according to a mechanical rule. Some stocks in the Russell 2000
that have experienced an increase in their market capitalization switch to the Russell 1000, and
those whose market capitalization has decreased switch from the Russell 1000 to the Russell 2000.
The researchers use an identification strategy based on the idea that ETF ownership is higher for
the top stocks in the Russell 2000 than for the bottom stocks at the Russell 1000, despite the fact
that members in the latter group have larger market capitalization than those in the former group.
The authors control for changes in other types of institutional ownership, and document that the
effect of ETF ownership is statistically and economically significant. Using this identification
strategy, the authors conclude that stock volatility increases substantially following this exogenous
increase in ETF ownership. Furthermore, the authors show that ETF flows correlate with price
movements in the same direction as the flows. This price movement partially reverts over the next
few days, consistent with the initial shock being liquidity motivated. These findings suggest that
the increased volatility is, at least in part, non-fundamental. Krause, Ehsani, and Lien (2014) also
find that stocks owned by ETFs have higher volatility and higher volume. Their setting, however,
lacks a strategy to identify exogenous variation in ETF ownership. Thus, the higher volatility may

16

be a result of a selection process in which ETFs end up holding more liquid—and thus more
volatile—stocks.
Other researchers argue that price reversals at the underlying securities level could be
evidence that ETF flows putting temporary price pressure on the underlying stocks which
ultimately revert. Staer (2014) finds that ETF flows are contemporaneous with index returns and
that these price effects partly revert after a few days. Baltussen, Da, and van Bekkum (2016) find
that the serial correlation of stock markets became more negative following indexation. They
interpret this result as evidence that index products impound non-fundamental shocks (which then
revert) into the underlying security prices.
The same mechanism of propagation of non-fundamental shocks from the ETFs to the
underlying securities should apply also to other investment vehicles and to derivatives. Indeed,
most studies in this area found confirming evidence. Coval and Stafford (2007), for instance, find
that mutual funds that experience strong outflows engage in fire sales, which have a significant
and long-lasting price impact on the underlying securities. In the futures market, MacKinlay and
Ramaswamy (1988) report that the volatility of index futures is higher than that of the index itself.
In addition, they find that the idiosyncratic component of futures’ returns tends to be
autocorrelated, suggesting that it is driven by temporary mispricing. Chang, Cheng, and Pinegar
(1999) document that the introduction of futures trading increased the volatility of stocks in the
Nikkei index stocks. Roll, Schwartz, and Subrahmanyam (2007) present evidence of Granger
causality between prices in the futures and equity markets. In contrast, Bessembinder and Seguin
(1992) determine that only the unexpected trading activity of stock futures is correlated with stock
volatility. They conclude that these patterns are consistent with the idea that futures trading
enhances the liquidity of the underlying securities without adding significant noise.
Another approach to testing for market inefficiency relates to the correlation of securities
with the index, once owned by ETFs. The conjecture is that ETF prices are set by investor demand
for the index, as opposed to the demand for the individual securities. Therefore, ETF prices
primarily reflect systematic shocks, and because of the arbitrage mechanism, the underlying
securities will display a greater comovement with the index. Basak and Pavlova (2013, 2016)
propose a similar mechanism in the context of institutional investment. In their model, institutional

17

investors measure their performance relative to an index, they overweight assets that are included
in the index, leading to an increase in asset prices, price volatility, and correlation with other
indices.
Empirical studies have found evidence supporting this mechanism. Da and Shive (2014)
show that stocks that are part of an index tend to comove with the index and thus lose their
idiosyncratic volatility. The effect is stronger for illiquid stocks and at times of market turbulence.
They instrument ETF ownership by the inception and closure of ETF funds. Sullivan and Xiong
(2012) and Israeli, Lee, and Sridharan (2017) find similar evidence in an empirical setting in which
ETF ownership is endogenous. Chinco and Fos (2016) develop a model in which many ETFs need
to rebalance their portfolios. They show that small changes in stock prices can trigger large
rebalancing cascades that affect the prices of all the securities within the same ETF. They conclude
that there is a feedback effect in which the rebalancing activity exacerbates the original price shock
that prompted the rebalancing.
It is important to note that the apparently-conflicting evidence about improved price
discovery in the presence of ETFs and the evidence for greater inefficiencies are not necessarily
contradictory or mutually exclusive. It is possible that prices more quickly reflect certain pieces of
information, and, at the same time, also are more impacted by liquidity shocks. Bhattacharya and
O’Hara (2016) propose a model in which ETFs hold assets that are less liquid than the ETF itself.
Therefore, some of the price discovery happens at the ETF level. Market makers try to extract
relevant information from the ETF about the underlying securities. However, market makers
extract a noisy signal, which causes them to propagate noise when they trade the underlying
securities.

4.3

Leveraged ETFs
Leveraged ETFs have attracted substantial attention from academics, regulators, and

market commentators because these ETFs need to actively rebalance their portfolios on an ongoing
and predictable basis, toward the end of the trading day. Leveraged ETFs strive to achieve returns
that are a multiple of the underlying index (e.g., x2, x3), or the inverse return on the index (often
called bear ETFs), as in a short strategy. To achieve their desired return patterns, these funds rely
on leverage or derivatives, and need to rebalance their portfolios following price moves of the
18

underlying index. The concern expressed by several parties is that these rebalancing actions have
a significant impact on the market. For example, leveraged ETFs were blamed in the 1% run-up
in the last 18 minutes of trade of the S&P 500 on October 10, 2011, despite the absence of any
news.13 According to Cheng and Madhavan (2009), the dynamics of leveraged ETFs lead to samedirection rebalancing (even for bear funds), akin to portfolio insurance. They also argue that shortterm speculators are attracted to these products because they allow traders to make short-term
highly leveraged bets. Jiang and Yan (2016) explore the nature of flows to regular and leveraged
ETFs and show that regular ETF flows can be characterized as momentum traders, whereas
leveraged ETF flows are contrarians.
Several studies have attempted to test the claim that leveraged ETFs create a price impact
when rebalancing their portfolios. Bai, Bond, and Hatch (2015) focus on the real estate sector and
find that rebalancing by leveraged ETFs increases the volatility of the underlying stocks and
contributes to price momentum. Tuzun (2014) calls leveraged ETFs “the new portfolio insurers”
because their rebalancing reinforces the original price movement and thus increases market
volatility. His estimation shows that leveraged ETFs contributed significantly to market volatility
during the financial crisis of 2008–2009. Shum, Hejazi, Haryanto, and Rodier (2016) present
evidence that stock-level end-of-day volatilities are higher following the rebalancing of leveraged
ETFs. In contrast, Ivanov and Lenkey (2016) argue that claims about the impact of leveraged ETFs
are exaggerated. They show that flows into ETFs counterbalance the hedging demand of ETFs,
mitigating their effects on the underlying securities. Despite this compelling argument, the effects
documented by Bai, Bond, and Hatch (2015) and Shum, Hejazi, Haryanto, and Rodier (2016) use
net rebalancing, i.e., after flows in the opposite direction are taken into account.
ETFs that track volatility indices have properties similar to leveraged ETFs. Volatility
indices do not reflect the returns of a constant basket of traded assets, but rather are calculated
based on prices of derivatives with weights that change daily, according to the expiration date of
the derivatives (e.g., the VIX in the United States). Thus, the ETFs that track the index need to
rebalance their portfolios daily in order to match the returns of the index. This setting is ideal to
test whether rebalancing affects the prices of the underlying derivatives. Dong (2016) reports that

13

Andrew Ross Sorkin, “Volatility, thy name is E.T.F.,” DealBook, New York Times, October 1, 2011.

19

the introduction of VIX ETFs, which hold VIX futures, created strong predicted demand due to
rebalancing on the VIX futures and caused a predictable price impact.

4.4

ETFs during Episodes of Market Turmoil
ETFs received much attention during several episodes when markets tumbled and ETF

prices appeared to deviate from the prices of the portfolios of the underlying securities. These
incidents prompted regulators to be concerned about the possibility that ETFs serve as a
transmission conduit for liquidity shocks (Office of Financial Research 2013). In particular, the
concern is that during market turbulence, market makers and arbitrageurs cease intermediation
activity because they do not have reliable pricing information. As a result, their absence can lead
to illiquidity in the underlying securities, amplification of the shock, and transmission to other
assets.
During several episodes in recent years, ETFs have displayed a high level of illiquidity
during times of market turbulence, which has led regulators and academics to investigate whether
ETFs exacerbate liquidity shocks. Perhaps the most well-known example of a market breakdown
in recent years was the Flash Crash of May 6, 2010. On that day, the market was volatile because
news about the Greek debt crisis was anticipated. The breakdown in market activity started with
an unusual trading volume in the S&P 500 e-mini future contracts, which spread to the equity
market and caused the S&P 500 to decline by about 9% within 20 minutes. Hundreds of stocks
experienced sharp declines in prices. Borkovec, Domowitz, Serbin, and Yegerman (2010) report
that the liquidity of ETFs declined dramatically during the crash: Spreads widened significantly,
and the limit order book dried up. They interpret this finding as evidence that market participants
exited the market once signs of extreme volatility and illiquidity appeared. As a result of the exodus
of liquidity providers, price discovery no longer took place at ETFs and there was a disconnect
between the returns of ETFs and the returns of the underlying securities. Madhavan (2012) reviews
the academic literature discussing the causes of the Flash Crash and agrees that liquidity providers
exited the market. He argues that the departure of ETF prices from those of the underlying
securities was rooted in the fragmentation of markets. Madhavan claims that stocks are more
sensitive to liquidity shocks when markets are fragmented. He finds evidence suggesting that these

20

stocks lost much liquidity during the Flash Crash event and that ETFs linked to these stocks
experienced the heaviest volume of canceled orders and price deviations.
Peterffy (2010), who owns and heads one of the largest stock broker houses in the United
States, testified that due to bad news from Europe, institutions sold ETF shares. Arbitrageurs
bought ETF shares and sold short the underlying stocks. Because of sparse liquidity in some
exchanges, some of the arbitrage programs diagnosed unreliable price data and withdrew from the
market, leading to a positive feedback loop. As a result, the dry-up of arbitrage capital caused the
mispricing between ETFs and the underlying stocks to widen. This mechanism is similar to the
model of Pan and Zeng (2016), which attempts to explain the behavior of arbitrageurs. At times
of market stress, when the securities underlying the ETF are illiquid, APs may abstain from
engaging in arbitrage activity. It is important to note that prior literature has documented that
arbitrageurs exit the market at times of market stress, potentially exacerbating market turbulence
(e.g., Aragon and Strahan 2012, Ben-David, Franzoni, and Moussawi 2012). There are also
similarities to the model by Cespa and Foucault (2014). In their theory, market participants rely
on information contained in the prices of one asset to price another, e.g., ETFs and the index
constituents. However, when one asset becomes temporarily less liquid and its price becomes
noisier, market participants are more cautious trading the second asset, leading to lower liquidity.
Thus, liquidity shocks travel across assets because they are informationally connected.
Following the Flash Crash, several regulators and market commentators voiced concerns
about ETFs. Ramaswamy (2011) generalizes the findings from events of market turbulence and
argues that some ETFs may pose a risk to the financial system. In particular, he argues that
synthetic and exotic ETFs (e.g., leveraged ETFs, bear ETFs) use leverage, swaps, and derivatives
to track the index. He says that past experience shows that assets with a long chain of
intermediaries and counterparties may cause or exacerbate financial shocks due to risk exposure
along the chain of financial intermediaries.
After the Flash Crash of 2010, the SEC adopted rules to halt trading in individual securities,
including ETFs, that exhibit extreme volatility swings. Subsequently, on August 24, 2015, extreme

21

price movements triggered trading halts of five minutes or longer for more than 300 ETFs.14
Following steep declines in the futures market prior to the stock market opening, there was a big
run on ETF prices immediately after 9:30 am, which caused several ETFs to trade at sharp
discounts relative to their NAV. ETF market makers and APs arguably withdrew from the market
after a trading pause in the futures market, which they used to hedge their exposure in volatile
trading sessions.15 On August 24, 42% of the overall volume in US equity markets was ETF
trading, despite a big fraction of the trading halts being attributed of US-listed ETFs. The shock
that hit ETF prices was eventually transmitted to several large underlying stocks without an
apparent fundamental reason.16,17 This event could very well be an example of the liquidity and
arbitrage model proposed by Pan and Zeng (2016), in which arbitrageurs stay on the sidelines
during market stress due to concerns that the mispricing may widen; eventually this behavior
becomes self-fulfilling as the absence of arbitrage by itself leads to greater mispricing. Agarwal,
Hanouna, Moussawi, and Stahel (2016) use the August 24 event to test whether ETFs pose a
liquidity risk in times of market stress. They find improvements in underlying stock liquidity
during the period when trading in the ETFs with wild price swings was halted that day. Their
results suggest that ETFs create an additional layer of commonality in the liquidity of underlying
securities that comes into play in times of market stress. In other words, when the price of an ETF
diverts from the price of the underlying portfolio, APs and arbitrageurs trade in an attempt to
correct the mispricing. This mechanical trading activity provides liquidity at the stock level;
however, the direction of the liquidity (buy or sell) is correlated across the different securities that
compose the ETF basket, usually a sample of the underlying index.
June 20, 2013, is another instance when the prices of ETFs plummeted, due to the lack of
countering arbitrage forces. On that day, the prices of stocks in many emerging markets declined
14

Eleven ETFs were halted 10 times or more. Corrie Driebusch, Saumya Vaishampayan, and Leslie Josephs, “Wild
trading exposed flaws in ETFs,” September 13, 2015, Wall Street Journal, http://www.wsj.com/articles/wild-tradingexposed-flaws-in-etfs-1442174925.
15
Chris Dieterich, “The great ETF debacle explained,” September 5 2015, Barron’s,
http://www.barrons.com/articles/the-great-etf-debacle-explained-1441434195.
16
Division of Trading and Markets at the SEC, Research Note on Equity Market Volatility on August 24 2015,
December 2015, https://www.sec.gov/marketstructure/research/equity_market_volatility.pdf
17
For example, DVY’s decline of 35% caused significant price pressure on large underlying basket stocks, such as
GE, which dropped by as much as 21% before reverting back to prior values after the DVY’s price stabilized during
the day.

22

sharply. The ETFs that track the indices of these emerging markets and that are traded in the United
States experienced sharp price declines as well. However, because the foreign markets were closed
during the operating hours of the US markets, APs and arbitrageurs appear to have abstained from
the market, letting ETF prices collapse under the selling pressure of US investors.18
These events show that across several market occasions, the prices of ETFs have diverged
from the prices of the underlying portfolios due to a lack of arbitrage between the two assets. The
model of Pan and Zeng (2016) appears to explain the withdrawal of arbitrage capital from the
market. Their model suggests that at times APs have little incentive to engage in arbitrage, for
example, due to the accumulation of inventory. In these cases, they may abstain from the market,
leading to greater mispricing.

5

Conclusion and Directions for Future Research
ETFs are perhaps the greatest game-changer in the asset management industry in the first

decades of the 21st century. These investment vehicles offer a combination of features that have
not been available to investors before: low-cost transactions, intraday liquidity, and passive index
tracking. The rise of ETFs is part of a wider process that has taken place in the asset management
industry over the last three decades: Passive management has expanded, while at the same time
the asset management landscape has become more concentrated. While some of the implications
of these trends have been studied (e.g., Ben-David, Franzoni, Moussawi, and Sedunov 2015), some
important research questions remain open. In particular, do the low transaction costs of ETFs
enable short-term trading, creating a new breed of short-term speculators who did not exist before?
In other words, do ETFs attract speculators who traded other investment vehicles before the
introduction of ETFs (e.g., closed-end funds), or did they start speculating once ETFs were
available? Do these traders have a significant impact on the quality of prices?
The literature presents mixed evidence about the effects of ETFs on the informational
efficiency of the underlying securities. On the one hand, researchers have found that ETFs allow
information to be more efficiently impounded into security prices. On the other hand, evidence

18

Christopher Condon and Michelle Kaske, “ETF tracking errors in rout shows access comes with risks,” Bloomberg,
June 23, 2013.

23

indicates that securities prices have become noisier since the introduction of ETFs. It is possible
that both phenomena are taking place in parallel: Security prices impound information more
efficiently once they are included in ETFs’ baskets and, at the same time, become more volatile
due to non-fundamental reasons. Missing to date is a welfare analysis exploring the net effect of
ETFs on market participants. Do ETFs increase informational efficiency overall? Are there corners
of the financial markets where the informational gains are particularly large, and others where they
are negative? Are there times in which ETFs increase price efficiency and market quality and
others in which they detract along those dimensions?
The ability of ETF prices to truly reflect the value of the underlying securities depends on
the presence of agents who facilitate arbitrage: high-frequency arbitrageurs, hedge funds, and APs.
The concerns raised by academics and regulators about the risks that these classes of investors may
create during events of market turbulence deserve additional investigation. Specifically, there is a
concern that ETFs provide a false sense of liquidity: that they are liquid in a normal trading
environment, but during turbulent times, liquidity dries up because APs and arbitrageurs stay out
of the market. The effect could be exacerbated if the presence of ETFs crowds out (i.e., withdraws)
liquidity from the underlying assets (e.g., corporate bonds, as in Dannhauser 2016). It is important
that financial economists continue to explore the integrity of financial markets and warn against
potential market breakdowns that could negatively impact the real economy and be potentially
harmful for society at large.
Understanding the effects of ETFs on liquidity and efficiency as well as their mechanism
is important not only from an academic standpoint, but also from a regulatory perspective. Since
the financial crisis of 2008, and due to a few later episodes when the ETF arbitrage mechanism
has broken down, both investors and policymakers have raised concerns about the fragility of the
ETF market.19,20,21 Our hope is that the academic research about ETFs is useful in quantifying the
systemic risks that these investment vehicles pose and that it can potentially help address them.

19

See Robin Wigglesworth, Nicole Bullock and Joe Rennison, “SEC gears up for major review of exchange traded
funds,” Financial Times, October 20, 2016.
20
See Joe Rennison and Thomas Hale, “Explosive growth of bond ETFs stirs fears of impending crisis,” Financial
Times, October 19, 2016.
21
The former head of the SEC, Mary Jo White, recently hinted at a large-scale review of the ETF landscape by the
US financial market regulator (https://www.sec.gov/news/speech/white-speech-keynote-address-ici-052016.html).

24

References
Agapova, Anna, 2011, Conventional Mutual Index Funds versus Exchange-Traded Funds, Journal
of Financial Markets 14, 323–343.
Agarwal, Vikas, Paul Hanouna, Rabih Moussawi, and Cristof Stahel, 2016, Do ETFs Increase the
Commonality in Liquidity of Underlying Stocks, Working Paper, Villanova University.
Antoniewicz, Rachelle, and Jane Heinrichs, 2014, Understanding Exchange-Traded Funds: How
ETFs Work, ICI Research Perspective 20(5), 1–39.
Appel, Ian R., Todd A. Gormley, and Donald B. Keim, 2016, Passive Investors, Not Passive
Owners, Journal of Financial Economics 121(1), 111–141.
Aragon, George O., and Philip E. Strahan, 2012, Hedge Funds as Liquidity Providers: Evidence
from the Lehman Bankruptcy, Journal of Financial Economics 103(3), 570–587.
Bai, Qing, Shaun A. Bond, and Brian Hatch, 2015, The Impact of Leveraged and Inverse ETFs
on Underlying Real Estate Returns, Real Estate Economics 43(1), 37–66.
Baltussen, Guido, Zhi Da, and Sjoerd van Bekkum, 2016, Indexing and Stock Market Serial
Dependence Around the World, Working Paper, Notre Dame University.
Barber, Brad M., and Terrance Odean, 2000, Trading Is Hazardous to Your Wealth: The Common
Stock Investment Performance of Individual Investors, Journal of Finance 55(2), 773–806.
Barnhart, Scott W., and Stuart Rosenstein, 2010, Exchange-Traded Fund Introductions and
Closed-End Fund Discounts and Volume, Financial Review 45(4), 973–994.
Basak, Suleyman, and Anna Pavlova, 2013, Asset Prices and Institutional Investors, American
Economic Review 103(5), 1728–1758.
Basak, Suleyman, and Anna Pavlova, 2016, A Model of Financialization of Commodities, Journal
of Finance 71(4), 1511–1555.
Ben-David, Itzhak, Francesco Franzoni, and Rabih Moussawi, 2012, Hedge Funds Stock Trading
during the Financial Crisis of 2007-2009, Review of Financial Studies 25(1), 1–54.
Ben-David, Itzhak, Francesco Franzoni, and Rabih Moussawi, 2013, Do ETFs Increase Stock
Volatility? Working Paper, The Ohio State University.
Ben-David, Itzhak, Francesco Franzoni, Rabih Moussawi, and John Sedunov, 2015, The Granular
Nature of Large Institutional Investors, Working Paper, The Ohio State University.
Berk, Jonathan B., and Richard C. Green, 2004, Mutual Fund Flows and Performance in Rational
Markets, Journal of Political Economy, 112(6), 1269-1295.
Bessembinder, Hendrik, and Paul J. Seguin, 1992, Futures-Trading Activity and Stock Price
Volatility, Journal of Finance 47, 2015–2034.
Bhattacharya, Ayan, and Maureen O’Hara, 2016, Can ETFs Increase Market Fragility? Effect of
Information Linkages in ETF Markets, Working Paper, Cornell University.

25

Bhattacharya, Utpal, Benjamin Loos, Steffen Meyer, and Andreas Hackethal, 2017, Abusing
ETFs, Review of Finance 21 (3), 1217–1250.
Blocher, Jesse, and Robert E. Whaley, 2016, Two-Sided Markets in Asset Management:
Exchange-traded Funds and Securities Lending, Working Paper, Vanderbilt University.
Bond, Philip, and Diego García, 2016, The Equilibrium Consequences of Indexing, Working
Paper, University of Washington.
Boone, Audra L., and Joshua T. White, 2015, The Effect of Institutional Ownership on Firm
Transparency and Information Production, Journal of Financial Economics 117(3), 508–533.
Borkovec, Milan, Ian Domowitz, Vitaly Serbin, and Henry Yegerman, 2010, Liquidity and Price
Discovery in Exchange-Traded Funds, Journal of Index Investing 1(2), 24-42.
Bradley, Harold, and Robert E. Litan, 2011a, Choking the Recovery: Why New Growth
Companies Aren’t Going Public and Unrecognized Risks of Future Market Disruptions, Working
Paper, The Kaufman Foundation.
Bradley, Harold, and Robert E. Litan, 2011b, ETFs and the Present Danger to Capital Formation,
Working Paper, The Kaufman Foundation.
Broman, Markus S., 2016a, Why Do Investors Chase Passive Returns? Working Paper, Syracuse
University.
Broman, Markus S., 2016b, Liquidity, Style Investing and Excess Comovement of ExchangeTraded Fund Returns, Journal of Financial Markets 30, 27–53.
Broman, Markus S., 2016c, Local Demand, Preferred Habitats and Excess Comovement, Working
Paper, Syracuse University.
Broman, Markus, and Pauline Shum, 2016, Does Liquidity Encourage Short-Term Trading?
Evidence from Exchange-Traded Funds, Working Paper, Syracuse University.
Brown, David C., Shaun W. Davies, and Matthew C. Ringgenberg, 2016, ETF Arbitrage and
Return Predictability, Working Paper, University of Arizona.
Cella, Cristina, Andrew Ellul, and Mariassunta Giannetti, 2013, Investors’ Horizons and the
Amplification of Market Shocks, Review of Financial Studies 26(7), 1607–1648.
Cespa, Giovanni, and Thierry Foucault, 2014, Illiquidity Contagion and Liquidity Crashes, Review
of Financial Studies 27(6), 1615–1660.
Chang, Eric C., Joseph W. Cheng, and Yinghui Pinegar, 1999, Short-Sales Constraints and Price
Discovery: Evidence from the Hong Kong Market, Journal of Finance 62(5), 2097–2121.
Cheng, Minder, and Ananth Madhavan, 2009, The Dynamics of Leveraged and Inverse ExchangeTraded Funds, Journal of Investment Management 7 (4), 43–62.
Chinco, Alex, and Vyacheslav Fos, 2016, The Sound of Many Funds Rebalancing, Working Paper,
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champagne.

26

Clifford, Christopher P., Jon A. Fulkerson, and Bradford D. Jordan, 2014, What Drives ETF
Flows? Financial Review 49(3), 619–642.
Cong, Lin William, and Douglas Xu, 2016, Rise of Factor Investing: Asset Prices, Informational
Efficiency, and Security Design, Working Paper, University of Chicago.
Coval, Joshua, and Erik Stafford, 2007, Asset Fire Sales (and Purchases) in Equity Markets,
Journal of Financial Economics 86(2), 479–512.
Coughenour, Jay F., and Mohsen M. Saad, 2004, Common Market Makers and Commonality in
Liquidity, Journal of Financial Economics 73, 37-69.
Da, Zhi, and Sophie Shive, 2014, Exchange Traded Funds and Asset Return Correlations, Working
Paper, Notre Dame University.
Dannhauser, Caitlin Dillon, 2016, The Impact of Innovation: Evidence from Corporate Bond
ETFs, Journal of Financial Economics, forthcoming.
Dong, Xiaoyang Sean, 2016, Price Impact of ETP Demand on Underliers, Working Paper,
Princeton University.
Evans, Richard, Rabih Moussawi, Michael S. Pagano, and John Sedunov, 2017, ETF Failures-toDeliver: Naked Short-Selling or Operational Shorting? Working Paper, Villanova University.
Frazzini, Andrea, and Owen A. Lamont, 2008, Dumb Money: Mutual Fund Flows and the CrossSection of Stock Returns, Journal of Financial Economics 88, 299–322.
French, Kenneth R., 2008, The Cost of Active Investing, Journal of Finance 63(4), 1537–1573.
Glosten, Lawrence, Suresh Nallareddy, and Yuan Zou, 2016, ETF Trading and Informational
Efficiency of Underlying Securities, Working Paper, Duke University.
Goetzmann, William N., and Massimo Massa, 2003, Index Funds and Stock Market Growth,
Journal of Business 76(1), 1–28.
Greenwood, Robin, 2005, Short- and Long-Term Demand Curves for Stocks: Theory and
Evidence on the Dynamics of Arbitrage, Journal of Financial Economics 75(3), 607–649.
Greenwood, Robin, and Nathan Sosner, 2007, Trading Patterns and Excess Comovement of Stock
Returns, Financial Analysts Journal 63, 69–81.
Guedj, Ilan, and Jennifer Huang, 2009, Are ETFs Replacing Index Mutual Funds? Working Paper,
University of Texas.
Hill, Joanne M., 2016, The Evolution and Success of Index Strategies in ETFs, Financial Analysts
Journal, September/October 2016.
Hill, Joanne M., Dave Nadig, Matt Hougan, and Deborah Fuhr, 2015, A Comprehensive Guide to
Exchange-Traded Funds (ETFs), Working Paper, CFA Institute Research Foundation.
Hurlin, Christophe, Grégoire Iseli, Christophe Pérignon, and Stanley C. H. Yeung, 2014, The
Collateral Risk of ETFs, Working Paper, HEC Paris.

27

Israeli, Doron, Charles M. C. Lee, and Suhas Sridharan, 2017, Is there a Dark Side to Exchange
Traded Funds (ETFs)? An Information Perspective, Review of Accounting Studies, forthcoming.
Ivanov, Ivan T., and Stephen L. Lenkey, 2016, Are Concerns About Leveraged ETFs Overblown?
Working Paper, Federal Research Board.
Jiang, Wenxi, and Hongjun Yan, 2016, Financial Innovation, Investor Behavior, and Arbitrage:
Evidence from the ETF Market, Working Paper, Chinese University of Hong Kong.
Kaul, Aditya, Vikas Mehrotra, and Randall Morck, 2002, Demand Curves for Stocks Do Slope
Down: New Evidence from an Index Weights Adjustment, Journal of Finance 55, 893–912.
Koch, Andrew, Stefan Ruenzi, and Laura Starks, 2016, Commonality in Liquidity: A DemandSide Explanation, Review of Financial Studies 29(8), 1943-1974.
Krause, Timothy, Sina Ehsani, and Donald Lien, 2014, Exchange-Traded Funds, Liquidity and
Volatility, Applied Financial Economics 24(24), 1617–1630.
Lee, Charles, Andrei Shleifer, and Richard H. Thaler, 1991, Investor Sentiment and the Closed‐
End Fund Puzzle, Journal of Finance 46(1), 75–109.
Lettau, Martin, and Anath Madhavan, 2016, ETF 101 For Economists, Working Paper, University
of California at Berkeley.
Li, Frank Weikai, and Qifei Zhu, 2016, Synthetic Shorting with ETFs, Working Paper, University
of Texas at Austin.
MacKinlay, A. Craig, and Krishna Ramaswamy, 1988, Index-Futures Arbitrage and the Behavior
of Stock Index Futures Prices, Review of Financial Studies 1(2), 138–158.
Mackintosh, Phil, and Victor Lin, 2011, ETF Trade Strategy: Triple Trouble, Working Paper,
Credit Suisse.
Madhavan, Ananth N., 2012, Exchange-Traded Funds, Market Structure, and the Flash Crash,
Financial Analysts Journal 68(4), 20–35.
Madhavan, Ananth N., 2016, Exchange-Traded Funds and the New Dynamics of Investing, Oxford
University Press.
Madhavan, Ananth N., Urusla Marchioni, Wei Li, and Daphne Yan Du, 2014 Fall, Equity ETFs
versus Index Futures: A Comparison for Fully Funded Investors, Journal of Index Investing.
Madhavan, Ananth N., and Aleksander Sobczyk, 2016, Price Dynamics and Liquidity of
Exchange-Traded Funds, Journal of Investment Management, forthcoming.
Malamud, Semyon, 2015, A Dynamic Equilibrium Model of ETFs, Swiss Finance Institute
Working Paper.
Marshall Ben R., Nhut H. Nguyen, and Nuttawat Visaltanachoti, 2013, ETF Arbitrage: Intraday
Evidence, Journal of Banking and Finance 37(9), 3486-3498.
Marshall Ben R., Nhut H. Nguyen, and Nuttawat Visaltanachoti, 2015, ETF Liquidity, Working
Paper, Massey University.

28

Nagel, Stefan, 2012, Evaporating Liquidity, Review of Financial Studies 25(7), 2005–2039.
Office of Financial Research, 2013, Asset Management and Financial Stability, Report.
Pan, Kevin, and Yao Zeng, 2016, ETF Arbitrage under Liquidity Mismatch, Working Paper,
Harvard University.
Petajisto, Antti, 2017, Inefficiencies in the Pricing of Exchange-Traded Funds, Financial Analysts
Journal 73(1).
Peterffy, Thomas, 2010, Testimony before the Join CFTC-SEC Advisory Committee on Emerging
Regulatory Issues, June 22, 2010.
Piccotti, Louis R., 2014, An ETF Premium Puzzle and a Market Segmentation Explanation,
Working Paper, Rutgers University.
Pontiff, Jeffrey, 1996, Costly Arbitrage: Evidence from Closed-End Funds, Quarterly Journal of
Economics 111(4), 1135–1151.
Ramaswamy, Srichander, 2011, Market Structures and Systemic Risks of Exchange-Traded
Funds, Working paper, Bank of International Settlements.
Richie, Nivine, Robert T. Daigler, and Kimberly C. Gleason, 2008, The Limits to Stock Index
Arbitrage: Examining S&P 500 Futures and SPDRs, Journal of Futures Markets 28(12), 1182–
1205.
Roll, Richard, Eduardo Schwartz, and Avanidhar Subrahmanyam, 2007, Liquidity and the Law of
One Price: The Case of the Futures-Cash Basis, Journal of Finance 62(5), 2201–2234.
Schultz, Paul, and Sophie Shive, 2016, Mutual Funds and Bond Liquidity, Working Paper, Notre
Dame University.
Shleifer, Andrei, 1986, Do Demand Curves for Stocks Slope Down? Journal of Finance 41(3)
579–590.
Shleifer, Andrei, and Robert W. Vishny, 1997, The Limits of Arbitrage, Journal of Finance
52(1), 35–55.
Shreck, Mara, and Shelly Antoniewicz, 2012, ETF Basics: The Creation and Redemption Process
and Why It Matters, https://www.ici.org/viewpoints/view_12_etfbasics_creation
Shum, Pauline, Walid Hejazi, Edgar Haryanto, and Arthur Rodier, 2016, Intraday Share Price
Volatility and Leveraged ETF Rebalancing, Review of Finance 20(6), 2379–2409.
Staer, Arsenio, 2014, Fund Flows and Underlying Returns: The Case of ETFs, Working Paper,
University of California at Irvine.
Stambaugh, Robert F., 2014, Investment Noise and Trends, Journal of Finance 69(4), 1415–1453.
Stratmann, Thomas, and John W. Welborn, 2012, Exchange-Traded Funds, Fails-to-Deliver, and
Market Volatility, Working Paper, George Mason University.
Stein, Jeremy C., 1987, Informational Externalities and Welfare-Reducing Speculation, Journal of
Political Economy 95(6), 1123–1145.
29

Sullivan, Rodney N., and James X. Xiong, 2012, How Index Trading Increases Market
Vulnerability, Financial Analysts Journal 68(2), 70–84.
Tuzun, Tugkan, 2014, Are Leveraged and Inverse ETFs the New Portfolio Insurers? Working
paper, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.
Wermers, Russ, and Jinming Xue, 2015, Intraday ETF Trading and the Volatility of the
Underlying, Working Paper, University of Maryland.
Wurgler, Jeffrey, 2011, On the Economic Consequences of Index-Linked Investing, in Gerald
Rosenfeld, Jay W. Lorsch, and Rakesh Khurana, eds.: Challenges to Business in the Twenty-First
Century (American Academy of Arts and Sciences, Cambridge, MA).
Wurgler, Jeffrey, and Ekaterina Zhuravskaya, 2002, Does Arbitrage Flatten Demand Curves for
Stocks, Journal of Business 75(4), 583–608.

30

Figure

1.

Time

Series

of

the

Total

Market

Capitalization

and the Assets Under Management of ETFs
10%
$25,000
9%

8%

7%

6%

$15,000

5%

4%

$10,000

% of Total Market Capitalization

Total Market Capitalization, $ Billion

$20,000

3%

2%

$5,000

1%

$0

0%

Common Stocks

ETFs

ETFs/Total (RHS)

Figure 2. Time Series of Daily Trading Volume
50%

$600

45%
$500
40%

35%

30%

25%

$300

20%
$200
15%

10%
$100
5%

$0

0%

Common Stocks

ETFs

31

ETFs/Total (RHS)

% of Total Daily Volume

Dollar Volume, $ Billion

$400

Figure 3. Time Series of Short Interest
$900

35%

$800
30%

25%
$600
20%

$500

$400

15%

$300
10%
$200
5%
$100

0%

$0

Common Stocks

ETFs

32

ETFs/Total (RHS)

% of Total Short Interest

Total Dollar Short Interest, $ Billion

$700

Figure 4. Illustration of the Propagation of Liquidity Shocks via Arbitrage

ETF
ETF

NAV

NAV

Fundamental Value

Fundamental Value

Figure 4a. Initial equilibrium

ETF

Figure 4b. Liquidity shock to ETF

NAV
ETF

NAV
Fundamental Value

Fundamental Value

Figure 4c. Initial outcome of arbitrage:
the shock is propagated to the NAV, and
the ETF price starts reverting to the
fundamental value.

Figure 4d. Equilibrium reestablished: after
some time, both the ETF price and the NAV
revert to the fundamental value.

33

Table 1. Time Series of Assets Under Management
The table presents the time series of assets under management in billions of US dollars. Index funds include both
traditional index funds and smart-beta index funds. Source: authors’ calculations and the Center for Research in
Securities Prices.

Year
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016

US Equity Funds
ETFs
Mutual Funds
Index Active
Index
Active
31.2
334.9 2,632.6
63.0
0.1
327.1 2,586.2
78.7
308.3 2,231.8
91.8
255.3 1,708.5
131.0
365.1 2,325.1
183.6
0.1
443.6 2,687.7
219.9
0.0
486.3 2,918.1
282.5
0.5
592.0 3,299.1
384.3
2.4
665.5 3,532.0
289.9 11.3
479.2 2,323.7
435.5 10.5
660.0 2,998.9
565.8 11.6
823.5 3,496.8
612.2 11.7
856.9 3,349.6
755.7 11.3
1,024.5 3,662.9
1,012.7 13.2
1,432.8 4,774.0
1,233.1 19.5
1,706.2 5,065.8
1,235.3 22.5
1,688.7 4,975.7
1,329.4 24.0
1,805.6 5,044.1

Foreign Equity Funds
ETFs
Mutual Funds
Index Active Index Active
2.0
19.1
504.3
2.0
0.0
19.2
457.5
2.9
17.7
364.5
5.3
18.3
310.4
13.9
31.5
448.5
33.1
51.1
601.7
64.0
79.1
791.4
107.7
125.9 1,105.3
169.7
0.0
177.7 1,396.4
104.2
0.1
102.4
845.5
199.1
0.3
130.0 1,185.1
260.0
0.8
184.1 1,383.6
223.0
0.0
179.8 1,190.3
305.0
0.0
234.6 1,424.3
378.1
0.0
306.1 1,799.4
396.7
1.2
357.5 1,778.9
455.3
0.8
319.5 1,953.4
434.5
0.9
349.2 1,958.9

34

Fixed Income Funds
ETFs
Mutual Funds
Index Active Index Active
20.0 2,181.3
23.9 2,403.0
33.5 2,890.1
3.9
42.6 3,007.6
4.7
46.1 2,887.2
8.5
54.3 2,803.5
15.0
63.6 2,953.1
75.9 3,364.7
20.5
34.3
109.5 4,242.7
55.6
0.0
134.3 5,001.6
100.1
0.0
185.8 4,986.8
132.3
1.5
233.9 4,910.5
183.1
3.8
276.1 4,913.6
235.7
9.7
319.8 5,292.1
227.7 10.9
324.2 5,127.9
280.5
9.8
397.5 5,282.8
324.9 12.8
427.9 5,266.5
381.6 15.5
481.1 5,458.8

