NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

TIME-INCONSISTENT CHARITABLE GIVING
James Andreoni
Marta Serra-Garcia
Working Paper 22824
http://www.nber.org/papers/w22824

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 2016, Revised December 2019

We are grateful to Simone Galperti, Uri Gneezy, Alex Kellogg, Menusch Khadjavi, Jeff Naecker,
David Reiley, Laura Schechter, Joel Sobel, Charlie Sprenger, Bertil Tungodden, Jeroen van de
Ven and several seminar and conference participants for helpful comments. This research was
conducted under IRB #140762. We would like to thank the National Science Foundation, grants
SES-1427355, SES-1658952, the Science of Philanthropy Initiative, the John Templeton
Foundation, and internal funds from UCSD for financial support. The views expressed herein are
those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2016 by James Andreoni and Marta Serra-Garcia. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Time-Inconsistent Charitable Giving
James Andreoni and Marta Serra-Garcia
NBER Working Paper No. 22824
November 2016, Revised December 2019
JEL No. C91,D64,D9
ABSTRACT
We motivate this paper with a puzzle. When we asked subjects to give five dollars to charity
today, about 30 percent agree, but when the donation would instead be paid in one week, giving
increases by 50 percent. The puzzle is that received models of self-control cannot explain this
time-inconsistent charitable giving. This suggests a new approach is needed for intertemporal
pro-sociality. We present one solution to the puzzle in a theoretical model and two new
experiments. Our explanation relies on the rich dynamics of warm glow, and specifically image
concerns, in prosocial behavior.

James Andreoni
Department of Economics
University of California, San Diego
9500 Gilman Drive
La Jolla, CA 92093-0508
and NBER
andreoni@ucsd.edu
Marta Serra-Garcia
University of California, San Diego
Rady School of Management
9500 Gilman Drive #0553
La Jolla, CA 92093-0553
mserragarcia@ucsd.edu

1

Introduction

We begin this paper by demonstrating a puzzle. In the first week of a two-week experiment, we ask subject to give $5 to a worthy charity. Half are asked to decide now to
give now, and half are asked to decide now to give the money in a week. If giving is like
other consumption, then the effects of both the warm-glow of giving and the cost of the
gift should both be evaluated at the time the gift is transacted. But this means the two
decisions are identical—if the net utility from giving today is positive, then it remains
positive even when discounted one week, with or without hyperbolic discounting. In our
experiment, by contrast, we find what we call time-inconsistent charitable giving: when
today’s decision is implemented one week after it is made, giving increases by 50 percent.
Understanding this time-inconsistent charitable giving is the goal of this paper.
Time inconsistencies are usually explained by models in which elements of the costs
and benefits are separated across time. In our motivating experiment above, both the gift
(benefit) and the payment (cost) were made at the same time. What was different about
the two was the separation between the date of the decision and the date that decision
was implemented. To explain the positive effect of delay, it would have to be that a share
of the positive utility from giving flows at the time of the decision, while a larger share
of the negative utility of paying for the gift flows at the time of the transaction. When
discounting is applied more heavily to the costs than to the benefits, time-inconsistent
charitable giving can occur.
Notice, at this point we can convert the conditions set out in the prior paragraph into
primitives about warm-glow assumed in the behavioral model. Instead, we take this as
an opportunity to learn about the process that generates the warm glow, and that would
allow, or perhaps force, the giver to consume some of the benefits of giving at the time
of the decision to give, but still delay the full cost. The mechanism we posit for this is
maintaining a self- or social image (Andreoni & Bernheim, 2009).
It is essential to first understand why models in which individuals only derive utility
from transacting the gift cannot explain the puzzle. In transacting the gift, both the

1

benefits and costs are assumed to occur in the same period. As a result, preference
rankings between giving and not giving cannot change over time.
One fix for this would be to assume different discount rates for the joy of giving and the
pain of giving. This will surely create time inconsistencies, but could only be consistent
with a model in which people are tempted to not give. As we show in follow up studies,
time-inconsistent givers show a strong preference for flexibility over commitment. This
indicates that temptation is not a dominant explanation for dynamic giving decisions.1
Moreover, this modeling choice begs the question of why there may be two different
discount parameters.
The solution we propose builds on the observation that a charitable contribution is a
social interaction. Stated differently, a single act of making a charitable contribution can
create a number of opportunities for the donor to collect social utility, which has been
known in literature as warm-glow (Andreoni, 1989, 1990). Since both the ask to give and
the transaction of giving are social interactions, both offer opportunities for warm-glow
to be collected (Andreoni and Payne, 2003; Andreoni and Rao, 2011; Andreoni et al.,
2017).
Our model of this phenomenon is built off of the observation that saying yes or no
to a request to give, even if is a future gift, can generate an emotional response from
the person asked.2 They may feel guilty saying no or elated to say yes. When there is
an audience to witness a decision about giving, these feelings of guilt or pride will likely
be stronger the larger the audience. But where do these emotions come from? Think
first of self-image. A person with an image of being charitable has just been offered
an opportunity to affirm this image. Someone concerned with social image has been
offered a similar opportunity. Once a decision to give has been made, the person’s selfor social-image can change, bringing immediate positive utility from a decision to give.
Transacting the commitment brings utility later, but in our motivating experiment would
add nothing to the giver’s image. Thus, image concerns add positive utility to saying
1

See Breman (2011); Saito(2015); and Dreber et al., (2016).
Similar observations are made in Andreoni et al., (2017, 2019); DellaVigna et al., (2012); Exley
(2015); Exley and Naecker (2017); and Kessler (2017).
2

2

yes to a request to give, and discounting can allow the positive image utility to outweigh
the potentially negative utility from actually giving. Thus a person may not give when
asked to give today, but will give when asked today to commit to giving in a week. When
there is an audience to witness a decision about giving, these feelings of guilt or pride
will likely be stronger the larger the audience.
We build a model of dynamic social-image concerns that contains two novel assumptions about the giving experience. First, like anticipation (e.g., Loewenstein, 1987; Elster
and Loewenstein, 1992; Bernheim and Thomadsen, 2005; Köszegi, 2010), the warm glow
from giving can begin flowing the moment the decision to give has been made and, in
particular, because social-image utility can flow as soon as the audience observes the
commitment to give. The cost of transacting the gift, however, can be discounted.
While this immediate experience of decision utility in the early period can explain the
results of our motivating study, the fifty percent growth in giving from a one week delay
seems intuitively (to us) too large of an effect for discounting alone to generate. Thus
we also consider a second realistic feature of our study that the pleasures experienced
at the time of the giving decision may be re-experienced later when focus is brought to
the giving decision, such as when the gift is transacted. Hence, spreading a single giving
decision into two distinct social interactions is like giving a person a larger audience,
even if the audience is the same people, and even if the audience is simply themselves (as
with self-signaling). The combination of both effects makes deciding now to give later
strongly preferable to deciding now to give now.
In addition to our motivating experiment, we present two additional experiments
to contrast our model with other known models that could bear on time-inconsistent
charitable giving. In the first of these two experiments we offer subjects a (probabilistic)
commitment device, in the style of Augenblick et al., (2015). We find that a majority
of subjects who show time-inconsistent charitable giving do not exhibit a preference
for commitment, but rather a preference for flexibility, in contradiction to models of
temptation, for instance.
To test broader predictions of our model of dynamic image concerns, our third ex-

3

periment exogenously varies the information given to the audience, and its size (Ali and
Bénabou, 2018). We find that time-inconsistent giving decisions increase when (some)
giving decisions are visible to an audience, and that commitment demand increases when
commitment choices are subject to an audience. The results are broadly consistent with
image concerns, and suggest that these can be an important part of the explanation for
time-inconsistent giving.
While a small literature has emerged around the temporal nature of altruistic decisions, we are the first to consider dynamic social interactions as the source of time
inconsistent giving behavior.3 Our model of dynamic social-image concerns builds on a
rich literature of static models of social and self-image concerns.4 Our model opens up
many new directions for research on the use dynamic fundraising appeals, anonymity,
pledges, and the public announcements of future gifts.
The paper is organized as follows. Next, Section 2 presents motivating experiment on
the puzzle of time-inconsistent charitable giving. In Section 3 we develop a theoretical
model of dynamic social-image concerns, and review other known possible explanations of
our motivating experiment. Section 4 presents our second experiment allowing subjects to
choose commitment. Section 5 studies dynamic giving decisions and commitment demand
when these decisions are made visible to an audience, providing a test of dynamic image
concerns. Section 6 concludes.

2

The Motivating Experiment: Give More Later

2.1

Experimental Design

We designed a simple longitudinal experiment. Subjects came to the laboratory for an
experiment designed to last two visits exactly one week apart, to the hour, irrespective
3

These have focused on the effects of time pressure (Rand et al., 2012; Kessler et al., 2016; Recalde
et al., 2018), narrow bracketing (Adena and Huck, 2017), reminders (e.g., Huck and Rasul, 2010) and
present-biased discounting (Kovarik, 2009; Breman, 2011; Dreber et al., 2016; Kolle and Wenner, 2018).
4
Benabou and Tirole, 2006, 2011; Andreoni and Bernheim, 2009; Ariely et al., 2009; Ellingsen et al.,
2012; Grossman, 2015; Filiz-Ozbay and Ozbay, 2014; Tonin and Vlassopoulos, 2013; Adena and Huck,
2019, among others.

4

of their decisions. We compare two treatments. In both treatments subjects see identical
presentations about a charity called GiveDirectly, and then are asked if they would give
$5 of their participation fee to the charity. All decisions are made in the first week, and
no new decisions are made in second week.
In the first treatment, subjects decide now about donations made today and coming
from today’s participation fee. We refer to this as the Decide Now to Give Now (NN)
treatment. In the second treatment, called the Decide Now to Give Later (NL) treatment,
subjects make an identical decision in week 1, but the donation is transacted a week later
and is paid from the participation fee from the next week. We observed 179 subjects in
the NN treatment and 173 in the NL treatment.5

2.2

Results

The results of this experiment are shown in Figure 1. The one-week delay in transacting
a charitable gift raises giving from 31% in the Decide Now to Give Now treatment to 45%
in the Decide-Now-to-Give-Later treatment—a 50% increase in giving. When deciding
today about a donation transacted today, people are significantly less likely to give than
when deciding today about a gift to be transacted just one week later (χ2 -test, p ≤ 0.01).6

2.3

The Puzzle

The behavior shown in Figure 1 clearly demonstrates that a delay between the decision to
give and the giving transaction increases giving. This cannot be explained by a model in
5

To reduce attrition, the first four out of eight sessions of the NN and NL treatments paid a higher
show-up payment in Week 2 of the study, paying $6 in Week 1 and $20 in Week 2. The second set of four
sessions paid the same show-up of $15 in both weeks. We observe no significant differences in attrition
(χ2 = 0.197, p = 0.658) and donation behavior (32.5% and 29.4%, respectively, χ2 = 0.184, p = 0.668 in
NN; and 43.8% and 47.5%, respectively, χ2 = 0.206, p = 0.650, in NL) between these sessions and hence
pool them in the analysis.
In NN, 14 subjects (7.8%) failed to complete the study, and in NL the number was 20 (11.5%). The
difference in completion rates is not significant across treatments, and subjects do not differ in their
observable characteristics. We focus on the analysis of individuals who completed the study, though
findings remain unchanged including all subjects. Further details of the design and the instructions for
this experiment are found in Appendix B.
6
In Appendix C, we show the results by gender. Giving by women increases from 30% to 50% with
delay, that by men increases from 32% to 39%.

5

Note: Error bars denote ± 1 S.E.

Figure 1: Giving Decisions in the NN and NL Treatments
which individuals only derive utility from the giving transaction and exhibit (standard)
time-consistent discounting.
To demonstrate this, assume households only derive utility when the gift is transacted.
An individual is asked to give a set amount to a charity, g, which we normalize to 1 so
that g = 0 or 1 can be interpreted as both a quantity and an index of giving. If the
individual decides to give, he gains value v ≥ 0, but must pay 1 for the gift.
In the Decide Now to Give Now treatment, the individual decides to give if
v > 1.

(1)

What happens if the giving transaction is delayed by a week, as in the Decide Now to
Give Later treatment? Assume that utility from experimental payments is discounted
at a rate δx while future charitable gifts are discounted at a rate δg . An individual who
is asked to give later will have utility of giving of δg v(1) + δx u(−1) = δg v, and utility of
not giving of δg v(0) + δx u(0) = δx . Suppose, as is standard, that δx = δg . Then the give
later decision depends on the benchmark condition (1), and is unaffected by the delay in
6

carrying out the decision. That is, charitable giving is time-consistent.

3

Models of Time-Inconsistent Charitable Giving

How can the behavior in Experiment 1 be explained? We consider two explanations.
First, individuals may exhibit temptation and/or quasi-hyperbolic discounting that differs for giving and own payments. Breman (2011) documents a similar change in giving
to that observed in Experiment 1, with longer time delays, of one and two months, and
attributes it to present-bias. However, there is a second explanation that is relevant in
the context of giving: (warm-glow) utility from giving may not only be determined by
the giving transaction, but also derived from the giving decision.
To understand the importance of these two explanations, we must design a setting
that will draw clear distinctions between them. We do this by studying commitment
demand in Experiment 2. We consider a within-subjects setting in which subjects are
asked to make the same giving decision at two different times, t = 1 or t = 2, that are
one week apart (to the hour). The question asked each week is a request to give $5 to
the charity GiveDirectly at time t = 2. Thus saying yes in t = 2 is to give now, while
saying yes in t = 1 is to give later. Notice too that all transactions take place in t = 2,
while decisions are made both before or concurrent to the transaction. By fixing the date
of the transaction and altering the date of the decision, this setting allows a rich set of
alternative models.
After the second decision is made one of the two decisions is randomly selected to be
carried out in t = 2. The degree of randomness, however, is selected by the subject in
t = 1 in a manner similar to Augenblick et al. (2015). Let p be the probability that the
t = 1 decision is selected. We restrict p to three values: p ∈ {0.1, 0.5, 0.9}. We call p the
level of commitment and for clarity will often refer to p = 0.1 as flexibility (F ), p = 0.5
as indifference (I), and p = 0.9 as commitment (C), and instead write p ∈ {F, I, C}.
The choice of p will play a key role in our experiment as the level of commitment chosen
will help reveal a subject’s true preference for giving.

7

Table 1 provides an overview of the models we discuss in this section. It outlines
their predictions and the results of Experiment 2, testing commitment demand (and thus
temptation models), presented in Section 4.
Table 1: Models and Testable Predictions Regarding Probabilistic Commitment

(1)
Model

Give More Later

(2)
Commitment
if Give More Later

(3)
Commitment
if Always Givers

Giving utility flows only from the giving transaction:
Benchmark
No
-

Indifferent

Temptation to Give:
Sophisticated
Naı̈ve

No
No

-

Indifferent
Indifferent

Temptation to Keep:
Sophisticated
Naı̈ve

Yes
Yes

Yes
Indifferent

Yes/Indifferent
Indifferent

Kreps:

No

No

No

Giving utility flows from the giving decision and transaction:
Image Concerns
Yes
No
Indifferent
Data

Yes

No

Indifferent

Note: Bold indicates coincidence between test and evidence.

3.1

Temptation

Two recent papers study temptation in the domain of prosocial behavior. Dreber et
al. (2016) use a dual-self model assuming temptation to give, in which an individual’s
short-run suffers from self-control problems that make its giving higher than the longrun self prefers. Saito (2015) (see also Noor and Ren, 2011) assumes a temptation to
keep. To simplify our discussion of these two approaches, assume two discount rates, δg
on utility from giving, and δx on utility from money kept for one’s self. Much like in
8

Jackson and Yariv (2015), this will necessitate time inconsistency. When δg > δx , we say
people are tempted to give. When δx > δg , by contrast, we say the person is tempted to
keep. What type of temptation is consistent with the time-inconsistent charitable giving
observed above?
A person will decide not to give now if v < 1, but will decide now to give later if
δg v > δx , that is, if v > δx /δg . For the same person to satisfy both of these conditions
requires that δx /δg < 1, that is, the donors are tempted to keep.
Individuals who are naı̈ve about their time inconsistency act as though they will
execute their long run plans. They can alternatively be assumed to be sophisticated,
meaning they understand that temptation will take over and choose commitment to the
long-run plan that maximizes current discounted utility. Focusing on those tempted to
keep, in our setting sophisticates will choose p = C while naı̈ve players will be indifferent
to p.
Naturally, we expect our sample to also include those who care so little for the charity
that g1 = g2 = 0, or who care so much for the charity that g1 = g2 = 1, regardless of the
opportunity to commit. By this model we expect both of these groups to be indifferent
to p.

3.2

Utility from the Giving Decision: Image Concerns

A charitable contribution is a social interaction not a market exchange. Stated differently,
giving is an experience rather than a consumption item. Hence, a single act of making
a charitable contribution can create a number of opportunities for the donor to collect
warm-glow utility (Andreoni, 1989, 1990; Ribar and Wilhelm, 2002; Ottoni-Wilhelm et
al., 2017). Warm-glow is a “placeholder for more specific individual and social motivations” (Andreoni et al., 2017) to give. An important component of warm glow is social
and self image: One’s feelings of guilt and price about their generosity are an important
driver of giving decisions (e.g., Andreoni et al., 2017; DellaVigna et al., 2012; Exley, 2015;
Exley and Naecker, 2017; and Kessler, 2017).
We propose that image utility can be derived when a decision to give is made. We
9

choose this specific form of warm-glow utility, which is also derived at the moment of the
giving decision, because it can explain why apparently time-inconsistent givers choose
flexibility. Naturally, other components of warm glow could be derived when a decision
to give is made. We think that carefully understanding image concerns is important, as
they have been shown to matter broadly, and they allow the giving utility not only to flow
at various moments, but be magnified by increasing the number of social interactions.
We start from our benchmark model where the only heterogeneity is in v, the utility
one gets from the act of giving, and introduce image concerns, building on static models of
image concerns, such as Bénabou and Tirole (2006) and Andreoni and Bernheim (2009).
We will refer to v as a person’s “type.” We assume that v is drawn from a continuous
distribution f (v) on the interval v ∈ [0, v̄], where v̄ > 1.
Imagine an audience observes an individual’s actions but not their v’s, and forms a
belief about each individual’s type. Image concerns are also known as audience effects
as they require that someone, perhaps just the experimenter, the other subjects in the
study, or a subject’s “impartial spectator,” to be viewing the participant’s choice.
Definition: Audience. An audience is n ≥ 1 individuals who make the same observations on a subject, and thus form the same expectation of the subject’s “type,” which
we call µ. The audience can be characterized by their number and belief. For audience
j write this as Aj = {nj : µj } meaning nj individuals all hold the belief µj about a
particular individual.
The individual gains more image utility the higher the audience believes v to be. Of
course, the individual never observes the audience’s belief, so we assume each person
forms an accurate expectation of the audience’s belief about the subject’s own true type.
Next, we formally define the two types of possible signaling. These definitions are
based on the assumption that each individual has only one audience (of size n).
Definition: Social-Signaling. A person is engaged in social-signaling if they believe
that an audience of others is seeing the person’s strategy unfold. Based on information
the audience holds at any time, the audience forms (or updates) beliefs about the ex10

pected value of the person’s utility parameter v. Call the person’s expectation about the
audience’s belief µ. A person who cares for social-signaling maximizes a utility function
that is increasing in µ.
Definition: Self-Signaling. A person is engaged in self-signaling if they behave as if
they are unsure of their own v value, and, importantly, act like their own audience in a
social-signaling model (Bénabou and Tirole, 2006).
An important distinction between self- and social-signaling is that the self has the
advantage of knowing their own full strategy for t = 1 and t = 2, while the audience for
social-signaling can only condition their beliefs on actions they observe.
Finally, we must define the image function M (n : µ):
Definition: Image Function M (n : µ). The function M (n : µ) maps the audience to
a real number M , and has these qualities:
a) Continuous: M (n : µ) is continuous and differentiable w.r.t. µ.
b) Increasing and concave in µ: ∂M/∂µ ≥ 0, and ∂ 2 M/∂µ2 ≤ 0.
c) Magnification by Audience: Having a larger audience will magnify the effect of any
existing audience. Thus, if M (n1 : µ) > 0, for any n2 > n1 ≥ 1, M (n2 : µ) ≥
M (n1 : µ). In particular, there will be a function ω(n) such that M (n : µ) =
ω(n)M (1 : µ).
d) Decreasing Marginal Magnification: ω(n) has the features n ≥ ω(n) ≥ 1, 1 ≥
ω 0 (n) ≥ 0 and ω 00 (n) ≤ 0.
e) Cardinal : M is a cardinal measure.

3.2.1

Image Concerns in Experiment 1

Before applying image concerns to probabilistic commitment, we demonstrate how a
model of image concerns can generate the time-inconsistent charitable giving puzzle from
Experiment 1, as a consequence of the time delay but regardless of discounting.
Imagine first that the only audience is the experimenter. This is the person who
observes the individual’s decision to give in Experiment 1, at the end of Week 1 and Week
11

2 (in the NL treatment). How can image concerns explain the time-inconsistent charitable
giving puzzle seen in Experiment 1? Recall, the individual’s strategy in Experiment 1
is simply g = 0 or g = 1. We assume the potential donor will form an expectation of
the audience’s belief about the donor’s type v based on their observation of g, which
we call µ(g), where µ(1) ≥ µ(0). Next, we assume there is an increasing and concave
function M (1 : µ) that translates beliefs into utility. To simplify notation, when there is
an audience of one (the experimenter or the self), we will write M (µ).
There will exist a Perfect Bayesian Equilibrium of this signaling game in which the
critical value of v, say v ∗ ≤ 1, is such that g = 0 if v < v ∗ and g = 1 if v ≥ v ∗ . The
∗
, compare to the
question to pose is, how does the solution from the NN treatment, vN

solution for the NL treatment, vL∗ ?
∗
solves these conditions:
First consider NN. Then vN

∗
vN
+ M (µN (1)) =1 + M (µN (0)),
Z vN∗
1
µN (0) =
vf (v)dv,
∗
F (vN
) 0
Z v̄
1
µN (1) =
vf (v)dv.
∗
1 − F (vN
) vN∗

(2)

Now consider NL. This treatment resembles NN in that the decision is reported to the
experimenter in t = 1, but it differs in that the gift is transacted with the experimenter
a week later at t = 2. Moreover, since the donation is featured in both meetings of the
experiment, there is potential for social image utility in both periods. Let vL∗ solve the
equations below, which determine the Perfect Bayesian Nash equilibrium in NL:
δvL∗ + M (µL (1)) + δβM (µL (1)) =δ + M (µL (0)) + δβM (µL (0)),
Z vL∗
1
µL (0) =
vf (v)dv,
F (vL∗ ) 0
Z v̄
1
µL (1) =
vf (v)dv.
1 − F (vL∗ ) vL∗

(3)

The one-week discount factor is 0 ≤ δ ≤ 1, β is a depreciation factor applied to the t = 1
12

image utility in t = 2, in particular 0 ≤ β ≤ 1.
∗
Compare equations (2) and (3). We obtain that vL∗ < vN
. This difference arises

if β = 0, and it becomes larger as β increases. We hence predict time-inconsistent
charitable giving in our motivating experiments that is caused by the delay of time, but
not necessarily by temptation or self-control problems. Of course, forms of discounting
could be part of the effect, which is why Experiment 2 tests commitment demand.
Notice that this model of social image predicts time inconsistent choices, but unlike
the other models, does not base the prediction on time inconsistent preferences. When
the decision maker has full awareness of the audience effects, she will be perfectly happy
with a fully contingent plan to decide now to give later and also to say no in one week
to a request to “give now.” Stated differently, preferences do not change, are not naı̈ve,
and are conformable to time-inconsistent charitable giving.7
3.2.2

Image Concerns in Probabilistic Commitment

Next, we examine individual behavior when individuals also choose their level of commitment, p. Assume in t = 1 the audience (the experimenter) observes the decision to
give later, g1 , and p ∈ {C, I, F }. From this, the audience forms an expected value of v,
and the subject forms a (rational) expectation of this value. Call this µ1 (g1 , p). In t = 2,
the individual decides about giving now, g2 , and the subject and the audience updates
their beliefs regarding v, which we call µ2 (g1 , p, g2 ). Finally, for ease of presentation and
to accentuate the role of social image, we will assume that the one-week discount factor
is δ = 1 while allowing future image utility to be depreciated with β. All derivations
reported in Appendix A will include δ < 1, with identical qualitative findings.
Given an increasing and concave function M , an individual’s expected utility is:
U (g1 , p, g2 ) = (v − 1)(pg1 + (1 − p)g2 ) + M (µ(g1 , p)) + βM (µ(g1 , p, g2 ))
The key to the predictions are the following four lemmas. Formal proofs of each of
7

See also Andreoni et al., (2019) for a similar finding in the context of fair allocations to two apparently
equally deserving others.

13

these are in Appendix A.
Lemma 1: Assume the population is engaged in social-signaling, but not self-signaling.
Further assume that some people in this population prefer to give in exactly one period.
These people will prefer to give in t = 1 rather than t = 2.
This lemma is very intuitive. A person who has chosen a strategy of s = (0, 1 − p, 1)
could also have accomplished the same level of consumption and giving by having chosen
s = (1, p, 0). The question for this donor is which path for revealing of the full strategy
will generate the most social utility. The first strategy will yield M (0, 1 − p) + βM (0, 1 −
p, 1) while the otherwise equivalent second strategy will yield M (1, p) + βM (1, p, 0). For
the strategy s0 = (0, 1 − p) the maximum probability of giving is p, while for s0 = (1, p)
the minimum probability of giving is p. Thus we should anticipate M (1, p) > M (0, 1−p).
As long as M (1, p, 0) = M (0, 1 − p, 1), then choosing the unfolding of the full strategy
that sends the strongest signal of one’s full intentions in t = 1 should dominate.
Lemma 2: Assume the population is engaged in social-signaling, but not self-signaling.
Then, if in t = 1 the audience observes a person choosing g1 = 0 for any p, the audience
can conclude that this person also intends to choose g2 = 0 in t = 2.
The second lemma follows almost immediately from the first. If this lemma were not
true, it would violate Lemma 1. It holds the critical implication that g1 = 0 is sufficient
for g2 = 0 as well.
Next consider that some people in this population may prefer to give in both periods.
Since there is not a choice of p = 1, it will not be until t = 2 that these people reveal their
full strategies. Define E(v|g1 , p, g2 ) the expected v of an individual given the strategy
(g1 , p, g2 ). We add an extra assumption, which we will relax later:
Assumption 1 (No Counter-Signaling): E(v|1, p, 1) is the same for all p.
This assumption means that in t = 2, if the person has chosen to give in both periods,
her expected type does not depend on her commitment choice. Thus, a person interested
14

in social image will want to send the strongest signal of v in period t = 1 in order to get
the highest social image.8 This means choosing s0 = (1, C) since E(v|1, C) ≥ E(v|1, I) ≥
E(v|1, F ).
Lemma 3: If E(v|1, p, 1) is the same for all p and if the individuals cares about social
image and wishes to choose g1 = g2 = 1, the individual will chose strategy s0 = (1, C) in
t = 1.
Again, Lemma 3 naturally flows from social image concerns. It also has a very useful
implication for those not choosing s0 = (1, C), which we state in Lemma 4:
Lemma 4: If E(v|1, p, 1) is the same for all p, if the individual cares about social image,
and if in t = 1 the audience sees the strategy s0 = (1, p) for any p 6= C, then the audience
will believe that g2 = 0.
We can now state a proposition for our probabilistic commitment game with social
image concerns.
Proposition 1: Assume all individuals care equally about social image, and that E(v|1, p, 1)
is the same for all p. Then there exists a Bayesian Perfect equilibrium of the probabilistic
commitment game, which is characterized by numbers v F 0 , v I0 , v C0 , and v C1 , such that
0 ≤ v F 0 ≤ v I0 ≤ v C0 ≤ v C1 ≤ 1 and
a) all individuals with v < v F 0 choose s = (0, p, 0), for any p;
b) all individuals with v F 0 ≤ v ≤ v I0 choose s = (1, F, 0);
c) all individuals with v I0 ≤ v ≤ v C0 choose s = (1, I, 0);
d) all individuals with v C0 ≤ v ≤ v C1 choose s = (1, C, 0);
e) all individuals with v C1 ≤ v ≤ v̄ choose s = (1, C, 1).
The formal proof of this is in Appendix A, but given the structure provided thus far,
it is rather easy to construct image functions M and probability distribution functions
of f (v) that would be consistent with an equilibrium. For instance, suppose that in
8

For a detailed discussion of counter-signaling, see Feltovich, Harbaugh, and To (2002) for introducing
the concept of counter-signaling.

15

t = 1 the whole population of subjects can be apportioned to one of the four pools
above (note in t = 1, both types in (d) and (e) are in the same pool choosing (1, C)).
Assuming a form for f (v) then one can identify the five values of v needed to form
the edges of the pools. Then to find the image utility M for each pool we note that
in equilibrium there will be one type who is indifferent between joining two adjacent
pools. For instance there will be a type v F 0 who is indifferent to joining the pool that
does not give and the pool that gives only with probability p = F . For this type,
(1 + β)M (0, p, 0) = 0.1(v F 0 − 1) + (1 + β)M (1, 0.1, 0). If we assume a value for M (0, p, 0)
we can build the value of M (1, 0.1, 1) for p = F . Next we know that there will be someone
with v = v I0 who is just indifferent to pooling with those with lower and those with higher
v’s. For this person 0.1(v I0 − 1) + (1 + β)M (1, F, 0) = 0.5(v I0 − 1) + (1 + β)M (1, I, 0).
Continuing in this manner, for any assumption of f (v) and β, we construct the M function
that will satisfy equilibrium.
Notice that the last of the 4 pools in t = 1, at s0 = (1, C), will split into two pools in
t = 2. There will be the “always-give” types with v ≥ 1 who will give in both periods
regardless of the social image. A pool of those with v’s near to but below 1 will have an
incentive to mimic the true always-give types in order to gather additional social image
utility.
3.2.3

About Self-signaling

If individuals in the experiment do not see the experimenter as an audience but instead see
only themselves as the audience, then they are solely self-signaling. The main difference
between this and the prior case of social signaling is that self-signaling individuals can
observe their full strategy in t = 1. Since, for instance, s = (1, 0.9, 0) and s = (0, 0.1, 1)
both produce a probability of giving of 0.9, they yield the same self-image. To differentiate
from commitment probabilities, call probability of giving q. Every three-part strategy
reduces to a probability q that they give. Because q = 0 when g1 = g2 = 0 and q = 1
when g1 = g2 = 1, there are five values of q they can choose from q ∈ {0, 0.1, 0.5, 0.9, 1}.9
9

See Appendix A for further detail and formal proofs.

16

3.2.4

About Counter-signaling

By counter-signaling we mean that there exists another equilibrium in which the most
generous person in the group—the person with v = v̄—can find a way to further signal
that she is, in fact, the person with the highest v in the community. The new equilibrium
must be so costly to imitate that only those with v at or near v̄ could benefit from the
strategy. Suppose Assumption 1, that E(v|1, p, 1) is the same for all p, no longer holds.
In our game we have two natural “wasteful” signals. Given our lemmas above, choosing
a strategy s = (1, C, 1) should always be better than any other way to give g1 = g2 = 1.
But suppose the person at v̄ instead chose the strategy (1, F, 1). This changes the donor’s
t = 1 image by an amount ∆1 = M (µ(1, F )) − M (µ(1, C)) < 0. In t = 2, the complete
strategy is revealed to be s = (1, F, 1). If the audience rewards this with an increase in
social image utility of ∆2 = M (µ(v̄)) − M (µ(1, C, 1)) > 0 in t = 2, then, if ∆2 > ∆1 , it
is easily shown that there is a probability distribution function f (v) and image function
M , that could support this type of equilibria with one or even two new pools formed.
We can get equilibria with pools of people choosing the counter-signaling strategies of
s = (1, I, 1), of (1, F, 1), or of both (1, I, 1) and (1, F, 1). In each case the individuals
in these counter-signaling pools are from the highest v types. An important aspect of
counter-signaling is that it is only useful if g2 is seen by the audience. This will come
into play in Experiment 3.10

3.3

Kreps Demand For Flexibility

Kreps (1979) shows that, given the future is uncertain, individuals should demand flexibility. Notice that this consideration could not have played a role in our motivating
experiment, as commitment demand was not part of the decision. Moreover, both the
decision to give now and to give later were made at the same time in Experiment 1, and
so there was an equal degree of uncertainty in both decisions. In the framework described
at the outset of this section, however, Kreps’ intuitions could play some role, and they
10

See Appendix A for formal proofs.

17

will be considered in our analysis.

4

Probabilistic Commitment: Experiment 2

Experiment 2 is a direct application of the theoretical setting discussed above. Hence
our description of the experiment here focuses primarily on implementation.

4.1

Experimental Design

This is a within-subjects experiment, in which all subjects participated in a two-week (to
the hour) study. In contrast to Experiment 1, each individual made two giving decisions
in this experiment. Both decisions were about giving $5 to a deserving charity in week
2. The week 1 decision we write as g1 , and the week 2 decision is g2 . Both choices were
made knowing that of the two decisions one would be randomly chosen to carry out. The
odds of g1 being chosen were selected by the subject in week 1, immediately after the
choice of g1 . This probability p is constrained to be p ∈ {0.1, 0.5, 0.9}. All these stages
were known to subjects before making any decisions. Instructions are shown in Appendix
B.
A total of 183 subjects participated in week 1, and 163 returned for week 2. This
attrition was unrelated to decisions to give and commitment choices in week 1 (χ2 -test,
p=0.537). We focus the analysis on 163 subjects.11

4.2

Results

First we examine within-subject behavior in Experiment 2. We find that 25.2% of the
subjects always give, while 38.0% never give. The remainder, 36.8%, make different
decisions over time. Of these, 62% (or 22.7% of subjects in the sample) decide now to
give later, but not give now. The remainder, 38% (14% of the sample) choose to give
now, but do not decide now to give later. Those choosing now to give later, but not now
11

Details on attrition and behavior are shown in Appendix C.

18

to give now in t = 2 are more numerous than the opposite (McNemar’s test, p = 0.07),
in line with the results of Experiment 1.
Table 2 summarizes the commitment choices of subjects and their give-now decisions,
according to their decision to give later. Column (4) shows that, among subjects who
decide now to give later, g1 = 1, flexibility is most frequently preferred, by 22.1% of the
subjects, while commitment and indifference are both chosen by 12.9% of subjects. This
distribution is different from chance (χ2 -test, p=0.056).
Table 2: Distribution of Subjects’ Choices in the Probabilistic Commitment Experiment

(1)
g1

g1 = 0

g1 = 1

(2)

(3)

Percent
Commitment
of Subjects
Choice

52.1%

47.9%

(4)

(5)

(6)

Percent
of Subjects

g2

Percent
of Subjects

0
1
0
1
0
1

18.4%
7.4%
12.3%
1.8%
7.4%
4.9%

0
1
0
1
0
1

4.3%
8.6%
3.7%
9.2%
14.7%
7.4%

C

25.8%

I

14.1%

F

12.3%

C

12.9%

I

12.9%

F

22.1%

Note: n = 163 subjects.

Focusing on individuals who decide now to give later, but do not decide now to give
now in t = 2, (g1 , g2 ) = (1, 0), we observe an even stronger preference for flexibility.
The choice pattern (g1 , p, g2 ) = (1, F, 0) is observed for 14.7% of subjects. By contrast,
4.3% of subjects who only give later choose to commit, and 3.7% choose indifference.
The preference towards flexibility is statistically significant (χ2 -test, p <0.01). As shown
in Table 3, the preference towards flexibility is significantly stronger among individuals
choosing to give more later, than among individuals showing other dynamic giving paths.

19

This yields Finding 1.
Finding 1 (Give more later and Commitment): Individuals who choose to give
more later exhibit a preference for flexibility.
Table 3: Dynamic giving decisions and commitment demand
(1)

(2)

Commitment Choice
Commitment (p = C) Indifference (p = I)

(3)
Flexibility (p = F )

Give More Later
(give later, not give now)

-0.318*
(0.182)

-0.156
(0.162)

0.475***
(0.118)

Always Give
(give later and give now)

-0.153*
(0.083)

0.024
(0.114)

0.130*
(0.075)

Give less later
(not give later, give now)

0.040
(0.091)

-0.226*
(0.121)

0.187
(0.134)

Observations

163

Note: This table presents the marginal effects (calculated at the means of all variables) from a
multinomial probit regression relating patterns of dynamic choice to commitment choice. Give later,
not give now is a dummy variable that takes value one if the subject gives in week 1 and not in week
2. Give later and give now is a dummy variable that takes value one if the subject gives in week 1
and week 2. Not give later, give now is a dummy variable that takes value one if the subject does not
give in week 1 and but gives in week 2. The omitted category is choosing not to give in week 1 and
week 2. Individual characteristics such as gender, ethnicity, whether the subject is a native English
speaker, and their score in the Cognitive Reflection Test are included as covariates. Robust standard
errors, clustered at the session level, are shown in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

The preference for flexibility is no longer observed among individuals who always give.
Instead, these subjects appear to choose levels of commitment with equal likelihood.
Strategy (g1 , p, g2 ) = (1, C, 1) is preferred by 8.6% of subjects, (1, I, 1) is preferred 9.2%,
and (1, F, 1) is preferred by 7.4%. This distribution of choices is not significantly different
from chance (χ2 -test, p=0.843). This yields Finding 2.
Finding 2 (Always give and Commitment): Individuals who always give exhibit
an equal likelihood of choosing each of the possible levels of commitment.
Looking back to Table 1, the three main variables of interest for explaining the timeinconsistent charitable giving puzzle all point to the model of image concerns. However,
20

not all of the data is perfectly in line with the model. The model of image concerns
predicts that we would never observe a strategy that chooses g1 = 0 and g2 = 1. Yet,
Table 2 shows us that about 14% of subjects are in this category. The strategy (0, C, 1),
that was chosen by 7.4% of subjects, could be consistent with one who is tempted to give
and is sophisticated, thus choosing commitment, or self-signaling. Likewise, the strategy
(1, C, 0), chosen by 4.3% of the subjects, could be consistent with a sophisticated timeinconsistent subject who is tempted to not give. Only the later strategy will produce the
time-inconsistent charitable giving puzzle, but its influence on the total effect is negated
by the (0, C, 1) subjects, meaning that models of self-control in general will not be able
to explain the time-inconsistent charitable-giving effect.
Strategies that choose F are suggested by Kreps as a demand for flexibly in the face
of an ambiguous future. First, only 36.4% of our subjects choose flexibility. Of those who
do, Kreps suggests that if E(v) > 1 for t = 2, the most likely strategy would be (1, F, 1).
Likewise if E(v) < 1, the most likely strategy choice should be (0, F, 0). In fact (1, F, 1)
represents only 7.4% of choices and is out numbered by (1, F, 0) at 14.7%.12 This leads
to our next finding.
Finding 3 (Temptation and Uncertainty): Evidence in support of both models of
temptation and of demand for flexibility are present in the experiment. However, the
predictions of temptation have a net effect opposite to that of the time-inconsistentcharitable-giving effect, and demand for flexibility is too small to be of use in predicting
the relatively higher giving when deciding now to give later.
The analysis thus far clearly indicates that, while there is evidence for temptation
models among some individuals, these models cannot explain the demand for flexibility
of time-inconsistent types. By contrast, the demand for flexibility is consistent with the
model of image concerns, though further evidence is needed to ascertain how relevant
image concerns are for dynamic behavior. We provide a test of this model, by controlling
the size of the audience and the information we allow the audience to know.
12

See Appendix D where we further examine whether subjects self-reported resolving uncertainty
between the week 1 and week 2 sessions of the experiment.

21

5

Manipulating Social Image: Experiment 3

To directly test image concerns, Experiment 3 repeats Experiment 2, but adds three
treatments that each manipulate the audience and the information they use to form social
image. All three new treatments add the other subjects in the experimental session as
the audience. This is typically between 20 and 23 other individuals. We then vary the
part of the strategy we announce to this audience. Treatment Announce 3 (A3) tells the
new audience all three elements of each other player’s strategy. In t = 1 subjects in a
given session are told g1 and p of all subjects present, and then in t = 2 are also told g2 .
Announce 2 (A2) tells the subjects in a session only the two t = 1 choices of g1 and p.
Finally, Announce 1 (A1) reveals one element, g1 in t = 1, and nothing else. We refer to
the absence of announcements as Baseline.

5.1

Several Audiences

Notice that announcing giving decisions to other subjects will create two audiences, the
experimenter and the other subjects in the session. Next we discuss how our model of
image concerns must be adjusted to account for this.
5.1.1

Image Function for Several Audiences

Begin with two audiences, Aa = {na : µa } and Ab = {nb : µb }. Intuitively, the aggregation function should have the basic qualities of the image function of a single audience
noted above. Let N (na : µa , nb : µb ) be the aggregation function for these two audiences.
As we note in the definition of M , image utility can be written as w(n)M (µ). Recall
that µ is the expected value of the individual’s belief about the audience’s beliefs about
the individual’s v. Following this, we can form the individual’s expectation, µab , as the
weighted average of each audience’s expected belief:
µab =

na
nb
µa +
µb .
na + nb
na + nb

22

(4)

Then it is natural to define N (na : µa , nb : µb ) as
N (na : µa , nb : µb ) = ω(na + nb )M (µab ),

(5)

where M (µab ) has all of the qualities of the image function of a single audience defined
above. The generalization to three or more audiences is straightforward.
In our experiment, na will be about 20, while nb will be 1. Given the concavity of
ω(n) and the concavity of M , the existence of the larger audience will have the effect of
greatly dulling the impact of the smaller audience, while the opposite effect will not be
true. Inside M , the smaller audience will be weighed approximately by 1/21 while the
large audience will be weighted 20/21, making the smaller audience nearly inconsequential
to the predictions. Thus, when the two audiences differ, we will provide an analysis for
the larger audience for the starkest predictions, knowing the true effects may be tilted
slightly in the direction of the Baseline.
5.1.2

Equilibrium Conditions

Earlier we described how to construct the critical values of v that serve to define the
different pools in equilibrium. While the full derivation of these is in Appendix A, we
write them here in a form that is most useful for understanding the predictions of the
announce conditions.
v F 0 =1 − (1 + β)w(n)(M (µF ) − M (µ0 ))/0.1

(6)

v I0 =1 − (1 + β)w(n)(M (µI ) − M (µF ))/0.4

(7)

v C0 =1 − w(n)(M (µC ) + β(M (µC0 ) − (1 + β)M (µI )))/0.4

(8)

v C1 =1 − β(M (µC1 ) − M (µC0 ))/0.1

(9)

where µ0 = E(v|0 ≤ v ≤ v F 0 ), µF = E(v|v F 0 ≤ v < v I0 ), µI = E(v|v I0 ≤ v < v C0 ), µC =
E(v|v C0 ≤ v ≤ v̄), µC0 = E(v|v C0 ≤ v < v C1 ), and µC1 = E(v|v ≥ v C1 ).

23

5.2

Predictions for the Announcement Conditions

We discuss predictions on the announcement conditions going from least to most restrictions on the two audiences.
5.2.1

Predictions for Announce 3 (A3)

We begin with Announce 3 under the assumption of only social signaling. Announce 3
simply expands the audience from 1 to n members. As is easily seen, this applies pressure
for v F 0 , v I0 , v C0 , and v C1 to all move lower. This means that, relative to the Baseline,
we expect more individuals to agree to giving in Week 1 and 2, increasing the average
values for g1 and g2 .
Next, suppose some people are not engaging in social-signaling in the Baseline, but
only self-signaling. Then the self-signaling person would be indifferent to s = (1, p, 0)
and s = (0, 1 − p, 1). Since the announcements in treatment A3 are clearly adding socialsignaling, our predictions for A3 as compared to the Baseline are largely the same, but
that we should expect the incidence of s = (0, 1 − p, 1) in A3 to decline relative to the
Baseline.
We can also say something about counter-signaling. Since we predict a greater number
of people choosing g1 = g2 = 1, the utility of always giving may be diluted. This could
in turn give those at the very top of the distribution of v’s an incentive to counter-signal:
further separate themselves through choosing lower levels of commitment, in A3 relative
to the Baseline. Thus we may expect the number of s = (1, I, 1) and s = (1, F, 1) to rise
relative to the Baseline.
5.2.2

Predictions for Announce 2 (A2)

Announce 2 is identical to Announce 3 except no information on g2 is provided. The
main effect of this is that unless v ≥ 1, there is no reason to give in both periods for
image reasons, i.e., for anyone to join a pool of g1 = g2 = 1 givers. This means we can
simply define vC1 = 1 in equations (6) to (9) above.

24

If the only audience is others, we predict v F 0 , v I0 , and v C0 all lower relative to the
Baseline, due to the observability of the week 1 gift. This means that we expect a rise in
g1 . Since the week 2 gift is not observed, we then also predict a reduction in g2 . As with
A3, we also expect a reduction in self-signaling strategies of the sort s = (0, p, 1). Since
g2 is not observed, we expect less counter-signaling relative to A3.
When we combine this audience with the experimenter as audience, then we will get a
slight softening of these predictions toward the Baseline predictions, but, we conjecture,
the general effects should be in the directions just described.
5.2.3

Predictions for Announce 1 (A1)

Given that the audience in A1 will only see whether g1 = 1 or 0, all subjects will sort
into just two pools. The first is for g1 = 0 and the second for g1 = 1. The cutoff value
separating them is v A1 . Without any signaling value from p or from giving in t = 2, any
subject with v < 1 will have an incentive to attach to any g1 = 1 the minimum level of
commitment, p = F . However, those for whom v ≥ 1 will still have an incentive to give
in t = 2. For these people, the choice of p is irrelevant as it pertains to the new audience.
In the equilibrium we find the value of v A1 to solve
ω(n)M (µ0 ) − (v A1 − 1)0.1 − ω(n)M (µA1 ) = 0

(10)

Imagine for a minute that v A1 = v F 0 in A3, such that the same number of people choose
g1 = 0. Then the first two terms of (10) would be the same as in A3, but clearly µA1 > µF 0
even if v A1 = v F 0 , since those who choose g1 = 1 pool with all higher types. This means
that if we start at v A1 = v F 0 , then the value of the expression in (10) will be less than
zero in value. How must we adjust v A1 to return equilibrium?
Differentiating the left hand side of (10) with respect to v A1 we find an ambiguous

25

result:
∂
ω(n)M (µ0 ) − (v A1 − 1)0.1 − ω(n)M (µA1 )
∂v A1
f (v A1 )
=ω(n)M 0 (µ0 )(v A1 − µ0 )
F (v A1 )
f (v A1 )
−ω(n)M 0 (µA1 )(µA1 − v A1 )
1 − F (v A1 )
−0.1.
Since µ0 < µA1 , by concavity M 0 (µ0 ) > M 0 (µA1 ). And since µ0 < vA1 < µA1 it follows
that (v A1 − µ0 ) > (µA1 − v A1 ). This makes the net value of the first two terms positive.
However, for the full derivative to be positive the net value of the first two terms must
exceed −0.1. While, intuitively, this seems likely, the actual result is unclear. As a result,
we cannot compare the effect of A1 on g1 = 0 to the Baseline or to the other conditions.
However, we can expect strong reductions in p and g2 (both conditional on g1 = 1).
Table 4 summarizes the predictions regarding how the Announcement treatments
will differ from the Baseline, without announcements. We present our main predictions
concerning giving decisions, g1 and g2 , which are the focus of our tests in Experiment
3. After presenting our main results, we test our additional predictions regarding selfsignaling, counter-signaling, and commitment choices.

5.3

Experimental Design

As is clear by now, Experiment 3 extends Experiment 2 with three additional treatments
designed to test the predictions of the social image model. These treatments manipulate
the information about participants’ decisions by announcing subsets of their strategies to
the other participants in the experimental session (between 20 and 23 other subjects).13
In Announce 1, we announce g1 to all participants in Week 1. In Announce 2, we announce
(g1 , p). Announce 3 reveals the full strategy (g1 , p, g2 ). The announcement plans were
known to all subjects before decisions were made. These sessions were otherwise like
13

Details are shown in Appendix C.

26

Table 4: Main Predictions From Image Concerns Model in the Announcement Treatments

Directions of Change Relative to Baseline
Outcome:

g1

g2

Predictions
Announce 3
Announce 2
Announce 1

+
+
?

+
−
−

Data
Announce 3
Announce 2
Announce 1

+ (∗∗∗ )
+ (∗∗∗ )
− (n.s.)

− (n.s.)
− (n.s.)
− (∗∗∗ )

Note: All changes are relative to the Baseline treatment (in which the only audience
is the experimenter). “+” denotes an increase. “‘−” denotes a decrease. The
question mark “?” denotes an ambiguous prediction. Under data, we present the
sign of the effects and in parenthesis their statistical significance. n.s. denotes not
significant, ∗∗∗ , ∗∗ , ∗ denotes significant at the 1%, 5% and 10% level, respectively.

those in Experiment 2.
A total of 263 new subjects participated in this experiment. Of these, 244 completed
both weeks of the experiment.14 There were 64, 65, and 59 in Announce 1, 2 and 3,
respectively. In addition, 56 participated in a replication of Experiment 2, which is the
Baseline treatment in Experiment 3. Since behavior in the new sessions of the Baseline
treatment was not significantly different from behavior in Experiment 2,15 all subjects in
Experiment 2 are included in the analysis of Experiment 3 and form part of the Baseline
treatment. Detailed instructions of this experiment are shown in Appendix B.
In the empirical analysis, we first examine, g1 and g2 , which are our primary outcome
variables. We acknowledge, however, that g2 may have been impacted by the information
provided at the end of the first week’s session regarding the strategies chosen by others
(see, e.g., Frey and Meier, 2004; Shang and Croson, 2009).
14

There are no significant differences in participation in the Week 2 session by treatment (χ2 -test,
p = 0.129), or by giving decisions and commitment choices within each treatment (χ2 -test, p > 0.1 in
all treatments). Detailed results are shown in Appendix C.
15
Donation decisions and commitment decisions in week 1, as well as donation decisions in week 2 did
not differ (χ2 -test, p > 0.1 in all cases).

27

5.4

Main Results

Figure 2 shows the results from the three new announcement treatments along with
the Baseline treatment. Here we see clear evidence of a continued time-inconsistent
charitable giving. In fact, when described relative to give now, the effect appears stronger
in the treatments with announcements: give later shows a 24% increase over give now
in the Baseline treatment, while there is a 71% increase across the combination of all
announcements treatments.16

Note: Error bars denote ± 1 S.E.

Figure 2: Giving by Announcements Treatment
Table 5 displays the estimated treatment effects of the announcements treatments
on the main outcome variables discussed in the predictions. We also add the expected
gift, E(g) = pg1 + (1 − p)g2 , to show the overall effect on giving. We begin with the
first column of Table 5 which shows the effects announcements on the Week 1 gift.
16

The difference in giving decisions over time, which is of 10 percentage points in the Baseline treatment, more than doubles in the treatments with announcements. Using a differences-in-differences
regression analysis, we find the difference increases by 12 percentage points in A1 (p = 0.079), by 20
percentage points in A2 (p = 0.007), and by 11 percentage points in A3 (p = 0.231).

28

Table 5: Treatment Effects in the Announcements Experiment

Announce 3
Announce 2
Announce 1

(1)
Probit
Week 1 gift decision
g1

(2)
Probit
Week 2 gift decision
g2

(3)
Linear reg.
Expected gift
E(g)

0.105***
(0.036)
0.151***
(0.045)
0.003
(0.050)

-0.002
(0.105)
-0.042
(0.087)
-0.134***
(0.045)

0.079
(0.084)
0.041
(0.067)
-0.092**
(0.033)
0.525***
(0.079)

407

407

407
0.044

Constant

Observations
R-squared

Note: Probit marginal effects (calculated at the means of all variables), and OLS coefficients.
The variables Announce 1, Announce 2 and Announce 3 are dummy variables that take value
one if the individual was a participant in that treatment, and zero otherwise. The omitted category is the Baseline treatment. Individual characteristics such as gender, ethnicity, whether
the subject is a native English speaker, and their score in the Cognitive Reflection Test are
included as covariates. Robust standard errors, clustered at the session level, are shown in
parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

This outcome provides the clearest test of the model, as it is the first decision made by
participants. Consistent with the predictions, we find that giving increases in Announce
3 and 2. We do not find an effect of Announce 1.
The second column of Table 5 shows the the effects announcements on the Week 2
gift. We find evidence in line with the predictions in Announce 1 and 2, whereby giving
in Week 2 was expected to decrease. The effect in Announce 1 is significant, while that in
Announce 2 is only directional. Contrary to our predictions, we do not find an increase
in giving in Announce 3. As discussed above, this may be in part due to the fact that
announcement decisions in Week 1 may convey information that leads to social influence
effects, beyond the social image model.
Finally, we examine the results shown in column (3) of Table 5, which tests the effects
of announcements on expected gifts. These are naturally a combination of the effects on
29

Week 1 and Week 2 decisions. Again, all three coefficients have the expected sign, one
of which is significant. These findings indicate that only announcing the initial decision
to give, without announcing commitment choices or the final gift, may discourage giving
overall. Providing more information can directionally increase giving, though its effects
may be weak in magnitude.
Overall, of the 5 treatment effects with clear theoretical predictions discussed in Table
4, 4 were measured with the correct sign, and three of those have significant coefficients.
We must, however, acknowledge that multiple (5) hypotheses are tested (List et al.,
2016). If we use a Bonferroni correction, on our primary outcome variables, g1 and g2 ,
results remain nevertheless unchanged (all p values remain below 0.05). This leads to
our last finding:
Finding 4 (Image concerns and audience effects): Exogenously varying the
information about intertemporal giving decisions known to others strengthens the timeinconsistent charitable giving puzzle, and these audience effects are broadly consistent
with the dynamic model of image concerns.

5.5

Additional Results

Our model of dynamic image concerns makes additional testable predictions for the
effects of announcements on behaviors such as self-signaling and counter-signaling. We
present the results of testing these predictions in columns (1) and (2) of Table 6. We
expect to observe less self-signaling in all treatments, as a new audience has been added
with other participants. This implies that, behaviorally, we expect fewer individuals to
choose the strategy (0, p, 1). Consistent with the model, column (1) of Table 6 shows that
self-signaling is reduced in all treatments, significantly so in Announce 3 and Announce
2.
Next, the predictions of the image model imply that counter-signaling should increase
in Announce 3, relative to Baseline, and it should decrease in Announce 2 and Announce
1 relative to Announce 3. To investigate counter-signaling, we test whether individuals
30

Table 6: Additional Treatment Effects in Experiment 3

(1)
(2)
Probit regressions
Self-signaling Counter-signaling
(0, p, 1)
(1, I, 1) & (1, F, 1)
Announce 3
Announce 2
Announce 1

(4)
Linear regressions
Commitment Commitment if g1 = 1
p
p ∗ g1

-0.084*
(0.049)
-0.085*
(0.050)
-0.064
(0.051)

0.054
(0.040)
0.014
(0.037)
-0.055*
(0.029)

-0.032
(0.027)
-0.005
(0.035)
-0.027
(0.044)
0.528***
(0.073)

0.074*
(0.036)
0.075*
(0.040)
-0.017
(0.027)
0.307***
(0.068)

407

407

407
0.005

407
0.048

Constant

Observations
R-squared

(3)

Note: Probit marginal effects (calculated at the means of all variables) are shown in columns (1)-(2), and
OLS coefficients in columns (3)-(4). The variables Announce 1, Announce 2 and Announce 3 are dummy
variables that take value one if the individual was a participant in that treatment, and zero otherwise. The
omitted category is the Baseline treatment. Individual characteristics such as gender, ethnicity, whether the
subject is a native English speaker, and their score in the Cognitive Reflection Test are included as covariates.
Robust standard errors, clustered at the session level, are shown in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, *
p<0.1

are more or less likely to choose the strategies (1, I, 1) and (1, F, 1). The results are
shown in column (2) of Table 6. We find that counter-signaling increases in Announce
3 directionally. It decreases significantly in Announce 1 relative to Announce 3 (χ2 -test,
p < 0.01), and we find a directional drop in this behavior in Announce 2 relative to
Announce 3 (χ2 -test, p = 0.396).
Table 6 also explores the treatment effects on the commitment decisions of individuals
in Experiment 3. Relative to Baseline, conditional on choosing to give in Week 1 (g1 = 1),
individuals should choose higher levels of p in Announce 2 and Announce 3, as these are
visible to the audience. By contrast, they should decrease their choice of p in Announce
1. Column (4) of Table 6 provides the results of this test. Consistent with the model, we
find that commitment increases in Announce 2 and 3, while it directionally decreases in

31

Announce 1.17

6

Summary and Conclusion

We began this paper with a puzzle. In a between-subjects experiment we found strong
evidence of time-inconsistent charitable giving. Giving increased nearly 50 percent simply
by adding a week’s delay between the decision to give and the transaction of that gift.
The puzzle was validated in two additional within-subjects experiments showing the
week-long delay increases giving by 24% to 82%.
The obvious place to look for a resolution of this puzzle is to models of self-control or
present bias, or perhaps to models of an uncertain future. We show that strong demand
for flexibility among time-inconsistent givers suggests that these models cannot be the
only explanation for the puzzle.
We present a new dynamic model of time-consistent social-image signaling that both
explains our puzzle and provides a rich set of hypotheses beyond other known models.
The contribution is thus theoretical, empirical, and conceptual.
Why do we believe this result is important? Our approach changes the perspective of
researchers in a non-trivial way. Rather than thinking of charitable giving as purchasing
goods and services for others, our model is asking researchers to view the act of giving as
a social interaction with unique social rewards, including social-image. We view socialimage utility as a magnification of private concerns of guilt from free riding or the warmglow from doing your fair share, which themselves may be internalizations of social norms
and pressures.
Viewing charitable giving as a social interaction means that our focus changes to the
process of giving. Utility can flow at the time the decision to give has been made. Thus,
warm-glow, in the form of social-image, can begin before the gift is transacted. Execution
of the gift at a later date acts the same way expanding the audience can increase social
image, further increasing the benefits of separating the decision from the gift. These two
17

Detailed descriptive statistics of commitment choices in Experiment 3, by treatment, are shown in
Appendix C.

32

effects in combination provide the best model to explain our puzzle of time-inconsistent
charitable giving.
This new view provides a more complete picture of motivations surrounding giving,
and raises many interesting questions for future research. For instance, it suggests there
could be an optimal distance of time between the agreement to give and the ultimate
timing of the giving transaction. Other innovations in fundraising that take advantage
of this form of preferences can also be studied, such as the potential benefit of taking
pledges for future donations (Andreoni & Serra-Garcia, 2018).
In sum, we have introduced a challenging puzzle of time-inconsistent charitable giving.
The puzzle requires a solution in which positive utility flows when the decision to give is
made, not just when transactions occur. Self- and social-image concerns can imbue the
decision to give with such utility. More than any other received model, image concerns
provide the best explanation for the data from all three experiments presented.

Acknowledgements
We are grateful to Simone Galperti, Uri Gneezy, Alex Kellogg, Menusch Khadjavi, Jeff
Naecker, David Reiley, Laura Schechter, Joel Sobel, Charlie Sprenger, Bertil Tungodden,
Jeroen van de Ven and several seminar and conference participants for helpful comments.
This research was conducted under IRB #140762. We would like to thank the National
Science Foundation, grants SES-1427355, SES-1658952, the Science of Philanthropy Initiative, the John Templeton Foundation, and internal funds from UCSD for financial
support.

33

References
[1] Adena, M., and Huck, S. (2017). Giving Once, Giving Twice: A Two-Period Field
Experiment on Narrow Framing in Charitable Giving. Working paper.
[2] Adena, M. and Huck, S. (2019). Online fundraising, self-image, and the long-term
impact of ask avoidance. Management Science, forthcoming.
[3] Ali, N., and Bénabou, R. (2018). Image Versus Information. Working paper.
[4] Andreoni, J. (1989). Giving with Impure Altruism: Applications to Charity and
Ricardian Equivalence. Journal of Political Economy 97, 1447–58.
[5] Andreoni, J. (1990). Impure Altruism and Donations to Public Goods: A Theory
of Warm-Glow Giving. Economic Journal, v. 100, June, 464–477.
[6] Andreoni, J., Aydin, D., Barton, B., Bernheim, B. D., & Naecker, J. (2019).
When Fair Isn’t Fair: Understanding Choice Reversals Involving Social Preferences.
Forthcoming, Journal of Political Economy. Available at SSRN 2763318.
[7] Andreoni, J., and Bernheim, D. B. (2009). Social image and the 50-50 norm: A
theoretical and experimental analysis of audience effects. Econometrica 77, no. 5:
1607-1636.
[8] Andreoni, J., & Payne, A. A. (2003). Do government grants to private charities
crowd out giving or fund-raising?. The American Economic Review, 93(3), 792-812.
[9] Andreoni, J., & Rao, J.M. (2011). The power of asking: How communication
affects selfishness, empathy, and altruism. Journal of Public Economics 95, no. 7:
513-520.
[10] Andreoni, J., Rao, J.M., & Trachtman, H. (2017). Avoiding the ask: a field experiment on altruism, empathy, and charitable giving. Journal of Political Economy,
125 (3): 625-653.

34

[11] Andreoni, J., & Serra-Garcia, M. (2018). The Pledging Puzzle: How Can Revokable
Promises Increase Charitable Giving? Unpublished working paper.
[12] Ariely, D., Bracha, A., & Meier, S. (2009). Doing Good or Doing Well? Image
Motivation and Monetary Incentives in Behaving Prosocially. American Economic
Review 99 (1), 544-555.
[13] Augenblick, N., Niederle, M., & Sprenger, C. (2015). Working over time: Dynamic
inconsistency in real effort tasks. Quarterly Journal of Economics 130 (3), 1067–
1115.
[14] Bénabou, R., & Tirole, J. (2006). Incentives and prosocial behavior. American
Economic Review 96 (5), 1652–1678.
[15] Bénabou, R., & Tirole, J. (2011). Identity, morals and taboos: Beliefs as Assets.
Quarterly Journal of Economics 126 (2), 805–855.
[16] Bernheim, D., & Thomadsen, R. (2005). Memory and Anticipation. Economic
Journal 115 (503), 271–304.
[17] Breman, A. (2011). Give more tomorrow: Two field experiments on altruism and
intertemporal choice. Journal of Public Economics, 95(11), 1349–1357.
[18] Clotfelter, C.T. (1985). Federal Tax Policy and Charitable Giving. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
[19] DellaVigna, S., List, J. A., & Malmendier, U. (2012). Testing for altruism and
social pressure in charitable giving. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 127(1), 1–56.
[20] Dreber, A., Fudenberg, D., Levine, D. K., & Rand, D. G. (2016). Self-Control,
Social Preferences and the Effect of Delayed Payments. Working paper.
[21] Ellingsen, T., Johannesson, M., Mollerstrom, J., & Munkhammar, S. (2012). Social
framing effects: Preferences or beliefs? Games and Economic Behavior 76(1), 117130.
35

[22] Elster, J. & Loewenstein, G. (1992). Utility from memory and anticipation, in
(George. Loewenstein and Jon Elster, eds.), Choice Over Time, pp. 213–234, New
York: Russell Sage Foundation.
[23] Exley, C.L. (2015). Excusing Selfishness in Charitable Giving: The Role of Risk.
The Review of Economic Studies 83 (2), 587-628.
[24] Exley, C.L, and J. Naecker (2017). Observability Increases the Demand for Commitment Devices. Management Science 63 (10), 3262–3267.
[25] Feltovich, N., Harbaugh, R., and To, T. (2002). Too cool for school? Signalling
and countersignalling. RAND Journal of Economics, 630–649.
[26] Filiz-Ozbay, E., & Ozbay, E. Y. (2014). Effect of an audience in public goods
provision. Experimental Economics 17(2), 200-214.
[27] Frey, B. & Meier, S. (2009). Social Comparison and Pro-social Behavior: Testing
‘Conditional Cooperation’ in a Field Experiment. American Economic Review 94
(5), 1717–1722.
[28] Grossman, Z. (2015). Self-signaling and social-signaling in giving. Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization, 117, 26-39.
[29] Huck, S., & Rasul, I. (2010). Transactions Costs in Charitable Giving: Evidence
from Two Field Experiments, The B.E. Journal of Economic Analysis & Policy 10
(1) (Ad- vances), Article 31.
[30] Jackson, M.O., and Yariv, L. (2015). Collective dynamic choice: the necessity of
time inconsistency. American Economic Journal: Microeconomics 7 (4), 150–78.
[31] Kessler, J. (2017). Announcements of Support and Public Good Provision. American Economic Review 107 (12), 3760–3787.
[32] Kessler, J., Kivimaki, H. & Niederle, M. (2016). Generosity Over Time. Unpublished manuscript.
36

[33] Kreps, D. (1979). A Representation Theorem for “Preference for Flexibility”.
Econometrica 47 (3), 565–577.
[34] Kovarik, J. (2009). Giving it now or later: Altruism and discounting. Economics
Letters, 102 (3), 152–154.
[35] Kolle, F. & Wenner, L. (2018). Time-Inconsistent Generosity: Present Bias Across
Individual and Social Contexts. Working paper.
[36] Köszegi, B. Utility from Anticipation and Personal Equilibrium. Economic Theory
(2010), 44 (3), 415–444.
[37] List, J.A., A.M. Shaikh, & Y. Xu (2016). Multiple Hypothesis Testing in Experimental Economics. NBER Working Paper 21875.
[38] Loewenstein, G. (1987). Anticipation and the Valuation of Delayed Consumption.
The Economic Journal 97 (387), 666–684.
[39] Noor, J. and Ren, L. (2011). Temptation and Social Preference. Unpublished
manuscript.
[40] Ottoni-Wilhelm, M., Vesterlund, L., and Xie, H. (2017). Why do people give?
Testing pure and impure altruism. American Economic Review, 107(11), 3617-33.
[41] Rand, D. G., Greene, J. D., and Nowak, M. A. (2012). Spontaneous giving and
calculated greed. Nature, 489(7416), 427–430.
[42] Recalde, Maria P., Arno Riedl, and Lise Vesterlund. (2018). Error-prone inference
from response time: The case of intuitive generosity in public-good games.Journal
of Public Economics 160, 132-147.
[43] Ribar, D. C., and Wilhelm, M. O. (2002). Altruistic and joy–of–giving motivations
in charitable behavior. Journal of Political Economy, 110 (2), 425–457.
[44] Saito, K. (2015). Impure Altruism and Impure Selfishness. Journal of Economic
Theory 158, 336-370.
37

[45] Shang, J. and Croson, R. (2009). A Field Experiment in Charitable Contribution:
The Impact of Social Information on the Voluntary Provision of Public Goods.
Economic Journal 119, 1422–1439.
[46] Tonin, M., & Vlassopoulos, M., (2013). Experimental evidence of self-image concerns as motivation for giving. Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization
90, 1927.

38

Appendix A: Theoretical Framework
A.1. Probabilistic Commitment
We assume that every population consists of some subjects with v close to zero who will
choose g1 = g2 = 0. Set the image utility experienced by these people to M0 ≤ 0. Others
will be so charitable as to have v > 1 and so will always choose g1 = g2 = 1. To explain
time-inconsistent charitable giving in our game of probabilistic commitment, it must be
that some people prefer to give in only one of the periods, and in particular must favor
giving in t = 1.
It is possible that some people will be engaged in self-signaling as well as socialsignaling if they see the experimenter as an audience. Here we will assume that everyone
is engaged in social-signaling with an audience of n = 1, that is, the experimenter. We
must acknowledge, however, that some subjects may not see the experimenter as an
audience and will be engaged only in self-signaling. For this part if the discussion, we
will set these people aside. When, in Experiment 3, we manipulate the audience and
surely add significant social-signaling incentives, we will revisit this possibility that in
Experiment 2, a small number of subjects are only engaged in self-signaling.

A.2. Definitions of Signaling Preferences
Definition: Social-Signaling. A person is engaged in social-signaling if they believe
that an audience of others is seeing the person’s strategy unfold. Based on information
the audience holds at any time, the audience forms (or updates) beliefs about the expected
value of the person’s utility parameter v. Call the person’s excpectation about the
audience’s belief µ. A person who cares for social-signaling maximizes a utility function
that is increasing in µ.
Definition: Self-Signaling. A person is engaged in self-signaling if they behave as if
they are unsure of their own v value, and, importantly, act like their own audience in a
social-signaling model.
39

An important distinction between self- and social-signaling is that the self has the
advantage of knowing their own full strategy for t = 1 and t = 2, while the audience for
social-signaling can only condition their beliefs on actions they observe.
Definition: Self-and-Social Signaling. A person could have have both self- and
social-signaling motives.
Having both motives will mean finding a way to aggegrate social image utility across
at least two audiences.

A.3. Analysis of only Social Image Types
Lemma 1: Assume the population is engaged in social-signaling, but not self-signaling.
Further assume that some people in this population prefer to give in only one period.
These people will prefer to give in t = 1 rather than t = 2.
Proof: By assumption, the person can choose either s = (1, p, 0) or s = (0, 1 − p, 1) as
both stragies will result in the same potential flows of earnings. However, the audience
in t = 1 must form their first estimate of the donor’s v based only on the portion of their
strategies revealed in t = 1, that is s0 = (g1 , p). Suppose first that s0 = (1, p). Then the
audience’s minimal belief is that v is at least high enough to give g = 1 with probability
p. Suppose instead that s0 = (0, 1 − p). Now the audience’s maximal belief is that v
is high enough to give g = 1 with probability p. Since E(v|1, p) ≥ E(v|0, 1 − p), the
strategy (1, p, 0)  (0, 1 − p, 1).k
Lemma 1 already largely established Lemma 2.
Lemma 2: Assume the population is engaged in social-signaling, but not self-signaling.
Then, if in t = 1 the audience observes a person choosing g1 = 0 for any p, the audience
can conclude that this person also intends to choose g2 = 0 in t = 2.
Proof: Suppose not. Then this person chooses s = (0, p, 1). This contradicts Lemma 1.k

40

Next let’s consider that some people in this population may prefer to give both periods. Since there is not a choice of p = 1, it will not be until t = 2 that these people
reveal their full strategies. We add an extra assumption, which we will relax later:
Assumption 1 (No Counter-Signaling): The E(v|1, p, 1) is the same for all p.
This assumptions implies that a person interested in social image will want to send
the strongest signal of v in period t = 1 in order to get the highest social image. This
means choosing s0 = (1, C) since E(v|1, C) ≥ E(v|1, I) ≥ E(v|1, F ).
Lemma 3: If E(v|1, p, 1) is the same for all p and if the individuals cares about social
image and wishes to choose g1 = g2 = 1, the individual will chose strategy s0 = (1, C) in
t = 1.
Proof: Since social image utility will be the same in t = 2 regardless of p, and the
objective is to choose g1 = g2 = 1 and p to maximize utility, then this is the same as
choosing p to maximize social image at t = 1. This is achieved by choosing s0 = (1, C)
in t − 1 and g2 = 1 in t = 2.
This lends itself naturally to the next lemma:
Lemma 4: If E(v|1, p, 1) is the same for all p, if the individual cares about social image,
and if in t = 1 the audience sees the strategy s0 = (1, p) for any p 6= C, then the audience
will believe that g2 = 0.
Proof: Suppose not. Then, this will contradict Lemma 3.
We can now state a proposition for our probabilistic commitment game with social
image concerns.
Proposition 1: Assume all individuals care equally about social image, and that the
E(v|1, p, 1) is the same for all p. Then there exists a Bayesian Perfect equilibrium of
the probabilistic commitment game, which is characterized by numbers v F 0 , v I0 , v C0 , and
v C1 , such that 0 ≤ v F 0 ≤ v I0 ≤ v C0 ≤ v C1 ≤ 1 and

41

a) all individuals with v < v F 0 choose s = (0, p, 0), for any p;
b) all individuals with v F 0 ≤ v ≤ v I0 choose s = (1, F, 0);
c) all individuals with v I0 ≤ v ≤ v C0 choose s = (1, I, 0);
d) all individuals with v C0 ≤ v ≤ v C1 choose s = (1, C, 0);
e) all individuals with v C1 ≤ v ≤ v̄ choose s = (1, C, 1).
Proof: Notice that in t = 1 there will be at most 4 pools consisting of those choosing
the strategy s0 = (g1 , p) of (0, p), (1, F ), (1, I), and (1, C). Lemma 3 shows that those
wishing to give in both t = 1 and t = 2 would choose (1, C) in t = 1. Then in t = 2
the pool at (1, C) would be split into two pools by a v C1 < 1 such that those with
v C0 ≤ v < v C1 choose g2 = 0 and those with v C1 ≤ v ≤ v̄ choose g2 = 1. We assume that
for certain distributions of v and definitions of the image function M (), this will indeed
be an equilibrium, and then prove the proposition by construction.
Let f (v), 0 ≤ v ≤ v̄, be the probability distribution function for v, with density
Rv
function F (v) = 0 f (v)dv. We assume f (v) is continuous, and twice differentiable.
Then define the function a(x, y) as the average (that is, expected value) of v conditional
on x ≤ v ≤ y:
1
a(x, y) =
F (y) − F (x)

Z

y

vf (v)dv
x

Then, define the expected value of v within each pool as
µ0 = a(0, v F 0 ),
µF = a(v F 0 , v I0 ),
µI = a(v I0 , v C0 ),
µC = a(v C0 , v̄),
µC0 = a(v C0 , v C1 ), and
µC1 = a(v C1 , v̄).
Next, define the utility of a donor in a given pool at time t = 1. We will use M () to
indicate the image utility in t = 1 and δβM () as the discounted image utility for t = 2,
42

where 0 < δβ ≤ 1. We use δ to represent the one week discount rate, and 0 < β ≤ 1 to
represent the idea that social image earned in period 1 may only partly carry over to the
period 2 decision.
U (v|0, p, 0) =M (µ0 ) + δβM (µ0 )

(11)

U (v|1, F, 0) =0.1δ(v − 1) + M (µF ) + δβM (µF )

(12)

U (v|1, I, 0) =0.5δ(v − 1) + M (µI ) + δβM (µI )

(13)

U (v|1, C, 0) =0.9δ(v − 1) + M (µC ) + δβM (µC0 )

(14)

U (v|1, C, 1) =δ(v − 1) + M (µC ) + δβM (µC1 ).

(15)

Then in equilibrium, the critical values v F 0 , v I0 , v C0 , and v C1 solve these four equations:
U (v F 0 |0, p, 0) − U (v F 0 |1, F, 0) = 0

(16)

U (v I0 |1, F, 0) − U (v I0 |1, I, 0) = 0

(17)

U (v C0 |1, I, 0) − U (v C0 |1, C, 0) = 0

(18)

U (v C1 |1, C, 0) − U (v C1 |1, C, 1) = 0

(19)

By the assumption that M is increasing, continuous, and concave, this system will have
a unique solution where 0 ≤ v F 0 ≤ v I0 ≤ v C0 ≤ v C1 ≤ 1. The final inequality follows
from the assumption that all those with v ≥ 1 will choose g1 = g2 = 1 as long as M ≥ 0
and by continuity there will form a pool of “always give” types that includes some points
v < 1 in the neighborhood of v = 1. k
A.3.1. Generalization to Counter-signaling
If we weaken the assumption of no counter-signaling, we can potentially get one or even
two new types of equilibria that include counter-signaling. By counter-signaling we mean
that the highest type person choosing g1 = g2 = 1 does not employ the strongest signal
of p = C in t = 1 but instead sends a weaker signal choosing, say s0 = (1, I) rather
than (1, C), thus pooling with lower type in t = 1, such that in t = 2 this person can
43

reveal themselves to be (among) the highest types. They can do this if the utility lost
in the lower quality signal sent in t = 1 can be made up for by those with high enough
v such that the social image M (1, I, 1) > M (1, C, 1). In particular, if upon seeing the
full strategy of s = (1, I, 1) the social image for this strategy increases just enough such
that U (v|1, I, 1) ≥ U (v|1, C, 1) if and only if v = v̄, and for all others the inequality is
reversed. Then we can establish a new equilibrium where the most generous type can
further separate from those of lower v. This is shown in Corollary 1 below.
If there is a sufficiently long right tail of the distribution of types, f (v), then it is
possible for there to be two counter-signals: (1, F ) by the highest group, and (1, I) by
the second highest group. This is shown in Corollary 2.
Of course, if there is no social information about g2 , then counter-signaling will not
be possible, excluding these strategies as equilibria. This will return when discussing
Experiment 3.
Corollary 1: Assume the no-counter-signaling assumption fails, and in particular assume
M (µI ) + βM (v̄) > M (µC ) + βM (µC1 ), but M (µF ) + βM (v̄) < M (µC ) + βM (µC1 ). Then,
there exists a probability distribution function f (v), 0 ≤ v ≤ v̄, and a neighborhood of
v̄, N (v̄), such that all j with vj ∈ N (v̄) choose the strategy s = (1, I, 1). In equilibrium
the image function M (µ) assures us that the individual i with vi = v̄ − ∗ is indifferent
to counter-signaling or choosing s = (1, C, 1).
Proof: If these assumptions hold, then a person with vi = v̄ can deviate from the strategy
s = (1, C, 1) to the counter-signaling strategy whereby the person pretends to be a lower v
type by choosing s0 = (1, I) in t = 1 such that in t = 2 the complete strategy s = (1, I, 1)
can be revealed. Since, by Lemma 2 the audience is anticipating that any strategy
s0 = (1, I) must be completed in t = 2 with s = (1, I, 0), the audience must ask who
is most likely to profit from this deviation. If the answer is that only individuals at or
very near vi = v̄, then this counter-signaling strategy can become an equilibrium. Given
continuity, there will be a neighborhood of v̄ where all i with vi in this neighborhood
will form a small pool that sends the counter-signal in period 1 and further separates

44

themselves from the other “always give” types.
In particular, let µ() = a(v̄ − , v̄) be the expected value of v given v ∈ N (v̄).
Then, for the equilibrium to exist, we need to find a value of , say ∗ , such that the
no-counter-signaling conditions, appropriately modified, hold for vi ∈ N∗ (v̄) but not
for those with v ∈
/ N∗ (v̄). Specifically, M (µI ) + βM (µ∗ ) > M (µC ) + βM (µC1 ), but
M (µF ) + βM (µ(v ∗ ) < M (µC ) + βM (µC1 ). k
Corollary 2: Assume M (µF ) + βM (v̄) > M (µC ) + βM (µC1 ). Then there exist a
neighborhood of v̄, N (v̄), such that all i with vi ∈ N (v̄) choose the strategy s = (1, F, 1).
And, letting v̄ 0 be the lowest element of N (v̄), then there exists another neighborhood
of v̄ 0 such that all vj ∈ Nγ (v̄ 0 ) such that vj < v̄ 0 the strategy s = (1, I, 1) will be optimal.
Proof: Here we simply follow the logic of Corollary 1, applying the method twice, under
the assumption that the distribution of v will actually support the equilibrium. k
A.3.2. Analysis of only Self-Signaling types
Assuming people are only self-image signalers is equivalent to assuming that t = 1 and
t = 2 are combined to a single decision. In particular, to a self-signaler the strategies s = (1, p, 0) and (0, 1 − p, 1) are the same. This then reduces the self-signal to
choosing a probability with which to give, say q, where now q has five possible values,
q = 0, 0.1, 0.5, 0.9, or 1. The strategy q = 0 results from s = (0, p, 0) and q = 1 from
s = (1, p, 1). Contrary to the above, now (1, p, 0) and (0, 1 − p, 1) both produce p.
With a model of pure self-signaling the solution is obvious:
Proposition 2: If subject care only about self-signaling there will exist an equilibrium
will be characterized by four numbers, v0.1 ≤ v0.5 ≤ v0.9 ≤ v1 ≤ 1, such that
a) If vi < v0.1 then i will give with probability q = 0.
b) If v0.1 < vi ≤ v0.5 then i will give with probability q = 0.1
c) If v0.5 < vi ≤ v0.9 then i will give with probability q = 0.5
d) If v0.9 < vi ≤ v1 then i will give with probability q = 0.9
e) If v1 < vi then i will give with probability q = 1
45

Proof: This is a subclass of the case considered in Proposition 1. The same tools can be
applied to construct this proof.

46

Appendix B: Instructions and Decision Screens
B.1. Summary of Session Structure
All experiments invited subjects to participate in a 2-week experiment. We refer to
Week 1 and Week 2 sessions in what follows. Participation in the two sessions was
always required and independent of decisions made in Week 1.
The structure of the Week 1 session was as follows. First there was a Welcome Sheet,
shown below. After subjects read the Welcome Sheet, a GiveDirectly Pitch was done.
The slides of GiveDirectly were shown on a screen in front of the room, visible to all
subjects. The experimenter read the slides. After reading the slides, the instructions
were read out loud. For each Experiment, we present the instructions and decision
screens shown in Week 1 below. The text in square brackets that follows was not read
aloud. All treatment differences are indicated in brackets below.
In Week 2 of Experiment 1, subjects did not receive any additional written instructions. In all treatments, they were first reminded of their donation decision in Week 1
on their computer screens, and then asked to complete several survey questions on their
computer. Once everyone had completed the survey, the subjects were called individually
to receive their payment.
In Week 2 of Experiments 2 and 3, subjects made their Week 2 donation decision (g2 ).
At the beginning of the session, subjects were reminded of their Week 1 decisions (g1 and
p). In the treatment Announce 3 sessions, they were reminded that their Week 2 donation
would also be announced, following the same procedures as the announcements in Week
1. Once all subjects had made their decisions and completed several survey questions, a
volunteer was randomly selected to roll a dice in front of the room, to determine for each
subject whether their Week 1 or Week 2 decisions would be implemented, according to
their choice of g1 , g2 and p.

47

[WELCOME SHEET]

Welcome
Thank you for participating in this experiment. During the experiment you and the other
participants are asked to answer a series of questions. Please do not communicate with
other participants. If you have any questions please raise your hand and an experimenter
will approach you and answer your question in private.
This experiment consists of two parts.
• Part 1: Today we will ask you to answer a series of questionnaires.
• Part 2: A follow up survey that you will be asked to fill out a week from today.
Payment
You receive for the participation in this experiment $30. Please note that in order to
obtain you all payments you need to answer both parts of the experiment.
• Today you receive $15 for showing up to the experiment and answering the first
part of the experiment. You can collect the $15 from the experimenter after the
session is finished.
• The remaining $15 you will receive at the end of the next week’s session.

B.2. Experiment 1
[At the end of the GiveDirectly pitch:]
• [Treatment NN]: We would like to ask you whether you would like to donate $5 of
your show up fee for today’s session to GiveDirectly. You will be asked to answer
this question on your screens in a minute. If you answer “YES, I’d like to donate
$5 today,” $5 of your show up fee today will be donated. If you say “NO,” no
donation will be made. Your decisions are final today.
48

• [Treatment NL]: We would like to ask you whether you would like to donate $5
of your show up fee for next week’s session to GiveDirectly. You will be asked to
answer this question on your screens in a minute. If you answer “YES, I’d like to
donate $5 next week,” $5 of your show up fee next week will be donated. If you
say NO, no donation will be made. Your decisions are final today.

Decision Screens

NN:

NL:

49

B.3. Experiments 2 and 3
The instructions of Experiment 3 are shown below. In brackets the additional variations
in Treatments Announce 1, Announce 2 and Announce 3 are shown. The instructions
for Experiment 2 did not explicitly discuss the indifference option, which was offered
on the computer screens only. This discussion was added explicitly in Experiment 3,
including the Baseline treatment of Experiment 3, which replicates Experiment 2. The
results demonstrate no differences in decisions. The former set of instructions is available
upon request.
Your Donation Decision

In this study we will ask you to make two donation decisions, but only one of these
two will end up being the decision that counts. One donation decision will be made
today. Call this your week-1 donation decision. Your second donation decision will be
made next week, when you return to the lab to complete this study. Call this your week-2
donation decision.
Here is how it works.
Week-1 donation decision
Today we will ask you whether you would like to donate $5 of your show up fee for
next week’s session to GiveDirectly. You will be asked to answer this question on
your screens in a minute.

If you answer “YES, I’d like to donate $5 next week,”

$5 of your show up fee next week will be donated. If you say NO, no donation will be
made.
Week-2 donation decision
Next week, when you return to the lab to complete this study, you will have the opportunity to renew or revise your donation decision. In particular, next week you will
be asked again whether you would like to donate $5 of your show up fee for next
week’s session to Give Directly. If you answer “YES, I’d like to donate $5 today,”
50

$5 of your show up fee next week will be donated. If you say NO, no donation will be
made.
IMPORTANT: Only one of your decisions, either your week-1 or your
week-2 donation decision, will be implemented. That is, only one decision
will be the decision-that-counts. We will not use both! The most you will
ever donate in this study is $5. The least you can donate is $0.
How will we decide whether your week-1 donation decision or your week-2
donation decision is the decision-that-counts?
Next week, after you make your week-2 donation decision, we will ask someone in the
room to roll a 10-sided die to determine which decision is the decision-that-counts. All
10 numbers on the die are equally likely. Based on your decision, there will be a 1 in 10
chance or a 9 in 10 chance that the decision-that-counts is your week-1 decision.
Today you will have three options to choose from:
A. Your week-1 donation decision will count with a 1 in 10 chance, and so your
week-2 donation decision will count with a 9 in 10 chance.
B. Your week-1 donation decision will count with a 9 in 10 chance, and so your
week-2 donation decision will count with a 1 in 10 chance.
C. Your choice between Option A or Option B is determined using a coin flip.
If you chose Option A today, the following will occur. A volunteer will roll a 10-sided
die and:
• Your week-1 donation decision will be the decision-that-counts if number “1” is
the outcome of the die roll.
• Your week-2 donation decision will be the decision-that-counts if numbers “2”,
“3”, “4”, “5”, “6”, “7”, “8”, “9” or “10” are the outcome of the die roll.

51

If you choose Option B today, the following will occur. A volunteer will roll a 10-sided
die and:
• Your week-1 donation decision will be the decision-that-counts if numbers “2”,
“3”, “4”, “5”, “6”, “7”, “8”, “9” or “10” are the outcome of the die roll.
• Your week-2 donation decision will be the decision-that-counts if number “1” is
the outcome of the die roll.
If you chose Option C today, a volunteer will flip a coin to determine whether your
payment will be determined according to Option A or Option B.
• If the outcome of the coin flip is “heads”, Option A will be the option assigned to
you.
• If the outcome of the coin flip is “tails”, Option B will be the option assigned to
you.
[Announce 1:
Announcing Decisions
At the end of the session today, after everyone’s decisions have been recorded, we will
announce your week-1 donation decision to all of the participants in the room today. We
will do this two ways.
First, we will use the screen at the front of this room to display the decision of each
participant. The screen display may look something like this:
Seat Number

Week-1 Donation Decision

1

Yes, donate $5 next week

2

No

3
Yes, donate $5 next week
. . . and so forth
Next, we will call out seat numbers sequentially, starting at a randomly determined
seat number. When we call your seat number, for example seat number 25, please stand
52

up and say “I am at seat 25”. Then, please read the decision you made today listed
on the screen, by saying “I chose yes, donate $5 next week”, or “I chose no”. Please
remember to stay standing until we are ready to call the next seat number.
As you can see, this means that the other participants in this session will learn your
week-1 donation decision.
[Announce 2:
Announcing Decisions
At the end of the session today, after everyone’s decisions have been recorded, we will
announce your week-1 donation decision and your choice between Options A, B and C
to all of the participants in the room today. We will do this two ways.
First, we will use the screen at the front of this room to display the decision of each
participant. The screen display may look something like this:
Seat Number

Week-1 Donation Decision

Option A, B or C?

1

Yes, donate $5 next week

Option A

2

No

Option B

3
Yes, donate $5 next week
. . . and so forth

Option C

Next, we will call out seat numbers sequentially, starting at a randomly determined
seat number. When we call your seat number, for example seat number 25, please stand
up and say “I am at seat 25”. Then, please read the decision you made today listed on
the screen, by saying “I chose yes, donate $5 next week”, or “I chose no”, and thereafter
adding “And I chose Option A”, “And I chose Option B” or “And I chose Option C”.
Please remember to stay standing until we are ready to call the next seat number.
As you can see, this means that the other participants in this session will learn your
week-1 donation decision, and your choice between Option A, B or C.]
[Announce 3:
Announcing Decisions
At the end of the session today, after everyone’s decisions have been recorded, we will
53

announce your week-1 donation decision and your choice between Options A, B and C
to all of the participants in the room today. We will do this two ways.
First, we will use the screen at the front of this room to display the decision of each
participant. The screen display may look something like this:
Seat Number

Week-1 Donation Decision

Option A, B or C?

1

Yes, donate $5 next week

Option A

2

No

Option B

3
Yes, donate $5 next week
. . . and so forth

Option C

Next, we will call out seat numbers sequentially, starting at a randomly determined
seat number. When we call your seat number, for example seat number 25, please stand
up and say “I am at seat 25”. Then, please read the decision you made today listed on
the screen, by saying “I chose yes, donate $5 next week”, or “I chose no”, and thereafter
adding “And I chose Option A”, “And I chose Option B” or “And I chose Option C”.
Please remember to stay standing until we are ready to call the next seat number.
As you can see, this means that the other participants in this session will learn your
week-1 donation decision, and your choice between Option A, B or C.
When you return to the lab next week, after everyone’s decisions have been recorded,
we will announce your week-2 decisions, following the same procedures as described
above. We will also remind everyone in the room of your decisions in week 1. ]]
In summary:
• Today you make a decision about donating $5 out of your show-up fee for next
week’s session to Give Directly. This decision will be carried out next week with a
1 in 10 or a 9 in 10 chance.
• Next week you will be asked again to make a decision about donating $5 out of
your show up fee for next week’s session to Give Directly. This decision will be
carried out next week with a 9 in 10 or a 1 in 10 chance.

54

• Only one of these two decisions will be carried out.
• You make both donation decisions before you know which decision will be carried
out.
• You decide today whether you would like Option A (your week-1 donation decision
to count with a 1 in 10 chance and so your week-2 donation decision will count with
a 9 in 10 chance), Option B (your week 1 donation decision to count with a 9 in 10
chance and so your week-2 donation decision will count with a 1 in 10 chance) or
Option C (you would like to flip a coin between these two options).
• After you have made your week-2 donation decision, a die will be rolled to determine
whether your week-1 or your week-2 donation decision is the decision that counts.
If you chose to flip a coin, a coin will be flipped beforehand.
• [Announce: At the end of the session today, [1: your week-1 donation decision [2, 3:
and your choice between Options A, B and C]] will be announced to the rest of the
participants in the room.
• [Announce: At the end of the session next week, [1, 2: there will be no announcements. [3: your week-2 donation decision will also be announced to the rest of
the participants in the room, together with your week-1 decision and your choice
between Options A, B and C.]]
Next you will be asked about your donation decision on the screens.
Remember: Your donation decision today could be the decision-thatcounts so treat this decision as if it were the decision that will count.

55

Decision Screens
Week 1 decision:

Commitment decision (on screen following week 1 decision):

56

Appendix C: Additional Analyses
C.1. Analysis of show-up rates
Table C.1 examines the determinants of the decision to show-up in Week 2, in the NN
and NL treatments. We do not find that the treatment, or the decision to give within
each treatment, or any individual characteristic is related to show-up in Week 2. Table
C.2 provides the same analysis for the Commitment and Announcement Experiments.
C.1. Analysis of Show-up Rates (Experiment 1)
No-show rate
in Week 2
NN Treatment
NL Treatment
NL vs. NN show-up rate (p-value χ2 -test)

Give (g=1)
If no-show If show-up

7.8%
11.6%
0.235

28.6%
45.0%

30.9%
45.8%

p-value
0.856
0.949

N
179
173

C.2. Analysis of Show-up Rates (Experiments 2 and 3)
Experiment 2
Probabilistic Commitment
No-show rate
χ2 -test p-value (Announcements)

Baseline

Experiment 3 (Announcements)
Announce 1 Announce 2 Announce 3

10.9%

6.7%
0.129

5.9%

3.0%

13.2%

Week 1 Decision
No + c=0.9
No + c=0.5
No + c=0.1
Yes + c=0.9
Yes + c=0.5
Yes + c=0.1

If show-up
26%
14%
12%
13%
13%
22%

If show-up
27%
16%
5%
13%
16%
23%

If show-up
8%
22%
22%
23%
17%
8%

If show-up
22%
8%
6%
15%
22%
28%

If show-up
10%
24%
7%
15%
22%
22%

No + c=0.9
No + c=0.5
No + c=0.1
Yes + c=0.9
Yes + c=0.5
Yes + c=0.1

If no-show
35%
10%
0%
20%
10%
25%

If no-show
50%
25%
25%
0%
0%
0%

If no-show
0%
0%
0%
50%
50%
0%

If no-show
50%
0%
0%
0%
0%
50%

If no-show
22%
0%
0%
11%
44%
22%

0.537

0.401

0.352

0.841

0.372

χ2 -test p-value

C.2. Gender Differences in Experiment 1
Table C.3. disaggregates the results of Experiment 1 by gender. In the NN and NL
treatments the number of male participants is 124 and the number of female participants
57

is 194.
Table C.3. Results by Gender

NN and NL Treatments
Decide Now to Give Now (NN): Share of giving
Decide Now to Give Later (NL): Share of giving
NN vs. NL: χ2 -test (p-val)

Men

Women

0.323
(0.058)
0.390
(0.064)
0.754

0.300
(0.046)
0.500
(0.051)
0.183

Notes: This table presents the behavior of male and female participants in the NN and
NL treatments. The table presents the frequency of each behavior unless otherwise noted.
Standard errors are displayed in parentheses for giving rates.

C.3. Session sizes in Experiment 3
The session size in treatments Announce 1, Announce 2 and Announce 3 was as follows.
In treatment Announce 1 the size of the Week 1 sessions was 22, 22 and 24, across three
sessions. In Announce 2, the size of the sessions was 21, 22 and 24. In Announce 3, the
size of the sessions was 21, 23 and 24.

58

C.4. Commitment Decisions in Experiment 3
Table C.5. provides detailed descriptive statistics of commitment choices in Experiment
3, by treatment.
C.5. Commitment Decisions in Experiment 3

Week 1 gift, Week 2 gift

Baseline

Treatment
Announce 1 Announce 2

Announce 3

Dynamically inconsistent (yes, no)

p=F
p=I
p=C
Frequency (N)

68.8%
14.6%
16.7%
48/219

72.2%
27.8%
0.0%
18/64

68.2%
18.2%
13.6%
22/65

53.3%
26.7%
20.0%
15/59

Dynamically inconsistent (no, yes)

p=F
p=I
p=C
Frequency (N)

29.6%
14.8%
55.6%
27/219

25.0%
0.0%
75.0%
4/64

33.3%
0.0%
66.7%
3/65

0.0%
66.7%
33.3%
3/59

Dynamically consistent (yes, yes)

p=F
p=I
p=C
Frequency (N)

27%
39%
34%
59/219

15%
46%
38%
13/64

15%
50%
35%
20/65

25%
45%
30%
20/59

Dynamically consistent (no, no)

p=F
p=I
p=C
Frequency (N)

18%
33%
49%
85/219

14%
48%
38%
29/64

15%
25%
60%
20/65

19%
57%
24%
21/59

59

D. Uncertainty and Flexibility: Additional Results
In this section we examine additional survey evidence regarding the role of uncertainty
in Experiment 2. At the end of the Week 2 session, after all donation decisions had
been made, we asked individuals to indicate their level of agreement with the following
statements: “Over the last week... (a) I thought about GiveDirectly” (GD thought);
(b) I read or did research about GiveDirectly” (GD read); (c) I learned about other
charities like GiveDirectly” (Thought others); (d) I thought about whether my financial
situation allows me to donate to GiveDirectly” (Thought budget). Answers were provided
on a 5-point Likert scale, ranging from strongly disagree to strongly agree. Based on
these statements we construct an index, that we label as Resolving Uncertainty index,
that measures the extent to which the individual thought and did research about her
donation decision. We also elicited the extent to which the search for information about
GiveDirectly changed the subject’s opinion, through the statement “Over the last week I
became more favorable about GiveDirectly.” (GD more favorable). We present average
responses to each variable in Table D.1. Based on these statements we construct an index,
labeled Resolving Uncertainty index, that measures the extent to which the individual
thought and did research about her donation decision. A higher value of the index
indicates more research and thought was given to the donation decision. We also elicited
the extent to which the search for information about GiveDirectly changed the subject’s
opinion, through the statement “Over the last week I became more favorable about
GiveDirectly.”
In Table D.2. we examine the relationship between these measures and donation
behavior. Naturally, since these measures were elicited after donation decisions have been
made, the results should be interpreted with caution. Column (1) of Table D.2. displays
the results of a linear regression on the (standardized) Resolving Uncertainty index and
giving and commitment decisions. The results indicate that individuals who demanded
flexibility report a higher likelihood doing more thinking and research between Week 1
and Week 2, relative to those individuals who are indifferent between commitment and

60

Table D.1. Self-reported behaviors between Week 1 and Week 2 sessions (Experiment 2)
GD thought

GD read

Thought others

Thought budget

GD more favorable

Always give
Flexibility
Indifference
Commitment

3.6
3.3
3.4

2.8
2.1
2.1

2.9
2.2
2.6

4.3
2.9
3.1

3.0
3.1
3.0

Never give
Flexibility
Indifference
Commitment

3.3
3.0
3.5

2.5
1.9
2.3

2.8
1.9
2.4

3.7
3.4
4.3

2.8
2.3
2.8

Give more later
Flexibility
Indifference
Commitment

3.1
4.0
3.4

2.3
2.0
2.0

2.8
2.0
2.1

3.6
4.0
2.7

3.0
2.3
2.6

Give less later
Flexibility
Indifference
Commitment

4.4
3.3
3.3

3.4
2.0
2.7

3.0
2.3
2.3

4.4
3.0
4.2

3.6
2.3
3.1

flexibility. However, those subjects who choose to give more later (g1 = 1 and g2 = 0) and
demand flexibility are less likely to do research and think about the charity, which speaks
against the concern that this type of time-inconsistent individuals demanded flexibility
due to uncertainty.
Column (2) of Table D.2. explores the relationship between changes in opinion with
regards to GiveDirectly, time inconsistency and demand for flexibility. The results indicate that subjects who chose (No, Yes) and demanded flexibility express becoming
significantly more favorable towards GiveDirectly in the week between the first and second session of the experiment. The behavior of these subjects is consistent with Kreps
(1979), since they were initially uncertain and cautious, but changed their donation decision, potentially due to their change in opinion about GiveDirectly. By contrast, the
behavior of subjects who chose to give more later (g1 = 1 and g2 = 0) and demanded
flexibility is again inconsistent with Kreps (1979). These subjects change their decision
towards not giving in Week 2, but they do not report becoming less favorable towards
the charity, since the coefficient for this group is not significant and positive (0.803).

61

Table D.2. Flexibility and Uncertainty

Flexibility
Give more later X Flexibility
Never give X Flexibility
Give less later X Flexibility
Commitment
Give more later X Commitment
Never give X Commitment
Give less later X Commitment
Give more later
Never give
Give less later
Constant

(1)
Resolving Uncertainty
Index

(2)
Became more favorable
towards charity

0.961*
(0.438)
-1.053*
(0.531)
-0.336
(0.536)
0.444
(0.433)
0.192
(0.286)
-0.732
(0.526)
0.564
(0.528)
0.386
(0.531)
0.462
(0.311)
-0.137
(0.513)
0.042
(0.473)
-0.375
(0.332)

-0.073
(0.458)
0.803
(0.571)
0.511
(0.684)
1.487**
(0.515)
-0.073
(0.423)
0.334
(0.683)
0.565
(0.693)
0.894
(0.507)
-0.803
(0.464)
-0.784
(0.598)
-0.803*
(0.420)
0.240
(0.388)

163
0.133

163
0.094

Observations
R-squared

Note: This table presents the estimate coefficients from an ordinary least squares regression
relating choices in the Commitment treatment and self-reported measures of behavior between
the Week 1 and Week 2 session. The Resolving Uncertainty index is the sum of the answers
to the following statements: Over the last week... (a) I thought about GiveDirectly; (b) I read
or did research about GiveDirectly; (c) I learned about other charities like GiveDirectly; (d) I
thought about whether my financial situation allows me to donate to GiveDirectly. A value of
1 corresponds to strongly disagree and 5 corresponds to strongly agree. The variable Became
more favorable towards charity takes values 1 to 5, reflecting disagreement/agreement with the
statement “Over the past week I became more favorable about GiveDirectly”. Both dependent
variables are standardized. All explanatory variables are dummy variables that take value one if
the subject chose the described behavior. Robust standard errors, clustered at the session level,
are shown in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

62

