                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                INFLATION DYNAMICS DURING THE FINANCIAL CRISIS

                                         Simon Gilchrist
                                        Raphael Schoenle
                                            Jae Sim
                                         Egon Zakrajšek

                                       Working Paper 22827
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w22827


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   November 2016




We thank Rudi Bachmann, Mark Bils, Marco Del Negro, Etienne Gagnon, Marc Giannoni, Yuriy
Gorodnichenko, Jim Kahn, Pete Klenow, Emi Nakamura, Joe Vavra, and three anonymous
referees for helpful comments and suggestions; we also benefited from comments from
participants at numerous conferences and seminars. We are especially grateful to Kristen Reed,
Ryan Ogden, and Rozi Ulics of the Bureau of Labor Statistics for their invaluable help with this
project and to Jonathan Weinhagen for sharing his expertise with the PPI data. Jane Brittingham,
Holly Dykstra, George Gu, Samuel Haltenhof, Matthew Klepacz, Shaily Patel, and Rebecca
Zhang provided outstanding research assistance at various stages of this project. Gilchrist and
Schoenle thank the National Science Foundation for financial support under grant No. 1357781.
All errors and omissions are our own responsibility. The views expressed in this paper are solely
the responsibility of the authors and should not be interpreted as reflecting the views of the Board
of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, anyone else associated with the Federal Reserve
System, or the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2016 by Simon Gilchrist, Raphael Schoenle, Jae Sim, and Egon Zakrajšek. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Inflation Dynamics During the Financial Crisis
Simon Gilchrist, Raphael Schoenle, Jae Sim, and Egon Zakrajšek
NBER Working Paper No. 22827
November 2016
JEL No. E31,E32,E44

                                         ABSTRACT

Using a novel dataset, which merges good-level prices underlying the PPI with the respondents’
balance sheets, we show that liquidity constrained firms increased prices in 2008, while their
unconstrained counterparts cut prices. We develop a model in which firms face financial frictions
while setting prices in customer markets. Financial distortions create an incentive for firms to
raise prices in response to adverse financial or demand shocks. This reaction reflects the firms’
decisions to preserve internal liquidity and avoid accessing external finance, factors that
strengthen the countercyclical behavior of markups and attenuate the response of inflation to
fluctuations in output.

Simon Gilchrist                                 Jae Sim
Department of Economics                         Division of Research & Statistics
Boston University                               Federal Reserve Board
270 Bay State Road                              20th Street & Constitution Avenue, NW
Boston, MA 02215                                Washington, D.C. 20551
and NBER                                        jae.w.sim@frb.gov
sgilchri@bu.edu
                                                Egon Zakrajšek
Raphael Schoenle                                Division of Monetary Affairs
Brandeis University                             Federal Reserve Board
Department of Economics                         20th Street & Constitution Avenue, NW
Mail Stop 021                                   Washington, D.C. 20551
415 South Street                                egon.zakrajsek@frb.gov
Waltham, MA 02454
http://people.brandeis.edu/~schoenle/
schoenle@brandeis.edu
1     Introduction
In spite of substantial and persistent economic slack, the United States experienced only a mild
disinflation during the “Great Recession” and its aftermath. Consumer price inflation, measured
by the core PCE price index, averaged 2 percent between 2003 and 2007 and only declined to
an average annual rate of about 1.5 percent over the following eight years, a period that saw the
deepest contraction in economic activity since the Great Depression, followed by an uneven and
weak recovery. Among many economists, the absence of more pronounced deflationary pressures
during this period has cast doubt on the empirical relevance of the Phillips curve—a central tenet of
most standard macroeconomic models—which posits that a high level of resource underutilization
should cause inflation to fall over time (Hall, 2011; King and Watson, 2012).
    The puzzling behavior of inflation during the Great Recession—at both the consumer and
producer levels—has led to a vigorous research effort aimed at reconciling the observed inflation
dynamics with the canonical Phillips curve-type relationships linking the rate of change in prices
to the level of economic activity.1 Importantly, the absence of significant deflationary pressures oc-
curred against the backdrop of extraordinary turmoil that swept through financial markets in 2008,
which resulted in a severe tightening of financial conditions for most businesses and households. To
better understand the interaction between the firms’ price-setting behavior and financial factors in
periods of such turmoil, we analyze—both empirically and theoretically—inflation dynamics during
the recent financial crisis through the lens of customer markets theory, while dispensing with the
assumption of frictionless financial markets.
    Our analysis intersects with three strands of the existing literature. First, the seminal con-
tributions of Phelps and Winter (1970) and Bils (1989) show that pricing decisions in customer
markets—markets in which a customer base is “sticky” and thus an important determinant of
firms’ assets and profitability—are a form of investment decisions because lower prices build the
future customer base.2 Second, recent work by Hottman et al. (2014) and Foster et al. (2016) doc-
uments that customer markets feature importantly in the major sectors of the U.S. economy. And
lastly, as emphasized by Gottfries (1991) and Chevalier and Scharfstein (1996), in the presence of
financial frictions, firms operating in customer markets that are experiencing a liquidity squeeze
accompanying a fall in demand may find it optimal to maintain—or even increase—their prices and
sacrifice future sales in order to boost current cashflows.3
    1
      These explanations typically involve the “anchored expectations” hypothesis or alternative measures of economic
slack (see Ball and Mazumder, 2011; Gordon, 2013; Krueger et al., 2014; Coibion and Gorodnichenko, 2015, and
references therein). At the same time, Del Negro et al. (2015) argue that a standard New Keynesian model augmented
with the financial accelerator mechanism of Bernanke et al. (1999) can match the broad contours of inflation during the
crisis, without relying on large exogenous markup shocks; their results, however, rely heavily on the estimated degree
of price stickiness, which is notably higher than that implied by the microeconometric evidence of Bils and Klenow
(2004) and Nakamura and Steinsson (2008).
    2
      The stickiness of the customer base may reflect a variety of microeconomic mechanisms: costly switching
Klemperer (1987); costly search Hall (2008); or idiosyncratic preferences Bronnenberg et al. (2012).
    3
      Some early empirical evidence supporting this hypothesis can be found in the work of Chevalier and Scharfstein
(1996), Asplund et al. (2005), and Lundin et al. (2009).           More recently, Antoun de Almedia (2015) and
Gilchrist and Zakrajšek (2016) document a systematic effect of financial constraints on the industry-level producer
prices in the euro area and United States, respectively. Using Spanish firm-level data, Montero and Urtasun (2014)


                                                          1
    We first demonstrate the empirical relevance of this phenomenon for the Great Recession by con-
structing a new dataset, which merges good-level transaction prices underlying the U.S. Producer
Price Index (PPI) with the respondent firms’ income and balance sheet data from the Standard
and Poor’s Compustat. The key finding that emerges from our empirical analysis is that firms with
limited internal liquidity and high operating leverage—a category of firms most exposed to liquid-
ity shocks—significantly increased their prices in 2008, a period characterized by the widespread
disruptions in credit markets and a sharp contraction in output. Their liquidity unconstrained coun-
terparts, by contrast, cut prices during this period, a move consistent with the standard pricing
models and the New Keynesian paradigm.4
    To rationalize the fact that firms’ balance sheet positions influenced their pricing behavior during
the financial crisis, we incorporate the theoretical insights of Chevalier and Scharfstein (1996) into
a tractable general equilibrium model, in which monopolistically competitive firms face costly price
adjustment, while setting prices to actively manage current versus future expected demand. We do
so in the context of the “deep habits” framework formulated by Ravn et al. (2006), which we aug-
ment with a financial distortion, namely, costly external equity finance. As in Gourio and Rudanko
(2014), the firm’s customer base in our model is an asset, and the presence of financial market fric-
tions affects the incentive of firms to invest into such an asset via price reductions.
    Relative to a setup with frictionless financial markets, our model implies a significantly different
response of prices to adverse demand and financial shocks. The key mechanism driving this result
is the interaction of financial frictions with customer markets. Faced with a sticky customer base
and costly external finance, firms are confronted with a tradeoff between current profits and the
longer-run consideration of their market share. Maintaining a market share requires a firm to post
low prices. However, a firm can be forced to deviate from this strategy if an adverse shock induces
a severe deterioration in its internal liquidity position. In that case, a firm will find it optimal
to raise prices—and sacrifice its market share—to avoid costly external financing. Thus, pricing
behavior becomes more myopic as financial constraints become more severe.
    Extending our theoretical framework to allow for differences in financial conditions across firms,
we further show that firms with weak balance sheets raise prices relative to firms with strong
balance sheets in response to adverse demand or financial shocks. These theoretical results accord
well with our empirical evidence, which shows that in 2008, firms with limited internal liquidity
actually increased prices, while their financially stronger counterparts lowered prices. Because
in our model firms with strong balance sheets are better positioned to reduce prices and “steal”
market share from their financially constrained competitors, heterogeneity in financial conditions
employ an econometric framework to derive estimates of the price-cost margins and find a significant increase in
the estimated margins during the 2007–2011 period; moreover, the increase in these implied markups was especially
pronounced for firms facing tight credit conditions and for firms operating in industries with a low degree of product
market competition. Using Japanese survey data, Kimura (2013) also finds evidence that the binding liquidity con-
straints among Japanese firms attenuated deflationary pressures arising from significant and persistent slack in the
post-bubble Japanese economy of the 1990s.
   4
     As shown in Appendix A, these differences in the price-setting behavior between liquidity constrained and uncon-
strained firms are also reflected in the differential behavior of employment, inventories, and other forms of investment,
in a manner that is consistent with the presence of binding financial constraints.


                                                           2
leads to a further deterioration in the liquidity position of financially constrained firms. In addition
to amplifying the overall contraction in output, such strategic pricing behavior is also in line with
“limit pricing” strategy of Milgrom and Roberts (1982) and the theories of “predation based on
agency problems” developed by Bolton and Scharfstein (1990).5
       Financial market distortions also play a key role in the cyclical behavior of markups: In the
model with financial frictions, markups remain elevated after the initial impact of an adverse
demand (or financial) shock; in the case of frictionless financial markets, by contrast, the coun-
tercyclical dynamics of markups are significantly attenuated, as the initial increase in markups is
offset by low future markups. Thus, the interaction of customer markets and financial frictions
can account for the countercyclical nature of markups as well as for the stabilization of inflation at
positive rates against the backdrop of significant and long-lasting economic slack.
       Within the context of New Keynesian models, Christiano et al. (2015) also draw attention to
the impact of financial frictions on inflation dynamics during the Great Recession. In their model,
the jump in credit spreads in late 2008 induces a sharp rise in the cost of working capital, which
increases firms’ marginal costs—the “cost channel” documented by Barth and Ramey (2001). At
the same time, the economy is hit by a series of exogenous negative technology shocks, which further
boost firms’ marginal costs. These two factors counteract the emergence of significant deflationary
pressures and deliver only modest disinflation in the face of a significant contraction in output.
       Although financial market frictions play a critical role in the work of Del Negro et al. (2015) and
Christiano et al. (2015), neither of these papers seeks to account for the differences in the actual
pricing behavior of firms in different financial positions during the Great Recession. And while the
cost channel is also present in our model, it is not the primary mechanism through which financial
frictions influence inflation dynamics during the crisis. Rather, our approach offers two distinct
contributions to the understanding of inflation dynamics during a financial crisis. First, it provides
new empirical evidence on how firms in different financial positions actually change their prices
during a crisis. Second, it provides a link between these new micro facts and the macroeconomy
by developing a tractable general equilibrium model, in which the strategic interaction of firms
operating in customer markets and facing imperfect capital markets can in periods of widespread
financial distress lead to economic outcomes characterized by a severe and persistent contraction
in economic activity that is accompanied by only mild disinflation.
   5
    In the standard financial accelerator model, by contrast, financial distortions reduce input demand but do not
directly affect the firms’ pricing decisions. In such environments, alleviating the severity of financial frictions for a
subset of firms—which boosts the overall financial capacity of the economy and at the same time induces greater
heterogeneity in financial conditions across firms—reduces the degree of amplification obtained through the financial
accelerator.




                                                           3
2     Empirical Evidence
2.1    Data Sources and Methods
To document how firms’ balance sheets affected their pricing behavior during the Great Reces-
sion, we construct a novel dataset using micro-level data from two sources: (1) good-level (con-
fidential) producer price data underlying the PPI published by the Bureau of Labor Statistics
(BLS); and (2) firm-level income and balance sheet data from Compustat. As emphasized by
Nakamura and Steinsson (2008) and Goldberg and Hellerstein (2009), the good-level PPI data are
transactions-based prices that are representative of the entire U.S. production sector and are consis-
tently sampled, both across production units and time. Goods produced by each firm are uniquely
identified, according to their “price-determining” characteristics such as the type of buyer, the type
of market transaction, the method of shipment, the size and units of shipment, the freight type,
and the day of the month of the transaction.
    The granularity of these data allows us to overcome limitations inherent in working with macro-
level price series because we can aggregate good-specific inflation rates to the firm level and thus
preserve the cross-sectional heterogeneity of the firms’ pricing decisions. In combination with the
firm-level balance sheet data, we can then analyze directly how differences in financial conditions
between firms translate into difference in their pricing behavior during the financial crisis. We focus
on producer prices because they directly capture the price response of domestic production units
to changes in the underlying economic and financial conditions.
    We use the algorithm of Schoenle (2010) to match the names of firms in the PPI and Compustat
datasets.6 After applying the algorithm to the two datasets over the period from January 2005
to December 2012, we matched 584 U.S. nonfinancial corporations with the PPI database. To
construct monthly inflation rates for these firms, we use quality-adjusted good-level prices, which
control for potential changes in product quality over time. Specifically, letting p∗i,j,t denote the
recorded transaction price of good i produced by firm j and pbi,j,t the corresponding “base” price—
which takes into account changes in the item’s quality over time—we define the quality-adjusted
good-level price as pi,j,t ≡ p∗i,j,t /pbi,j,t . The good-level inflation rate in month t—denoted by πi,j,t —is
then calculated as                                                                !
                                                                        p∗i,j,t
                                      πi,j,t = ∆ log pi,j,t = ∆ log                   ,                            (1)
                                                                        pbi,j,t

where ∆xt ≡ xt − xt−1 .7 We also use the quality-adjusted good-level prices to calculate other
price-change characteristics, such as frequency of price changes, positive/negative price changes,
   6
     Weber (2014) and Gorodnichenko and Weber (2016) also consider a matched sample of publicly traded firms to
study asset pricing implications of nominal rigidities.
   7
     To ensure the PPI measures only “pure” price changes—that is, changes attributable solely to market factors—it
must exclude any change in price of the sampled items that is due to a change in the base price, such as physical
changes to the item or changes in the way the item is sold. To adjust for such changes in the base price, the
BLS employs a number of quality-adjustment procedures, which depend on the type of change and the information
available from the respondent; see Bureau of Labor Statistics (2014) for details. To mitigate the effect of outliers on
our results, we also exclude all observations with absolute monthly inflation rates in excess of 100 percent from our
calculations.


                                                          4
                           Figure 1: Comparing Data with Broader Aggregates


                                                                                                 Percent (SAAR)
                                                                                                                   6
      3-month moving average
                                                                                                                   4

                                                                                                                   2

                                                                                                                   0

                                                                                                                   -2

                                                                          Matched PPI-Compustat sample             -4
                                                                          Full PPI sample
                                                                                                                   -6
        2005        2006          2007         2008          2009          2010         2011          2012
                                           (a) Producer price inflation

                                                                                                Percent (SAAR)
                                                                                                                  40
       Quarterly
                                                                                                                  20

                                                                                                                   0

                                                                                                                  -20

                                                                                                                  -40
                                                                          Matched PPI-Compustat sample
                                                                          Full Compustat sample
                                                                                                                  -60

                                                                                                                  -80
        2005        2006          2007         2008          2009         2010         2011          2012
                                                 (b) Sales growth
 Note: The solid line in panel (a) depicts the weighted-average of monthly good-level inflation rates for the sample
 of 584 firms in the matched PPI–Compustat sample, while the dotted line depicts the corresponding inflation rate
 calculated using the full PPI sample. The solid line in panel (b) depicts the quarterly weighted-average growth
 rate of sales for the sample of 584 firms in the matched PPI–Compustat sample, while the dotted line depicts the
 corresponding growth of sales calculated using the sample of all U.S. nonfinancial firms in Compustat; firm-level
 sales are deflated by the U.S. nonfarm business sector GDP price deflator (2009:Q4 = 100). The shaded vertical
 bar represents the 2007–2009 recession as dated by the NBER.




and frequency of positive/negative price changes.
      Although the matched PPI–Compustat sample includes less than 600 firms, these firms tend
to be appreciably larger than a typical U.S. nonfinancial corporation. As a result, the matched
sample is representative of the U.S. economy as a whole in a number of dimensions relevant to our
analysis.8 Panel (a) of Figure 1 shows the weighted-average of good-level inflation rates calculated
  8
   Table A-1 in Appendix A provides a comprehensive comparison of the pricing characteristics between the full
PPI and matched PPI–Compustat datasets, while Table A-2 compares the key characteristics of firms in the matched
PPI–Compustat sample with those of the entire U.S. nonfinancial corporate sector.




                                                         5
using the full PPI and the matched PPI–Compustat samples.9 The average inflation rate based on
the subset of publicly traded firms is somewhat noisier compared with the overall PPI inflation rate,
but the two series are positively correlated and in broad terms capture the same cyclical behavior
of producer prices. Panel (b) compares the weighted-average growth rate of sales for the matched
PPI–Compustat sample with that of all nonfinancial firms in Compustat. The two series exhibit a
high degree of comovement, especially during the Great Recession.

2.2      Inflation Dynamics by Selected Firm Characteristics
A defining feature of the recent financial crisis was a massive disruption in the credit intermediation
process, both in the arm’s-length capital markets and in the form of credit intermediated through
the banking sector. With regards to the latter, Bassett et al. (2014) show that a significant portion
of the decline in the capacity of businesses and households to borrow from the banking sector
represented a reduction in the supply of credit lines, as banks aggressively reduced their off-balance-
sheet credit exposures in response to the acute pressures on their capital and liquidity positions.
       In 2008, with short-term funding markets in severe turmoil, this pullback in the supply of
contingent liquidity that businesses rely upon heavily exerted a significant strain on corporate
balance sheets, forcing companies to turn to internal sources of liquidity (Campello et al., 2011).
As documented by Lins et al. (2010), bank credit lines are the primary source of liquidity for
companies around the world, and firms use (non-operational) cash reserves as a buffer against
cashflow shocks, especially during economic downturns. Given the special role of corporate cash
holdings during the recent crisis, we use the ratio of cash and short-term investments to total assets
(the liquidity ratio)—a measure of the firm’s ability to turn short-term assets into cash to cover its
immediate debt obligations and fund its operations—to analyze how differences in internal liquidity
affected the firms’ pricing behavior during this period.10
       There is a growing recognition among economists that customer markets are a pervasive feature
of the economic landscape. Recent work by Foster et al. (2016) shows that even within commodity-
like product industries in the manufacturing sector, the endogenous “demand accumulation pro-
cess,” whereby the producer actively influences its future demand by making pricing decisions that
build customer base at the expense of current profits, is a key factor explaining the small size and
slow growth of new plants in such industries. At the retail level, Hottman et al. (2014) use scanner
price and expenditure data on individual consumer products to show that demand differences—
   9
      The weights used to aggregate the good-level inflation rates in each month t are the product of the relative weight
of a good in the establishment’s production structure and the relative weight of the establishment as measured by its
total shipments. It is also worth noting that the more pronounced drop in producer prices during the latter patter of
the Great Recession recorded in the full PPI dataset (see panel (a) of Figure 1) is due to the fact the matched PPI–
Compustat sample omits a number of goods that experienced out-sized price declines during this period, reflecting
the drop in the energy prices.
   10
      Our focus on the firms’ internal liquidity positions during the crisis is also motivated by the corporate finance
literature, which emphasizes the role of agency problems and contractual frictions in financial markets as key deter-
minants of cash holdings among firms. According to these theories, the accumulation of liquid assets is an insurance
mechanism, whereby (risk-neutral) firms can overcome an inability to raise sufficient funds in capital markets when
hit by a liquidity shock.



                                                           6
reflecting variation in quality and taste among consumers—are the principal reason why some firms
succeed in the marketplace while others fail. In addition, as documented by Roberts et al. (2012),
Eaton et al. (2015), and Fitzgerald et al. (2016), customer markets considerations also importantly
shape the pricing decision of exporting firms in both advanced and emerging market economies.
       In a recent paper, Gourio and Rudanko (2014) argue that a high level of sales and general admin-
istrative (SG&A) expenses may be indicative of whether a firm is operating in customer markets—
the SG&A expenditures include advertising expenses and costs associated with maintaining a sales
force, activities that are closely associated with developing and maintaining a loyal customer base.
As emphasized by Gilchrist and Himmelberg (1998), however, significant SG&A spending can also
signal high fixed costs of operation and hence high operating leverage. Falato et al. (2013), on the
other hand, interpret a high level of SG&A expenditures as indicating that the firm relies heavily
on intangible capital, which cannot be pledged as collateral in loan contracts. Note that the two
latter interpretations have similar implications for the firms’ pricing decisions in the presence of
financial market frictions: Firms with high operating leverage or limited pledeable collateral face
greater liquidity risk during economic downturns and have a natural incentive to increase prices
when external financing is costly and internal liquidity is scarce. Indeed, as shown below, we use the
operating-leverage interpretation of the SG&A expenditures to introduce differences in “financial
capacity” across firms in our model.
       To analyze how the strength of the firms’ balance sheet interacted with their price-setting
behavior during the crisis, we use the liquidity ratio to classify firms in the PPI–Compustat sample
into “high” and “low” liquidity categories. Specifically, we sort firms into the two categories based
on whether the firm’s trailing 12-month moving average of the liquidity ratio in month t − 1 is
above or below the median of its distribution in that period, an approach that minimizes the
switching of firms between the two categories due to seasonal or other temporary factors.11 We
also examine how the firms’ price-setting behavior during the crisis differed among firms of varying
degree of operating leverage. To do so, we calculate for each firm in our sample its average ratio
of SG&A expenditures to sales (the SGAX ratio), using all the available data over the 2000–2004
period. Firms are then sorted into “high” and “low” SGAX categories based on whether their
pre-sample average SGAX ratio is above or below the median of these firm-specific ratios; note
that this classification scheme assigns a firm into one of the two SGAX categories over the entire
2005–2012 sample period.12
  11
      The PPI data are monthly, whereas the Compustat data are quarterly but are recorded in months given by the
firm’s fiscal year. In merging the two data sets, we are thus able to preserve the monthly frequency of the PPI data.
   12
      Both of our classification schemes result in an economically significant differences in their intended dimensions.
According to Table A-3 in Appendix A, liquid assets account, on average, for only 3 percent of total assets in the
low liquidity category, compared with an average of 21 percent in the high liquidity category. Similarly, over the
2005–2012 sample period, the average SGAX ratio in the low SGAX category is 0.13, compared with the average
ratio of 0.37 in the high SGAX category.




                                                           7
2.2.1      Descriptive Analysis

Our first empirical exercise zeroes in on the differences in inflation dynamics between the different
types of firms during the Great Recession. To take into account the industry-level cyclical price
dynamics, we work with firm-specific industry-adjusted inflation rates—denoted by π̃j,t —defined as

                                                   Nj,t
                                                   X                            
                                         π̃j,t =          wi,j,t × πi,j,t − πtIND ,
                                                   i=1

where πi,j,t is the monthly inflation rate for good i produced by firm j (see equation 1), Nj,t is
the number of goods by firm j that are included in the PPI, 0 < wi,j,t ≤ 1 is the relative weight
of good i within the total shipments of firm j; and πtIND is the (quality-adjusted) average inflation
rate in the 2-digit NAICS industry corresponding to good i.13 For each category of firms, we then
compute the weighted-average monthly inflation rate, with the weights equal to the nominal value
of sales in month t − 1, as recorded by Compustat.
       As shown in panel (a) of Figure 2, there is a sharp divergence in the behavior of industry-
adjusted inflation rates between high and low liquidity firms in the latter part of 2008: Liquidity
constrained firms significantly increased prices—relative to industry trends—whereas their uncon-
strained counterparts substantially lowered prices. The differences in the price-setting behavior
between financially weak and strong firms are large in economic terms—by the end of 2008, the
average inflation rate of liquidity constrained firms increased by more than 25 percentage points
(annualized) relative to the inflation rate of liquidity unconstrained firms. Outside this period of
acute financial turmoil, however, the inflation patterns between these two categories of firms do
not exhibit any clear systematic differences.
       These results are difficult to reconcile with the standard price-adjustment mechanism empha-
sized by the New Keynesian literature, a paradigm where firms’ financial conditions play no role
in determining their price-setting behavior. In the absence of large unobservable markup shocks,
standard calibrations of these models imply a significant broad-based decline in producer prices in
response to a contraction in output of the magnitude experienced by the U.S. economy in the latter
part of 2008 (Hall, 2011; King and Watson, 2012). Moreover, if a low (pre-determined) liquidity
ratio—which is used to measure the strength of the firms’ balance sheets—was indicative of weak-
ness in demand, one would expect liquidity constrained firms to lower prices even more relative to
firms with ample internal liquidity. However, we observe exactly the opposite pattern in the data.
       A similar divergence in industry-adjusted inflation rates emerges in panel (b) of Figure 2, where
firms are sorted by the intensity of their (pre-sample) SG&A spending. High SGAX firms also
  13                      ∗                   ∗
    Formally, wi,j,t = wi,j,t × θj,t , where wi,j,t denotes the relative weight of good i in the production structure of
firm j (as recorded by the BLS), and θj,t is an adjustment factor that takes into account the fact that when merging
the PPI database with Compustat more than one PPI respondent may fall within the definition of the Compustat
firm j. To take into account this feature of the data, the adjustment factor equals the relative value of shipments of
one PPI respondent with respect to all other respondents within the same Compustat firm unit. It is also important
to note that the (2-digit NAICS) industry-specific inflation rates (πtIND ) are constructed using the entire PPI database
and not just the good-level price data corresponding to the matched PPI–Compustat sample.



                                                                8
                           Figure 2: Industry-Adjusted Producer Price Inflation
                                   (By Selected Firm Characteristics)


                                                                                                  Percentage points
                                                                                                                      10
    3-month moving average, annualized
                                                                                                                       5

                                                                                                                       0

                                                                                                                      -5

                                                                                                                      -10
                                                                           Low liquidity firms                        -15
                                                                           High liquidity firms
                                                                                                                      -20

                                                                                                                      -25
       2005         2006          2007          2008          2009         2010           2011          2012
                                               (a) By liquidity ratio

                                                                                                  Percentage points
                                                                                                                      10
    3-month moving average, annualized

                                                                                                                       5


                                                                                                                       0


                                                                                                                      -5
                                                                            High SGAX firms
                                                                            Low SGAX firms                            -10


                                                                                                                      -15
       2005         2006          2007          2008          2009         2010           2011          2012
                                                (b) By SGAX ratio
 Note: The solid (dotted) line in panel (a) depicts the weighted-average industry-adjusted inflation rate for low
 (high) liquidity firms. The solid (dotted) line in panel (b) depicts the weighted-average industry-adjusted inflation
 rate for high (low) SGAX firms. All underlying series are seasonally adjusted and annualized. The shaded vertical
 bar represents the 2007–2009 recession as dated by the NBER.




increased prices significantly during the nadir of the crisis—low SGAX firms, in contrast, lowered
prices relative to industry trends during this period. While the price response of low SGAX firms
is consistent with the standard competitive market price dynamics, the relative price increase of
high SGAX firms appears to support the interpretation of SG&A expenditures as an indicator of
customer markets—firms operating in such an environment and facing financial constraints will
raise prices during a liquidity crunch at the expense of future market shares. As discussed above,
to the extent that a substantial part of the firm’s SG&A expenditures reflects overhead costs, a high
SGAX ratio is indicative of high operating leverage. Facing both a liquidity squeeze and falling
cashflows, high SGAX firms may thus be forced to boost prices in order to cover immediate debt



                                                          9
obligations and help fund operations.
   A potential concern with the results in panel (a) is that the difference in inflation rates between
high and low liquidity firms during the crisis is due to firms moving from one category to another
or firms altering their liquidity positions as the crisis unfolds. To rule out these possibilities, we
consider an alternative sorting procedure, whereby companies are permanently assigned into high
and low liquidity categories based on their average liquidity ratio in 2006—that is, before the onset
of the financial crisis. Using this ex ante classification scheme, we also analyze the relative dynamics
of real sales, a proxy for real output, between liquidity constrained and unconstrained firms.
   Specifically, we construct the quarterly growth rate of real sales for firm j as
                                                            X
                                                                            3m
                               ∆ log S̃j,t = ∆ log Sj,t −         wi,j,t × πi,j,t ,
                                                            i∈j


where ∆ log Sj,t is the quarterly log-difference of nominal sales as recorded by Compustat, and
P               3m
  i∈j wi,j,t × πi,j,t is the corresponding (3-month) weighted-average inflation rate of all goods pro-
duced by firm j calculated from the micro-level PPI data (see equation 1). We then sort firms into
low and high liquidity categories based on their average liquidity ratio in 2006. To control for the
differential effects of industry-specific shocks on output dynamics, we regress the growth of real
sales in each sample of firms on the interaction of industry (3-digit NAICS) and time fixed effects
and then calculate the cross-sectional (sales-weighted) average of the residuals in each quarter.
   Panel (a) of Figure 3 shows the accumulated industry-adjusted inflation rates for the liquidity
constrained and unconstrained firms based on our ex ante classification scheme. The sharp diver-
gence in industry-adjusted inflation rates between financially strong and weak firms in the latter
part of 2008 shown in panel (a) of Figure 2 is clearly evident in the case of this ex ante classification
scheme, which abstracts from the compositional effects associated with firms switching between the
two categories. Moreover, this divergence—although fairly short-lived—has significant long-term
consequences for the behavior of relative prices for these two types of firms. The weighted aver-
age of prices charged by the ex ante liquidity constrained firms remains persistently above that
charged by the firms that had more liquid balance sheets in 2006, even when taking into account
the industry-level price dynamics.
   The cyclical dynamics of real sales for the corresponding two categories of firms are shown in
panel (b). The relative behavior of industry-adjusted real sales accords remarkably well with the
divergence in industry-adjusted producer prices between liquidity constrained and unconstrained
firms. As the evaporation of market liquidity disrupted the flow of credit to businesses and house-
holds in the second half of 2008, real sales of the ex ante liquidity unconstrained firms increased
markedly relative to those of their financially weaker counterparts, a pattern consistent with the
fact that the financially strong firms slashed prices during this period. Also consistent with the
relative pricing trends shown in panel (a) is the fact that for the remainder of our sample period,
industry-adjusted real sales of the ex ante liquidity constrained firms remained persistently below
those registered by firms that had more liquid balance sheets prior to the crisis.


                                                    10
                            Figure 3: Industry-Adjusted Producer Prices and Sales
                                     (By Selected Firm Characteristics)


                               Index (Jan. 2008 = 100)                                            Index (2008:Q1 = 100)
                                                         110                                                              110
   Monthly                                                          Quarterly


                                                         100                                                              100



                                                         90                                                               90

                                  Low liquidity firms                           Low liquidity firms
                                  High liquidity firms                          High liquidity firms
                                                         80                                                               80
       2008      2009      2010      2011       2012                  2008       2009      2010        2011    2012
                     (a) Producer prices                                                (b) Real sales

                               Index (Jan. 2008 = 100)                                            Index (2008:Q1 = 100)
                                                         110                                                              110
   Monthly                                                          Quarterly


                                                         100                                                              100



                                                         90                                                               90

                                  High SGAX firms                               High SGAX firms
                                  Low SGAX firms                                Low SGAX firms
                                                         80                                                               80
       2008      2009      2010      2011       2012                  2008       2009      2010        2011    2012
                     (c) Producer prices                                                (d) Real sales
 Note: The solid (dotted) line in panel (a) depicts the cumulative weighted-average industry-adjusted inflation
 rates for low (high) liquidity firms, while the solid (dotted) line in panel (b) depicts the cumulative weighted-
 average industry-adjusted real sales growth for low (high) liquidity firms; firms are sorted into high and low
 liquidity categories based on their 2006 liquidity ratio. The solid (dotted) line in panel (c) depicts the cumulative
 weighted-average industry-adjusted inflation rates for high (low) SGAX firms, while the solid (dotted) line in
 panel (d) depicts the cumulative weighted-average industry-adjusted real sales growth for high (low) SGAX firms;
 firms are sorted into high and low SGAX categories based on their average pre-sample SGAX ratio.




       Panels (c) and (d) of Figure 3 present the same information for firms with varying intensity
of SG&A spending. According to panel (c), the divergence in industry-adjusted prices between
the low and high SGAX firms during the nadir of the crisis is notably less pronounced; moreover,
the difference dissipates within a couple of years. Consequently, as shown in panel (d), there is
appreciably less divergence in industry-adjusted real sales between the low and high SGAX firms
during this period.14
  14
       Our analysis of the micro-level data also indicates that the deflationary pressures during the recent financial crisis


                                                               11
2.2.2    Multivariate Analysis

We now turn to regression analysis to examine formally how differences in the strength of firms’
balance sheet affect their price-setting behavior. Specifically, we consider two pricing decision
variables: (1) the firm’s observed decision to change prices at the good level—a variable representing
the extensive margin of price adjustment; and (2) good-level price inflation, which reflects the
combined effect of the extensive and intensive margins of price adjustment. In the first case, we
estimate a multinomial logit regression
                                                      
                                                       −
                                                    
                                                        0 = Λ(β ′ Xj,t + γπt
                                                                           IND(3m)
                         Pr sgn[pi,j,t+3 − pi,j,t ] =                              ),                               (2)
                                                      
                                                        +
                                                      


where sgn[pi,j,t+3 − pi,j,t ] is a discrete variable that equals “−” if the price of good i (produced
by firm j) decreased between months t and t + 3; “+” if the price of good i increased between
months t and t + 3; and “0” if the price of good i did not change during this 3-month period (the
base category). In the second case, we estimate a linear pricing regression

                                     3m
                                    πi,j,t+3 = β ′ Xj,t + γπtIND(3m) + ui,j,t+3 ,                                   (3)

       3m
where πi,j,t+3 = log pi,j,t+3 − log pi,j,t is the inflation rate of good i from month t to month t + 3.
    In both specifications, the good-level dependent variables are modeled as functions of firm-
specific covariates Xj,t and πtIND(3m) , the (3-month) 3-digit NAICS producer price inflation corre-
sponding to good i, which controls for the cyclical pricing dynamics at a narrowly defined industry
level. The key firm-specific explanatory variable is the liquidity ratio in month t, denoted by LIQj,t .
To capture the differential effect of firms’ internal liquidity positions on their pricing decisions dur-
ing the financial crisis, we interact the liquidity ratio with the crisis indicator 1[CRISISt ], which
equals 1 between January and December 2008 and 0 otherwise. Additional firm-specific covariates
are the 12-month log-difference of nominal sales and the cost of goods sold (log(Sj,t /Sj,t−12 ) and
log(Cj,t /Cj,t−12 ), respectively) and the inventory-sales ratio in month t ([N/S]j,t ). The inclusion of
the growth of sales and cost of goods sold controls for the cyclical changes in demand and direct
costs attributable to the production of goods sold by the firm, while the inventory-sales ratio cap-
tures precautionary liquidity demand that may arise from the need to finance inventories during a
downturn (Kashyap et al., 1994; Barth and Ramey, 2001).
    Panel (a) of Table 1 summarizes the estimation results based on the full sample of firms: The
two columns of the MLOGIT specification report the marginal effects of the specified explanatory
variable on the probability of upward (+) and downward (−) price adjustment, relative to no price
were concentrated primarily in nondurable goods manufacturing (see Figure A-1 in Appendix A), a result consistent
with the evidence in Bils et al. (2013). Moreover, relative price deflation within that sector appears to reflect solely
a large price cut by liquidity unconstrained firms or firms with a low level of SG&A expenditures relative to sales. In
contrast, nondurable goods manufacturers with weak balance sheets or those with a high SGAX ratio significantly
increased—relative to industry trends—prices during the crisis.



                                                          12
     Table 1: Liquidity and the Price-Setting Behavior of Firms During the Financial Crisis

                                                                        MLOGIT                             OLS
  Explanatory Variables                                           (+)                 (−)                 (π 3m )
  (a) Time-varying liquidity ratio a
  LIQj,t × 1[CRISISt = 1]                                      −0.433∗∗∗           −0.012               −0.029∗∗∗
                                                               (0.107)              (0.072)             (0.009)
  LIQj,t × 1[CRISISt = 0]                                      −0.143∗∗            −0.044               −0.012∗∗∗
                                                               (0.068)              (0.050)             (0.004)
  log(Sj,t /Sj,t−12 )                                          −0.020              −0.042∗               0.004
                                                               (0.025)              (0.025)             (0.003)
  log(Cj,t /Cj,t−12 )                                           0.017                0.020∗             −0.002
                                                               (0.013)              (0.011)             (0.002)
  [N/S]j,t                                                     −0.022              −0.020                0.001
                                                               (0.021)              (0.024)             (0.001)
  πtIND(3m)                                                     1.182∗∗∗           −0.127                0.134∗∗
                                                               (0.333)              (0.170)             (0.055)
  (b) Pre-crisis liquidity ratio b
  LIQj,2006 × 1[CRISISt = 1]                                   −0.394∗∗∗           −0.098               −0.021∗∗
                                                               (0.083)              (0.076)             (0.008)
  LIQj,2006 × 1[CRISISt = 0]                                   −0.245∗∗∗           −0.051               −0.017∗∗∗
                                                               (0.080)              (0.054)             (0.004)
  log(Sj,t /Sj,t−12 )                                          −0.044              −0.029                0.004
                                                               (0.033)              (0.027)             (0.005)
  log(Cj,t /Cj,t−12 )                                           0.047∗               0.019              −0.003
                                                               (0.024)              (0.021)             (0.005)
  [N/S]j,t                                                     −0.021              −0.013                0.000
                                                               (0.020)              (0.023)             (0.001)
  πtIND(3m)                                                     1.052∗∗∗           −0.152                0.118∗∗
                                                               (0.299)              (0.148)             (0.047)
  Note: The dependent variable in the multinomial logit specification (MLOGIT) is sgn[pi,j,t+3 − pi,j,t ], a discrete
 variable that equals “+” if the price of good i (produced by firm j) increased between months t and t + 3; “−”
 if the price of good i decreased between months t and t + 3; and “0” if the price of good i did not change during
 this 3-month period (the base category). The dependent variable in the linear regression specification (OLS) is
   3m
 πi,j,t+3 = log pi,j,t+3 − log pi,j,t , the inflation rate of good i from month t to month t + 3. In addition to the
 specified explanatory variables, both specifications include time fixed effects. Asymptotic standard errors reported
 in parentheses are clustered at the firm level: * p < .10; ** p < .05; and *** p < .01.
 a
   Sample period: 2005:M1 to 2012:12 at a quarterly frequency; No. of firms = 547; Obs. = 89,803.
 b
   Sample period: 2007:M1 to 2012:12 at a quarterly frequency; No. of firms = 511; Obs. = 73,400.


change; specification OLS, in contrast, reports the corresponding effects for the overall inflation
(π 3m ). According to column (+), differences in internal corporate liquidity imply significant differ-
ences in the propensity of firms to increase their prices during the recent crisis: The point estimate
of −0.433 associated with the interaction term LIQj,t × 1[CRISISt = 1] indicates that in 2008, a
difference in the liquidity ratio of two standard deviations around the mean (32 percentage points
according to Table A-2 in Appendix A) implies an almost 14 percentage point higher probability of


                                                         13
a price increase for a low liquidity firm—relative to the baseline case of no price change—compared
with its high liquidity counterpart.
       In addition to being statistically highly significant, this effect is economically meaningful, as
the unconditional probability of an upward price adjustment over a 3-month period is roughly
30 percent for both low and high liquidity firms (see Table A-3 in Appendix A). Thus in 2008,
firms in a weak liquidity position were much more likely to raise their prices, compared with their
financially stronger counterparts. Outside this period of extreme financial turmoil, differences in
the firms’ internal liquidity positions have, in economic terms, a significantly smaller effect on the
likelihood of a price increase. Interestingly, variations in companies’ cash stocks have no discernible
effect on the propensity of firms to lower their prices (column (−)).
       The results reported in column (π 3m ) also comport with the notion that differences in the firms’
internal liquidity positions significantly influenced producer price inflation during the crisis: A two
standard deviation difference in the liquidity ratio across firms during the crisis period implies
a difference in the annualized inflation of almost 4 percentage points over the subsequent three
months. Outside the crisis period, by contrast, such a difference in the liquidity ratio across firms
is associated with an inflation differential of only about 1.5 percentage points.
       To obviate concerns about the possible endogeneity of the firms’ liquidity positions as the crisis
unfolds, panel (b) of Table 1 reports the results from estimating the pricing regressions (2) and (3)
using the firms’ pre-crisis liquidity ratio—that is, the proportion of liquid assets on the firms’
balance sheet in 2006 (LIQj,2006 ), prior to any widespread concerns that the U.S. economy was
heading towards a financial crisis. Reassuringly, these results are very similar—in both economic
and statistical terms—to those in panel (a).15 For example, as shown in column (+), firms in a
weak internal liquidity position in 2006 were much more likely to increase prices in 2008, compared
with their ex ante financially stronger counterparts. Moreover, the pre-crisis differences in liquidity
ratios among firms have no effect on the firms’ propensity to lower prices, either in normal times
or in periods of acute financial stress (column (−)). And as shown in column (π 3m ), variations in
the pre-crisis liquidity positions imply differential inflation outcomes of comparable magnitudes—
during both normal and crisis times—to those estimated using a time-varying liquidity ratio.
       Of course, the fact that the effects of internal liquidity on inflation dynamics during the crisis
are virtually the same regardless of whether we condition on the pre-determined (time-varying)
liquidity ratio or on the pre-crisis (time-invariant) ratio does not decisively establish that internal
liquidity matters for the firms’ pricing decision due to financial frictions. Cash holdings could affect
the firms’ price-setting behavior for reason unrelated to financial frictions. For example, firms
operating in a standard competitive environment and facing highly cyclical demand may choose
to accumulate more liquid assets in order to smooth dividends during the course of a business
cycle, compared with firms in industries characterized by more stable demand. To the extent that
our set of control variables does not fully capture such systematic cyclical differences in demand,
  15
    In addition to the comparable magnitudes of the estimated coefficients associated with the firms’ internal liquidity
positions across the two panels, the standard deviation in the pre-crisis liquidity ratio is 14 percent a mere 2 percentage
point less than the standard deviation of the liquidity ratio implied by the full sample.


                                                            14
our regressions would yield a similar result: Ample liquidity would predict a larger price decline
during the crisis—this result, however, would reflect a standard price response in the face of a more
pronounced fall in product demand.
   There are, however, several pieces of evidence that weigh strongly against this alternative hy-
pothesis. First, the behavior of industry-adjusted real sales during the crisis (see panel (b) of
Figure 3) shows that real sales at the ex ante liquidity flush firms actually increased compared
with the real sales at the ex ante liquidity constrained firms. In addition, as shown in Table A-4
in Appendix A, employment and inventories became, conditional on sales, markedly more sensitive
to internal liquidity during the crisis period. As argued by Bils and Kahn (2000), these results
provide further evidence that markups of liquidity constrained firms become more countercyclical
in periods of widespread turmoil in financial markets.
   Another potential concern with the analysis reported in panel (a) is that we only allow the
coefficient on the liquidity ratio to change during the crisis. It is plausible that the impact of other
explanatory variables is also different in such extreme circumstances. To examine the sensitivity of
our results to this assumption, we re-estimate specifications (2) and (3) using a rolling four-quarter
window, thereby allowing for time-series variation in all the response coefficients. Panels (a) and (b)
of Figure 4 show the estimated time-varying marginal effects of the liquidity ratio on the probability
of a price increase and a price decrease, respectively. These results further corroborate our main
finding that differences in corporate liquidity significantly affected the propensity of firms to increase
prices in 2008. As shown in panel (a), the pronounced decline in the marginal effect during the
crisis implies that firms with low levels of internal liquidity were much more likely to increase prices,
compared with their liquidity unconstrained counterparts. Moreover, the estimate of this marginal
effect on the probability of upward price adjustment is at the end of 2008 virtually the same as
that reported in panel (a) of Table 1. Also consistent with our previous results is the fact that
differences in the firms’ internal liquidity positions have an insignificant effect on the propensity to
lower prices throughout the sample period.
   Panel (c) of Figure 4 depicts the time-varying effect of the liquidity ratio on the 3-month
producer price inflation. As before, a low liquidity ratio during the crisis period foreshadows an
economically and statistically significant increase in inflation over the subsequent three months.
As in the case of the multinomial logit regression, the estimate of this effect at the end of 2008
is very close to that based on the full-sample specification reported in panel (a) of Table 1. Note
also that a very similar effect of internal liquidity on the firms’ price-setting behavior emerges in
late 2011, when the vicious feedback loop between fiscal and financial-sector distress in the euro-
zone periphery raised uncertainty among firms—not only in the euro area, but also in the United
States—as to whether they would be able to access bank funding in the future.
   Our last empirical exercise analyzes how differences in internal liquidity influence the pricing
behavior of firms of varying intensity of SG&A spending. To do so, we split the sample of firms
into low and high SGAX categories and estimate the pricing regressions (2) and (3) separately
for each category. Focusing first on the high SGAX firms, panel (a) of Table 2, one can see


                                                   15
          Figure 4: Time-Varying Effect of Liquidity on the Price-Setting Behavior of Firms

                                                      0.4                                                         0.4

                                                      0.2                                                         0.2

                                                      0.0                                                         0.0

                                                     -0.2                                                         -0.2

                                                     -0.4                                                         -0.4

                                    Estimate         -0.6                                          Estimate       -0.6
                                    +/- 2 SEs                                                      +/- 2 SEs
                                                     -0.8                                                         -0.8
    2006           2008      2010         2012                   2006         2008         2010          2012
           (a) Probability of a price increase                          (b) Probability of a price decrease

                                                                                                                 0.04

                                                                                                                 0.02

                                                                                                                 0.00

                                                                                                                 -0.02

                                                                                                                 -0.04
                                                                                     Estimate
                                                                                     +/- 2 SEs
                                                                                                                 -0.06

                                                                                                                 -0.08
            2006          2007         2008          2009         2010          2011             2012
                                              (c) Producer price inflation
 Note: The solid lines in panels (a) and (b) depict the time-varying estimates of the (average) marginal effect of the
 liquidity ratio on the probability of the 3-month-ahead positive and negative price changes (relative to no change),
 respectively. The solid line in panel (c) depicts the time-varying OLS estimate of the coefficient measuring the
 effect of liquidity ratio on the 3-month-ahead producer price inflation. The estimates are plotted at the end-point
 of the rolling four-quarter estimation window. Asymptotic standard errors are clustered at the firm level. The
 shaded vertical bar represents the 2007–2009 recession as dated by the NBER.




significant differences in how variations in their internal liquidity positions affect subsequent pricing
decision. Within this category, a difference in the liquidity ratio of 32 percentage points during
the crisis implies more than a 12 percentage points higher probability of a price increase for a low
liquidity firm, compared with its high liquidity counterpart (column (+)). Outside the crisis, the
likelihood that such a financially vulnerable firm will raise its prices over a 3-month period is about
5 percentage points higher than for a firm in a much stronger financial position. These differential
internal liquidity effects are also evident in the inflation outcomes (column (π 3m )): During the
crisis, the same-sized variation in the liquidity ratio across high SGAX firms implies a differential
in the annualized producer price inflation over the subsequent three months of about 6 percentage
points.


                                                            16
                                 Table 2: High SGAX vs. Low SGAX Firms

                                                                           MLOGIT                              OLS
  Explanatory Variables                                              (+)                  (−)                 (π 3m )
  (a) High SGAX Firms
  LIQj,t × 1[CRISISt = 1]                                        −0.386∗∗∗             −0.061               −0.013∗∗
                                                                 (0.125)                (0.072)             (0.006)
  LIQj,t × 1[CRISISt = 0]                                        −0.159∗∗∗             −0.043               −0.006∗
                                                                 (0.062)                (0.051)             (0.004)
  log(Sj,t /Sj,t−12 )                                            −0.004                −0.052∗∗              0.008
                                                                 (0.025)                (0.026)             (0.005)
  log(Cj,t /Cj,t−12 )                                             0.011                  0.032∗             −0.005
                                                                 (0.016)                (0.018)             (0.004)
  [N/S]j,t                                                       −0.024                −0.025                0.002
                                                                 (0.020)                (0.024)             (0.002)
  πtIND(3m)                                                       1.114∗∗∗             −0.587∗               0.216∗∗∗
                                                                 (0.243)                (0.306)             (0.062)
  (b) Low SGAX Firms
  LIQj,t × 1[CRISISt = 1]                                        −0.211                  0.331∗∗            −0.062∗∗
                                                                 (0.207)                (0.153)             (0.024)
  LIQj,t × 1[CRISISt = 0]                                         0.185                  0.116              −0.001
                                                                 (0.149)                (0.119)             (0.006)
  log(Sj,t /Sj,t−12 )                                            −0.027                −0.025                0.001
                                                                 (0.039)                (0.038)             (0.004)
  log(Cj,t /Cj,t−12 )                                             0.026                  0.013               0.001
                                                                 (0.019)                (0.014)             (0.003)
  [N/S]j,t                                                       −0.019                −0.004               −0.001
                                                                 (0.035)                (0.036)             (0.002)
  πtIND(3m)                                                       0.894∗               −0.001                0.080
                                                                 (0.472)                (0.186)             (0.058)
  Note: Sample period: 2005:M1 to 2012:12 at a quarterly frequency. Panel (a): No. of firms = 258; Obs. = 33,279.
 Panel (b): No. of firms = 269; Obs. = 55,049. The dependent variable in the multinomial logit specification
 (MLOGIT) is sgn[pi,j,t+3 − pi,j,t ], a discrete variable that equals “+” if the price of good i (produced by firm j)
 increased between months t and t + 3; “−” if the price of good i decreased between months t and t + 3; and “0” if
 the price of good i did not change during this 3-month period (the base category). The dependent variable in the
                                            3m
 linear regression specification (OLS) is πi,j,t+3 = log pi,j,t+3 − log pi,j,t , the inflation rate of good i from month t
 to month t + 3. In addition to the specified explanatory variables, both specifications include time fixed effects.
 Asymptotic standard errors reported in parentheses are clustered at the firm level: * p < .10; ** p < .05; and
 *** p < .01.


    In contrast, as shown in panel (b), differences in internal liquidity positions among low SGAX
firms have no differential effect on the propensity of these firms to raise prices (column (+)).
The liquidity of their balance sheets, however, does affect the likelihood of low SGAX firms to
lower prices, though only during the financial crisis (column (−)). In that case, a firm flush with
internal liquidity is significantly more likely—in both economic and statistical terms—to lower
prices, compared with a liquidity constrained firm. This result is consistent with the interpretation


                                                            17
of a low SGAX ratio as an indicator of low operating leverage, which lessens the exposure of such
firms to liquidity risk in periods of widespread financial distress. As a result, low SGAX firms
with ample internal liquidity are able to cut their prices aggressively in periods of falling demand
and tight credit, a finding consistent with the economically and statistically significant negative
estimate of the coefficient on liquidity ratio during the financial crisis (LIQj,t × 1[CRISISt = 1])
reported in column (π 3m ).
    In sum, our empirical analysis strongly supports the notion that internal liquidity positions
played an important role in shaping the firms’ price-setting behavior during the Great Recession.
The drying up of external liquidity such as commercial paper and bank lines of credit in response
to shocks that roiled credit markets in 2008 forced firms with limited financial capacity to signif-
icantly increase their prices, whereas their unconstrained counterparts slashed prices during the
concomitant economic downturn.


3     Model
In this section, we develop a general equilibrium model that is qualitatively able to match the salient
facts about the dynamics of producer prices during the nadir of the 2007–2009 financial crisis: the
fact that financially weak firms raised prices, while their financially stronger counterparts lowered
prices. To motivate the competition for market shares implied by customer markets, we consider
household preferences that allow for the formation of a customer base, whereby low prices today
are a form of investment into future market shares (Rotemberg and Woodford, 1991). Specifically,
we adopt the good-specific habit model of Ravn et al. (2006), which we augment with nominal
rigidities in the form of quadratic adjustment costs faced by firms when changing nominal prices.
To explore the influence of financial frictions on the firms’ price-setting behavior, our framework
also includes a tractable model of costly external finance.

3.1   Preferences and Technology
The model economy contains a continuum of households indexed by j ∈ [0, 1], and each household
consumes a variety of consumption goods indexed by i ∈ [0, 1]. The preferences of households are
defined over a habit-adjusted consumption bundle xjt and labor hjt as
                                   ∞
                                         β s U (xjt+s − ψt+s , hjt+s );
                                   X
                              Et                                          0 < β < 1,               (4)
                                   s=0

where the AR(1) demand shock ψt affects the final demand by altering the current marginal utility
of consumption.




                                                          18
       The consumption/habit aggregator is defined as
                                                                                       1
                                                             !1− 1                     1
                                                                                      1− η
                                             1
                                                      cjit                  η
                                     Z
                           xjt ≡                                               di          ;   θ < 0 and η > 0,                              (5)
                                         0         sθi,t−1


where cjit denotes the amount of a good of variety i consumed by household j and sit is the habit
stock associated with good i. The good-specific habit stock is assumed to be external and thus taken
as given by consumers—that is, “keeping up with the Joneses” at the good level.16 Specifically, we
assume that the external habit evolves according to

                                     sit = ρsi,t−1 + (1 − ρ)cit ;                                0 < ρ < 1.                                    (6)

       The dual problem of cost minimization gives rise to a good-specific demand:
                                                                               −η
                                                                       pit              θ(1−η)
                                                    cjit =                            si,t−1 xjt ,                                             (7)
                                                                       p̃t
                                                                                                               hR              i    1
                                                                                                                     1 1−η         1−η
where pit = Pit /Pt is the relative price of variety i in terms of Pt =                                             0 Pit di             , and the
externality-adjusted composite price index p̃t is given by
                                                                                                     1
                                                         Z       1                 1−η
                                                                                                   1−η
                                                 p̃t =                  pit sθi,t−1      di               .                                    (8)
                                                              0

       The supply side of the economy is characterized by a continuum of monopolistically competitive
firms producing a differentiated variety of goods indexed by i ∈ [0, 1]. The production technology
is given by                                               α
                                                 At
                               yit =                 hit              − φ;        0 < α ≤ 1 and φ > 0,                                         (9)
                                                 ait
where At is an aggregate productivity shock and ait is an adverse idiosyncratic productivity shock—
                                                                      iid
that is, a cost shock—distributed as log ait ∼ N (−0.5σ 2 , σ 2 ), with the associated CDF denoted by
F (a). Note that we allow the production technology to exhibit either decreasing or constant returns
to scale. In addition, we assume that production is subject to fixed operating costs—denoted by
φ—which makes it possible for firms to incur negative operating income, thereby creating a liquidity
squeeze if external financing is costly. Although we do not explicitly model the balance sheet of
the firm, implicitly, these fixed costs can include “long-term debt payments,” a coupon payment to
perpetual bond holders. Thus broadly speaking, the presence of fixed operating costs captures the
possibility of a debt overhang.
       Firms make pricing and production decisions to maximize the present value of discounted div-
idends. Our timing assumptions imply that firms must commit to pricing decisions—and hence
  16
    In addition to being more tractable, the assumption of external habits avoids the time-inconsistency problem of
firm price setting associated with good-specific internal habits (Nakamura and Steinsson, 2011).



                                                                                19
production—based on all aggregate information available within the period, but prior to the real-
ization of their idiosyncratic cost shock. Based on this aggregate information, firms post prices,
take orders from customers, and plan production based on expected marginal costs. Firms then
realize actual marginal cost and hire labor to meet the demand. Labor must be paid within the
period and in the presence of fixed operating costs, the firm’s ex post profits may be too low to
cover the total cost of production. In that case, the firm must raise external funds.
       To introduce a wedge between the cost of internal and external finance in a tractable manner,
we focus on equity as the sole source of external finance. That is, firms can obtain external funds
only by issuing new equity, a process that involves dilution costs reflecting agency problems in
financial markets. Formally, we assume that equity finance involves a constant per-unit dilution
cost ϕt ∈ (0, 1) per dollar of equity issued. Dilution costs are indexed by time to allow for exogenous
changes in financing costs—that is, financial shocks. To keep the model tractable, we abstract
from firm savings decisions by assuming that all dividends are paid out within the period.17 This
formulation of costly external finance allows us to highlight the basic mechanism within a framework
that deviates only slightly from the standard good-specific habit model. In particular, in our model,
all firms are identical ex ante, and as a result, only firms with an idiosyncratic cost shock above an
endogenous threshold incur negative profits and are forced to issue new equity.

3.2      Profit Maximization
We now turn to the firm’s problem, which, for simplicity, we describe abstracting from nominal
rigidities. We then consider the implications of adding frictions to nominal price setting, which
allows us to highlight the model’s implications for the Phillips curve. The firm’s objective is to
                                                            P∞             
maximize the expected present value of a dividend flow, E0      t=0 m0,t dit , where dit denotes the
(real) dividend payout when positive and equity issuance when negative and m0,t is the stochastic
discount factor. Note that the presence of equity dilution costs ϕt implies that when a firm issues a
notional amount of equity dit < 0, actual cash intake from the issuance is reduced to −(1 − ϕt )dit .
       The firm’s problem is subject to the flow-of-funds constraint:
                                                                      
                                   0 = pit cit − wt hit − dit + ϕt min 0, dit ;                                    (10)

and given the monopolistically competitive product markets, the demand constraint specified in
equation (7). Formally, letting λit , νit , κit , and ξit denote the Lagrange multipliers associated with
equations (6), (7), (9), and (10), respectively, the Lagrangian associated with the firm’s problem is
  17
    In our empirical analysis, we focused on the role of liquidity—as measured by cash holdings—as a determinant of
firms’ pricing decisions. Thus allowing for costly equity financing and precautionary cash holding is of obvious interest
but would make the distribution of firms’ liquid asset holdings a state variable. We leave this nontrivial extension for
future research. However, our full model with firm heterogeneity can be thought of as representing an economy in
which a certain proportion of firms have accumulated sufficient liquidity, so as to behave in an unconstrained manner.
As shown in Section 5, this does not eliminate the main mechanism of our model.




                                                           20
given by

             ∞
                      (              α          
             X                 At                                                              
  L = E0     m0,t dit + κit        hit    − φ − cit + ξit pit cit − wt hit − dit + ϕt min 0, dit
                               ait
         t=0
            "                       #                                   )                        (11)
              pit −η θ(1−η)                                            
      + νit           si,t−1 xt − cit + λit ρsi,t−1 + (1 − ρ)cit − sit .
              p̃t

The firm’s optimal choices of its decision variables are summarized by the following first-order
conditions:
                             
                             1                       if dit ≥ 0
            dit :    ξit =                                  ;                                                                 (12)
                           1/(1 − ϕ ) if d < 0
                                         t          it
                                          
                                      wt                 1−α
            hit :    κit = ξit ait             cit + φ α ;                                                                    (13)
                                     αAt
                     Et νit = Et ξit pit − Eat κit + (1 − ρ)Eat λit ;
                       a           a
                                                          
            cit :                                                                                                             (14)
                                                                                       
                       a
                                   a
                                                                    a
                                                                                ci,t+1
            sit :    Et λit = ρEt mt,t+1 λi,t+1 + θ(1 − η)Et mt,t+1 Et+1 νi,t+1             ;                                 (15)
                                                                                    sit
                                         Ea νit
                                               
                     0 = Eat ξit − η t
                             
            pit :                                 .                                                                           (16)
                                           pit

Implicit in the last three conditions is the assumption that the firm makes pricing and production
decisions prior to the realization of the idiosyncratic cost shock ait . Accordingly, these first-order
conditions involve the expected shadow values of internal funds (Eat ξit ), marginal sales (Eat νit ),
                                                                                                

and habit stock (Eat λit ), where the expectations are formed using all aggregate information up
                      

to time t. In contrast, the realized values ξit and ait enter the efficiency conditions (12) and (13)
without the expectations operator because dividend payouts (or new equity issuance) and labor
hiring decisions are made after the realization of the idiosyncratic cost shock.18
      Under risk-neutrality and with i.i.d. idiosyncratic cost shocks, the timing convention adopted
above implies that firms are identical ex ante.19 Hence, we focus on a symmetric equilibrium, in
which all firms choose the identical relative price (pit = 1), production scale (cit = ct ), and habit
stock (sit = st ). However, the distributions of labor inputs (hit ) and dividend payouts (dit ) are
non-degenerate and depend on the realization of the idiosyncratic cost shock ait .

3.3      Value of Internal Funds and the Customer Base
Define the equity issuance trigger aEt as the idiosyncratic cost level that satisfies the flow-of-funds
constraint (10) when dividends are exactly zero:

                                                                     ct   At
                                                         aEt =             1 .                                                (17)
                                                                 (ct + φ) wt
                                                                           α

                                                   1
 18                                ait
      The labor demand hit =       At
                                             (cit + φ) α is substituted into equation (13) after deriving the first-order condition.
 19
      A similar timing convention has been used by Kiley and Sim (2012) in the context of financial intermediation.


                                                                    21
The first-order condition for dividends (equation 12) implies that because of costly external fi-
nancing, the realized shadow value of internal funds increases from 1 to 1/(1 − ϕt ) > 1, when the
realization of the idiosyncratic cost shock ait is greater than the threshold value aEt :
                                                             (
                                                                    1                       if ait ≤ aEt
                                                   ξit =                                                               (18)
                                                                    1/(1 − ϕt ) if ait > aEt .

       Let ztE denote the standardized value of aEt ; that is, ztE = σ −1 log aEt + 0.5σ 2 . The expected
                                                                                          

shadow value of internal funds can then be expressed as

                                         aE                  ∞                                 
                                                                     1                     ϕt
                                 Z        t
                                                         Z
               Eat
                                                                                                            
                         ξit =                dF (a) +                    dF (a) = 1 +              1 − Φ(ztE ) ≥ 1,   (19)
                                     0                       aE
                                                              t
                                                                   1 − ϕt                1 − ϕt

where Φ(·) denotes the standard normal CDF. The expected shadow value of internal funds is
strictly greater than one as long as equity issuance is costly (ϕt > 0) and the firm faces idiosyncratic
liquidity risk (σ > 0). This makes the firm de facto risk averse when making its pricing decision—
reducing the price lowers the markup and exposes the firm to the risk of incurring negative operating
income, which must be financed through costly equity issuance.20
       Consider first the case with no habits, so that θ = 0, in which case λit = 0. By combining the
first-order conditions (13), (14), and (16), we can express the pricing rule as

                                                       η Eat ξit ait
                                                                                       
                                                                         wt           1−α
                                               pit =                        (cit + φ)  α    ,                          (20)
                                                     η − 1 Eat ξit
                                                                  
                                                                        αAt

where, in the symmetric equilibrium, pit = 1 and cit = ct . With frictionless financial markets,
Eat ξit = Eat ξit ait = 1, and we obtain the standard result that firms set prices as a constant
                  

markup over marginal cost, the term in brackets.
       Because the right-hand side of equation (18) is increasing in dilution cost ϕt , this mechanism
introduces a form of the cost channel into the model, through which financial distortions raise
marginal costs—inclusive of expected financing costs—and thereby reduce profit margins. Define
the financially adjusted markup as the inverse of marginal cost, inclusive of expected financing
costs:
                                                                                        1
                                                   µ̃t =                        h                           i.       (21)
                                                              Ea
                                                               t       ξit ait         wt               1−α
                                                                                      αAt (cit   + φ)
                                                                                                       α
                                                                  Ea
                                                                   t ξit


The pricing rule in equation (20) then implies that, in the absence of customer markets, firms set
prices as a constant markup over the financially adjusted marginal cost 1/µ̃t .
       With customer markets, λit > 0, the first-order conditions (13) and (14) imply that the value
  20
    Equation (17) imposes the symmetric equilibrium. From the firm’s perspective, raising prices increases profits
and hence reduces the cost of external finance if pwitt hcit
                                                           it
                                                              is increasing in the price charged. Given the production
                                               
                                        1    ct
function (9), this is true if 1 − η 1 − α ct +ϕt > 0, where η is the short-run demand elasticity. Because the term in
parentheses is close to zero, this condition is satisfied in any reasonable calibration of the model.



                                                                                  22
of marginal sales νit satisfies:

                                      Eat νit                   Eat λit
                                                                  
                                               µ̃t − 1
                                           =         + (1 − ρ) a   ,                                     (22)
                                      Eat ξit     µ̃t           Et ξit

where the first term measures the current price-cost margin, and the second term captures the
value of the customer base.
     Let gt ≡ ct /st−1 = (st /st−1 − ρ)/(1 − ρ) and define the growth-adjusted discount factor β̃t,s+1
as
                                                    s−t
                                                    Y                             
                    β̃t,s+1 ≡ ms,s+1 gs+1 ×                 ρ + θ(1 − η)(1 − ρ)gt+j mt+j−1,t+j .
                                                    j=1

By iterating equation (15) forward, one can solve for the marginal value of an increase in the
customer base—the term Eat λit /Eat ξit —as the growth-adjusted present value of marginal profits.
                                  

Substituting the resulting expression into equation (22) then yields the value of marginal sales:
                                               " ∞                         #
                        Eat νit                            Eas ξis
                                                             
                                 µ̃t − 1         X                 µ̃s − 1
                             =         + χEt        β̃t,s a               ,                              (23)
                        Eat ξit     µ̃t
                                                s=t+1
                                                           Et ξit     µ̃s

where χ = (1 − ρ)θ(1 − η) > 0 if θ < 0 and η > 1.
     In a symmetric price equilibrium, equation (16) implies Eat νit /Eat ξit = 1/η. With customer
                                                                        

markets, the markup is time-varying and balances future expected marginal costs against future
expected growth opportunities. The sequence of terms Eas ξis /Eat ξit , s = t, . . . , ∞, determines
                                                                

the weight that the firm places on current versus future profits when determining the expected
price trajectory for its product. If today’s liquidity premium outweighs the future liquidity premia,
the firm places a greater weight on current profits relative to future profits and, as a result, sets a
higher current markup.

3.4    Nominal Price Rigidities and the Phillips Curve
To allow for nominal rigidities, we follow Rotemberg (1982) and assume that firms face quadratic
adjustment costs when changing nominal prices:
                                              2                                     2
                        γp        Pit                    γp             pit
                                        − π̄        ct =          πt            − π̄        ct ;   γp > 0.
                        2        Pi,t−1                  2             pi,t−1

The first-order condition governing the optimal choice of relative prices (equation 16) then imply
the following local inflation dynamics:

                                                    1 ˆ                      
                                         π̂t =         (ξt − ν̂t ) + βEt π̂t+1 ,                             (24)
                                                    γp

where ξˆt and ν̂t denote the log-deviations of Eat ξit and Eat νit , respectively. Without nominal
                                                             

rigidities, π̂t = 0 and consistent with equation (16), prices are set so that ξˆt = νˆt . With nomi-


                                                               23
nal rigidities, equation (24) implies that given inflation expectations, the current inflation rate is
determined by the expected shadow value of internal funds relative to that of marginal sales.
   To highlight the relationship between the model’s structural parameters and inflation dynamics,
we can log-linearize equation (23) and substitute the result in equation (24). These steps yield the
following expression for the Phillips curve:

                                                  ∞
                                      "                             #
                            ω(η − 1)             X
                                                         s−t+1
                                                                                   
                    π̂t = −             µ̂t + Et     χδ̃       µ̂s+1 + βEt π̂t+1
                               γp                s=t
                                                    ∞
                                                                                                     (25)
                             1                                    h                      i
                                                       χδ̃ s−t+1 (ξˆt − ξˆs+1 ) − β̂t,s+1 ,
                                                 X
                          +      η − ω(η − 1) Et
                            γp                     s=t


where ω = 1 − βθ(1 − ρ)/(1 − ρβ), δ̃ = β[ρ + θ(1 − η)(1 − ρ)], µ̂t is the log-deviation of the financially
adjusted markup µ̃t , and β̂t,s+1 is the log-deviation of the growth-adjusted discount factor β̃t,s+1 .
In the absence of external habit (that is, θ = 0), ω = 1 and χ = 0, and we obtain the standard
                                                   
New Keynesian Phillips curve: π̂t = −µ̂t + βEt π̂t+1 ; in that case, current inflation is equal to the
present discounted value of expected future marginal cost (that is, the inverse of the markup).
    With external habit but no financial distortions (that is, θ < 0 and ϕt = 0), all terms involving
ˆ
ξt − ξˆs+1 in the second line of equation (25) drop out. However, with customer habits, χ > 0,
and there are two offsetting effects of demand-driven movements in output on current inflation
conditional on expected future inflation. First, the present value of future markups directly enters
the Phillips curve and implies that current inflation responds to future marginal cost, conditional
on the next period’s expected inflation. This term increases the sensitivity of current inflation to
future fluctuations in output. Second, the term β̂t,s+1 captures the capitalized growth rate of the
customer base and thus measures the present value of the marginal benefit from expanding the
customer base today. According to equation (25), when the firm expects a greater benefit from the
future customer base, it is more willing to lower the current price in order to build its customer base.
This term thus reduces the sensitivity of current inflation to future output movements. Because
these two effects offset each other, customer markets may lead to more or less responsiveness of
inflation to output fluctuations.
   Frictions in financial markets also have two effects on inflation dynamics. First, the markup
must be adjusted for the distortions that create a cost channel. Under reasonable calibrations, this
adjustment reduces the countercyclicality of the markup and attenuates the response of inflation
to output fluctuations—this adjustment occurs regardless of whether we allow for customer habits.
Second, customer habits imply that the firm takes into account the future customer base when
setting its current price. In this case, financial distortions influence the effective discount factor
captured by the shadow value of dividends today relative to the future—the term ξˆt − ξˆs+1 . In
practice, however, the effect of the cost channel is small, and the primary mechanism through which
financial market frictions affect inflation is by altering the discount factor associated with how the
firm values the benefits of the future customer base.
   Faced with both a sticky customer base and costly external finance, firms are confronted with

                                                      24
a fundamental tradeoff between current profits and the longer-run maximization of their market
share, which is reflected in the term (ξˆt − ξˆs+1 ) − β̂t,s+1 . Maintaining their market share requires
firms to post low current prices. However, firms may be forced to deviate from this strategy,
provided that their current internal liquidity position—as summarized by ξˆt —is sufficiently weak
relative to their future liquidity position ξˆs+1 . In that case, firms may raise their current prices in
response to an adverse demand shock in order to avoid costly external financing, a pricing strategy
that resembles a myopic optimization of current profits.21

3.5      Closing the Model
We assume that equity issuance costs are paid out to households and hence do not affect the aggre-
gate resource constraint. Costs incurred when firms change nominal prices are similarly returned
to households in a lump-sum manner. The household’s optimal consumption-savings decision then
implies that the stochastic discount factor mt,t+1 satisfies

                                                   Ux (xt+1 − ψt+1 , ht+1 ) sθt−1
                                    mt,t+1 = β                                    .                               (26)
                                                       Ux (xt − ψt , ht )    sθt

Letting rt denote the ex ante nominal interest rate, then the Fisher equation may be expressed as
                                                                         
                                                                 1 + rt
                                         1 = Et mt,t+1                          .
                                                                1 + πt+1

       The efficiency condition governing the household’s consumption-leisure choice is given by:22

                                             wt     Uh (xt − ψt , ht )
                                                 =−                    .                                          (27)
                                             p̃t    Ux (xt − ψt , ht )

The endogenous aggregate state variable st evolves according to st = ρst−1 + (1 − ρ)ct , where, from
the demand curve, the aggregate consumption index xt = ct /sθt .
       The supply side of the model is then summarized by the markup equation (21), equation (23)
governing the valuation of marginal sales, and the Phillips curve (25), along with the production
function that determines labor demand, according to
                                               "                           #1
                                                                            α
                                                   c +φ
                                        ht =     t                                ,                             (28)
                                             exp 0.5α(1 + α)σ 2

where the term in the denominator follows from the integration over the distribution of idiosyncratic
  21
     The fundamental tradeoff between current cashflows and future market shares relies on the parameter restriction
η − ω(η − 1) > 0. Otherwise, firms in strong financial condition may increase their current prices in order to increase
their long-run market shares. As long as θ, ρ, and η are chosen such that the steady-state marginal profit is strictly
positive, we can exclude such pathological cases.
  22
     In the numerical implementation of the model, we also assume convex adjustment costs for nominal wages
(parametrized by γw ) by introducing market power associated with differentiated labor; for expositional purposes
those details have been relegated to Appendix B.



                                                           25
cost shocks.23
       The model also features a monetary authority that sets the nominal interest rate rt using a
Taylor-type rule that responds to inflation and output gaps:
                                                                   π τπ  y τy 1−τr
                                               τr                     t       t
                            rt = (1 + rt−1 )            (1 + r̄)                           − 1.                    (29)
                                                                    π∗      yt∗

The rule also allows for policy inertia, as reflected in letting 0 < τr < 1. In our baseline calibration
of the model, we set τy = 0, implying that monetary authorities respond only to inflation.

3.6      Calibration
A period in the model equals one quarter. Accordingly, the time discounting factor β = 0.99.
Following Ravn et al. (2006), we set the deep habit parameter θ equal to −0.8. To highlight the
firms’ incentive to compete for market share, we also choose a fairly persistent habit formation
process by assuming that only 5 percent of the habit stock is depreciated in a quarter (that is,
the parameter ρ in equation (6) is set to 0.95). The CRRA parameter in the household’s utility
function is then set equal to 1, given that the deep habit specification provides a strong motive to
smooth consumption. We set the elasticity of labor supply equal to 5.
       The elasticity of substitution across varieties of differentiated goods is a key parameter in the
customer markets model—smaller the degree of substitutability, greater is the firm’s market power,
and greater is its incentive to invest in customer base. Broda and Weinstein (2006) provide a set
of estimates for the elasticity of substitution for the U.S. economy. According to their post-1990
data, the median value of the elasticity of substitution for differentiated goods at 2.1. Because this
is a product category that is most relevant for the deep habits model, we set η = 2.24
       Another important parameter is the fixed operating cost φ, the value of which is determined
jointly with the returns-to-scale parameter α. Specifically, we set α first and then choose φ so that
the dividend-payout ratio (relative to income) hits the post-WWII mean value of about 2.5 percent.
In our calibration, α = 0.8, a degree of returns to scale that is common in the empirical literature
that relies on firm-level data, which then implies φ = 0.3. With α = 0.8, φ = 0.3, and η = 2, the
average gross markup in our model is equal to 1.19.
       Following Cooley and Quadrini (2001), we calibrate the degree of financial market frictions—the
equity dilution costs—by setting ϕt = ϕ̄ = 0.3. When analyzing the macroeconomic implications
of financial disturbances—which we model as exogenous shocks to the time-varying equity dilution
costs—we set the persistence of the financial shock to 0.9. To abstract from the differences in the
persistence of different aggregate disturbances, the AR(1) parameter for the demand shock ψt is also
  23
     The adjusted markup µ̃t and the expected external financing cost Eat ξit are static functions of aggregate
                                                                                  

variables. After substituting out for these variables, the model adds two dynamic equations—a      backward-looking
equation for the endogenous stock of habit st and the forward-looking valuation equation for Eat νit /Eat ξit —to the
                                                                                                            

otherwise standard three-equation log-linearized New Keynesian model.
  24
     In Appendix B, we show that the main conclusions of the paper are robust with respect to three different
calibrations: (1) a lower labor supply elasticity; (2) a higher elasticity of substitution between differentiated goods;
and (3) a less powerful deep-habit mechanism.


                                                               26
set equal to 0.9. The volatility of the idiosyncratic cost shock is calibrated at 0.05 (20 percent at an
annual rate), implying a moderate amount of idiosyncratic uncertainty. With the fixed operating
cost calibrated as described above, the combination of σ = 0.05 and ϕ̄ = 0.3 yields an annualized
expected premium on external funds of about 13 percent (that is, Ea ξi = 1.127). In our crisis
                                                                       

experiment, a simulation exercise that imposes an extreme degree of financial distortions, we let
ϕ̄ = 0.5, in which case, the premium on external funds jumps to 20 percent.
         For the parameters related to nominal rigidities, we set the adjustment costs of nominal prices
γp = 10 and wages γw = 30. These values are within the range of point estimates of 14.5 and 41 in
Ravn et al. (2006), who show that deep habits substantially enhance the persistence of inflation,
without the reliance on an implausibly large amount of stickiness in nominal prices.25 Finally,
we set the interest rate smoothing coefficient τr in the policy rule (29) at a conventional level
of 0.75, and τπ , the coefficient on the inflation gap, at 1.5, values in line with those used in the New
Keynesian literature.


4         Model Simulations: Homogeneous Firms
4.1        Financial Crisis and Inflation Dynamics
To implement a financial crisis in the model, we set ϕt = ϕ̄ = 0.5, which implies an external
finance premium of 20 percent (annualized). Such a high expected cost of external funds strikes us
as plausible in the latter part of 2008, a period during which the commercial paper market froze,
credit spreads widened sharply, equity prices tanked, and asset price volatility skyrocketed. The
solid lines in Figure 5 show the macroeconomic impact of an adverse demand shock under such
extreme circumstances. To highlight the role of financial frictions, the dotted lines show the effect
of the same shock in the economy with perfect capital markets.
         In the absence of financial distortions, the negative demand shock leads to a drop in real output
and a decline in inflation. The comparison of responses in panel (a) reveals that financial frictions
amplify the response of output to a demand shock, a result consistent with the standard financial
accelerator mechanism. Although differences in output dynamics are fairly modest, the initial
response of inflation differs substantially across the two models. In particular, in the model with
financial frictions, inflation rises rather than falls. The explanation for this striking difference can be
found in panels (e)–(f). Our timing assumptions imply that firms know that the economy has been
hit by a demand shock before making their pricing decisions. In the presence of financial distortions,
this reduces the firms’ expected cashflows and increases the probability that they will require costly
external finance. As a result, the shadow value of internal funds jumps almost 200 basis points
upon the impact of the shock (panel (f)). To protect themselves against the idiosyncratic tail event
in which the ex post cashflows are negative and they must raise external finance, firms significantly
    25
    As shown in Appendix B, setting γp = 10 is equivalent to assuming—in a Calvo-type price setting—that about
27 percent of firms will optimally reset their prices each quarter, a proportion that is very close to that used by
standard New Keynesian models.



                                                        27
                                Figure 5: Demand Shock During a Financial Crisis
                                       (Economy with Nominal Rigidities)


 (a) Output                           (b) Hours worked                       (c) Inflation                           (d) Real wage
                        pct.                                  pct.                                     pps.                                   pct.
                                                                                                              0.2                                    0.2
                               0.0                                   0.0
                                                                                                              0.1
                                                                                                                                                     0.1
                               -0.5                                                                           0.0
                                                                     -0.5
                                                                                                                                                     0.0
                   w/o FF      -1.0                                                                           -0.1
                   w/ FF                                             -1.0                                                                            -0.1
                                                                                                              -0.2
                               -1.5
                                                                     -1.5                                     -0.3                                   -0.2
  0     5     10   15    20           0     5     10     15    20            0      5        10   15    20           0      5    10      15    20

 (e) Markup                           (f) Value of internal funds            (g) Value of marginal sales             (h) Interest rate
                        pps.                                  pps.                                     pct.                                   pps.
                               0.4                                                                            1.5                                    0.1
                                                                     2.0

                                                                     1.5                                      1.0
                               0.2                                                                                                                   0.0
                                                                     1.0
                                                                                                              0.5
                                                                     0.5
                               0.0                                                                                                                   -0.1
                                                                     0.0                                      0.0

                                                                     -0.5
                               -0.2                                                                           -0.5                                   -0.2
  0     5     10   15    20           0     5     10     15    20            0      5        10   15    20           0      5    10      15    20

 Note: The panels of the figure depict the model-implied responses of selected variables to a negative demand
 shock of 1 standard deviation: w/ FF = responses implied by a model with financial frictions, with the degree of
 financial frictions calibrated to a crisis situation (ϕ̄ = 0.5); and w/o FF = responses implied by a model without
 financial frictions (ϕ̄ = 0).




boost their markups relative to the model without financial frictions (panel (e)).
      The severity of financial frictions in a crisis situation causes the value of internal funds and the
value of marginal sales to move in tandem (panels (f) and (g)). Because cashflows are discounted
using internal valuations, financial distortions create a direct link between the two valuations,
which does not exist in an economy with frictionless financial markets. Note that in both models,
the demand shock leads to a sharp initial increase in the markup (panel (e)). Financial frictions,
however, substantially amplify the countercyclical behavior of markups—the increase in the markup
in the model with financial distortions is double that implied by the model without such distortions.
Moreover, in an economy with financial frictions, the markup remains elevated for quite some time
after the initial impact of the shock, while in the frictionless case, the high initial markup is offset
by low future markups. As highlighted in panels (f) and (g), the driving force behind the strong
countercyclical nature of markups in the presence of financial distortions is the deterioration in the
firms’ internal liquidity positions, which causes firms to increase markups in an effort to stabilize
near-term profits in the face of falling demand.
      Figure 6 considers the same experiment, but in an environment without nominal (price and



                                                                        28
                                Figure 6: Demand Shock During a Financial Crisis
                                     (Economy without Nominal Rigidities)


 (a) Output                           (b) Hours worked                       (c) Inflation                           (d) Real wage
                        pct.                                  pct.                                     pps.                                   pct.
                                                                                                              1.0                                    0.2
                               0.0                                   0.0
                                                                                                              0.5                                    0.1
                               -0.5
                                                                     -0.5
                                                                                                              0.0                                    0.0
                   w/o FF      -1.0
                   w/ FF                                             -1.0                                     -0.5                                   -0.1
                               -1.5
                                                                     -1.5                                     -1.0                                   -0.2
  0    5      10   15    20           0     5     10     15    20            0      5        10   15    20           0      5    10      15    20

 (e) Markup                           (f) Value of internal funds            (g) Value of marginal sales             (h) Interest rate
                        pps.                                  pps.                                     pct.                                   pps.
                               0.4                                   1.5                                      1.5                                    0.05


                                                                     1.0                                      1.0
                               0.2                                                                                                                   0.00

                                                                     0.5                                      0.5

                               0.0                                                                                                                   -0.05
                                                                     0.0                                      0.0


                               -0.2                                  -0.5                                     -0.5                                   -0.10
  0    5      10   15    20           0     5     10     15    20            0      5        10   15    20           0      5    10      15    20

 Note: The panels of the figure depict the model-implied responses of selected variables to a negative demand
 shock of 1 standard deviation: w/ FF = responses implied by a model with financial frictions, with the degree of
 financial frictions calibrated to a crisis situation (ϕ̄ = 0.5); and w/o FF = responses implied by a model without
 financial frictions (ϕ̄ = 0).




wage) rigidities. The negative demand shock again causes a drop in output and hours worked and,
in the model with financial frictions, an increase in the value of internal funds. In the absence
of financial distortions, the markup is not affected by the demand shock upon impact but then
declines gradually and remains persistently below steady state. Thus, in the absence of nominal
rigidities and financial distortions, the markup is strongly procyclical in response to demand shocks
in this version of the deep habits model. Adding sticky prices alone to the model imparts at best
only a modest degree of countercyclicality to the markup. However, with the addition of financial
frictions, the markup becomes strongly countercyclical, as firms seek to increase current profits to
overcome the liquidity squeeze.

4.2    Financial Shocks and Inflation Dynamics
We now consider the macroeconomic implications of financial disruptions. That is, rather than
considering a reduction in demand in an environment where external finance is extremely costly,
we model a financial disruption as a persistent but temporary increase in the cost of external
finance. We implement this idea by assuming that the equity issuance cost parameter ϕt follows


                                                                        29
                                                      Figure 7: Financial Shock
                                                   (Economy with Nominal Rigidities)


 (a) Output                                (b) Hours worked                         (c) Inflation                          (d) Real wage
                             pct.                                  pct.                                       pps.                                  pct.
                                                                                                                     1.5                                   0.2
            w/ deep habit
            w/o deep habit
                                    0.0                                   0.0
                                                                                                                                                           0.0
                                                                                                                     1.0
                                    -0.2                                  -0.2
                                                                                                                                                           -0.2
                                    -0.4                                  -0.4                                       0.5

                                                                                                                                                           -0.4
                                    -0.6                                  -0.6
                                                                                                                     0.0
                                    -0.8                                  -0.8                                                                             -0.6
  0     5     10    15        20           0     5     10     15    20              0      5        10   15    20          0      5    10      15    20

 (e) Markup                                (f) Value of internal funds              (g) Value of marginal sales            (h) Interest rate
                             pps.                                  pps.                                       pct.                                  pps.
                                    1.0                                   5                                          5
                                                                                                                                                           0.6
                                    0.8                                   4                                          4

                                    0.6                                   3                                          3
                                                                                                                                                           0.4
                                                                          2                                          2
                                    0.4
                                                                                                                                                           0.2
                                                                          1                                          1
                                    0.2
                                                                          0                                          0
                                    0.0                                                                                                                    0.0
                                                                          -1                                         -1
  0     5     10    15        20           0     5     10     15    20              0      5        10   15    20          0      5    10      15    20

 Note: The panels of the figure depict the model-implied responses of selected variables to a temporary increase
 in the time-varying equity dilution cost parameter ϕt : w/ deep habit = responses implied by a model with deep
 habits (θ = −0.8); and w/o deep habit = responses implied by a model without deep habits (θ = 0).




a process of the form: ϕt = ϕ̄ft , where log ft = 0.90 log ft−1 + ǫft . Using this framework, we then
analyze the effects of a financial shock ǫft that increases equity dilution costs 25 percent from their
steady-state level upon impact.
      Under our baseline calibration (ϕ̄ = 0.3), this financial shock boosts the level of equity dilution
costs from 0.3 to 0.375 upon impact, a degree of financial distortions that is significantly below that
assumed in the crisis situation. The solid lines in Figure 7 show the macroeconomic implications
of such a temporary increase in financial distress. To help highlight the importance of customer
markets in our model, the dotted lines show the corresponding responses of the economy facing the
same degree of financial distress but no customer markets—this corresponds to a financial shock in
a model that incorporates only the cost-channel mechanism.
      According to panels (a) and (b), the temporary increase in external financing costs has large
effects on economic activity in an environment where financial distortions interact with customer
markets: The immediate decline in both output and hours worked in response to a contractionary
demand shock is larger by a factor of ten, compared with an economy that features only financial
market frictions and thus only allows for the traditional cost channel. The response of inflation
is also amplified substantially when financial frictions interact with customer markets, compared


                                                                               30
with the case where only the cost channel is present. In effect, a temporary deterioration in the
firms’ internal liquidity positions shrinks the financial capacity of the economy, a development that
directly shifts the Phillips curve upward.
    Panels (e), (f), and (g) show the essential mechanism at work. When the economy is hit by a
financial shock, the markup, the shadow value of internal funds, and the value of marginal sales all
increase sharply. Without customer markets, the rise in the value of internal funds is almost entirely
offset by the increase in the value of an additional sale, implying very little change in the financially
adjusted markup (see equation 21).26 With customer markets, however, the financial shock enters
independently as a cost-push factor in the Phillips curve because firms recognize that they may
trade off current cashflows for future market share and thus are willing to increase markups.
    As output falls, the habit stock declines, generating a further deterioration in the firms’ liquidity
positions. In effect, customer capital acts as a form of financial capital at times when internal
liquidity is scarce. When habit stocks and hence output are low relative to fixed operating costs,
firms are more likely to require costly external finance. Thus, the presence of customer markets
generates both greater amplification and greater persistence relative to the model featuring only
the standard cost-channel mechanism. As shown in panel (h), the rise in inflation also prompts an
increase in the nominal interest rate in the customer markets model. Although the interest rate
rule used by the monetary authorities puts zero weight on the output gap, the nominal interest
rate increases by considerably less than inflation because of the interest-rate smoothing motive.
This causes a sharp decline in the real interest rate. The model with customer markets, therefore,
provides substantial amplification in spite of a strongly countercyclical monetary policy.

4.3    Monetary Policy Implications
According to the simulations shown in Figures 5 and 7, output falls while inflation rises in response
to a contractionary demand shock or an adverse financial disturbance. These macroeconomic
dynamics stand in sharp contrast to those implied by either standard New Keynesian models or
financial accelerator models that work through investment demand—in both of these frameworks,
output and inflation exhibit strong positive comovement in response to such shocks. Indeed, this
positive comovement is at the heart of the so-called divine coincidence of monetary policy, whereby
monetary authorities—by lowering nominal interest rates—can simultaneously stabilize both output
and inflation and thus eliminate any concern of an active tradeoff for monetary policy.
    To explore implications of our model for monetary policy, we re-consider the crisis experiment
shown in Figure 5 by allowing monetary authorities to respond to inflation and output. Figure 8
reports the results of this simulation for the output gap coefficient τy equal to 0.125 and 0.25; for
  26
     The increase in the value of marginal sales in the model with customer markets is significantly attenuated in
comparison with the model without customer markets. This differential response reflects the fact that in the former
model, the value of marginal sales is less responsive to shocks because it captures the entire present discounted value
of the customer base. Nonetheless, the markup, and thus inflation dynamics, are determined by the gap between the
value of internal funds and the value of marginal sales, which in the customer markets model widens considerably in
response to a financial shock.



                                                          31
                                       Figure 8: Demand Shock During a Financial Crisis
                                             (Alternative Monetary Policy Rules)


 (a) Markup                                  (b) Inflation                            (c) Output                           (d) Real interest rate
                            pps.                                       pps.                                  pct.                                   pps.
                                      0.4                                     0.6                                   0.3                                    0.2
                   τy = 0
                   τ y = 0.125                                                0.5                                   0.0
                   τ y = 0.250        0.3
                                                                              0.4                                   -0.3                                   0.0
                                      0.2                                     0.3                                   -0.6

                                      0.1                                     0.2                                   -0.9                                   -0.2

                                                                              0.1                                   -1.2
                                      0.0
                                                                              0.0                                   -1.5                                   -0.4

                                      -0.1                                    -0.1                                  -1.8
    0    5    10     15          20          0      5        10   15    20            0     5      10   15   20            0     5     10     15     20

 Note: The panels of the figure depict the model-implied responses of selected variables to a negative demand
 shock of 1 standard deviation for different values of an output gap coefficient τy in the monetary policy rule. All
 responses are based on the model featuring nominal rigidities and financial frictions, with the level of financial
 frictions calibrated to a crisis situation (ϕ̄ = 0.5).




comparison purposes, the figure also shows the responses from the original exercise in which τy = 0,
that is, the central bank is concerned only about inflation.27 As evidenced by the differences in
the impulse responses, increasing the coefficient on the output gap successfully stabilizes output
but comes at the very obvious cost of destabilizing inflation. In our model, therefore, the divine
coincidence fails to hold, and there exists a meaningful tradeoff between output and inflation
stabilization in response to demand and financial shocks.28


5        Model Simulations: Heterogeneous Firms
We now consider our full model with firm heterogeneity, which generates a nondegenerate equilib-
rium distribution of prices across firms in the economy. Allowing for firm heterogeneity highlights
an important aspect of the interaction between customer markets and financial market frictions in
periods of financial distress. In a crisis situation, financially strong firms—in response to an adverse
demand shock—attempt to drive out their weaker competitors by undercutting their prices. This
“price war” creates an aggregate demand externality, whereby significant heterogeneity in financial
conditions across firms may lead to a greater contraction in output relative to a situation in which
firms are more uniformly constrained in their financial capacity.
    27
     In all three of these cases, the coefficient on the inflation gap in the policy rule τπ = 1.5, while the degree of
interest rate smoothing τr = 0.75.
  28
     In addition to examining model sensitivity to different monetary policy rules, we have also considered the effect
of a binding zero lower bound on nominal interest rates. In the model with customer markets and financial frictions,
output declines lead to upward inflationary pressure. As a result, real interest rates fall by more and the amount of
time spent at the zero lower bound is curtailed. Hence, the effects of a binding zero lower bound are substantially
mitigated relative to a model with frictionless financial markets.



                                                                                 32
5.1    Heterogeneous Operating Costs
To introduce heterogeneity in the model, we modify the production technology in equation (9),
according to                                                      α
                                                         At
                                           yit =             hit        − φi ,                       (30)
                                                         ait
where φi ≥ 0 denotes fixed operating costs of firm i. These costs can take on one of N -values from
a set {φ1 , . . . , φN }, where 0 ≤ φ1 < · · · < φN . The measure of firms with operating efficiency φk is
denoted by Ξk , where N
                            P
                              k=1 Ξk = 1. Lastly, we also assume that all firms face the same distribution
                                                             iid
of the idiosyncratic cost shock ait (that is, log ait ∼ N (−0.5σ 2 , σ 2 )).
    The introduction of heterogeneous operating costs implies that the external financing trigger
is specific to each category of firms, with dEat ξit |φk /dφk > 0, k = 1, . . . , N . Consistent with our
                                                       

empirical results, therefore, a low operating efficiency—or equivalently a high operating leverage—
implies an increased likelihood that the firm will have difficulties meeting its liquidity needs using
only internally generated funds. In other words, all firms within a category characterized by low
operating efficiency face higher expected external financing costs and thus are considered to be
financially “weak.”
   Within this framework, we again consider a symmetric equilibrium, in which all firms with a
given level of operating efficiency choose the same price and production scale. The derivation of firm-
specific prices, financing costs, labor inputs, and output decisions is analogous to the homogeneous
model. In particular, firm-specific inflation rates evolve according to a category-specific Phillips
curve. Note that although all firms with the same φk choose the same price level, heterogeneity
in fixed operating costs generates dispersion of prices across firms. Aggregate quantities are then
obtained in a standard manner. Specifically, the aggregate inflation rate can be expressed as a
weighted average of inflation rates across different categories of firms:
                                                                                1
                                               N
                                           "                                 # 1−η
                                               X
                                    πt =             Ξk (pk,t−1 πkt )1−η             ,               (31)
                                               k=1

where πkt ≡ Pkt /Pk,t−1 and pkt ≡ Pkt /Pt denote category-specific inflation rates and relative prices,
respectively (see Appendix B for the microfounded derivation of the aggregate inflation rate).

5.2    Countercyclical Dispersion of Inflation Rates
For maximum intuition, we consider only two categories of firms in our numerical simulations. The
first consists of financially “strong” firms, which are characterized by having φ1 = 0. The second
is made up of financially “weak” firms, distinguished by having φ2 = 0.3, the value used in our
baseline calibration. For simplicity, we assume that the two categories are of equal sizes—that is,
Ξ1 = Ξ2 = 0.5. Within this setup, we analyze the extent to which in periods of financial turmoil
financially strong firms slash prices to drive out their weaker competitors. Specifically, we perturb
the model economy with a financial shock, which, as in Subsection 4.2, corresponds to a temporary


                                                           33
                                                     Figure 9: Financial Shock
                                                 (Economy with Heterogeneous Firms)


  (a) Relative prices                      (b) Inflation                              (c) Output                            (d) Hours worked
                             pct.                                      pps.                                   pct.                                  pct.
                                    1.0                                       2.5                                    1.0                                   1.0
              Financially strong                           Aggregate
              Financially weak                                                2.0
                                    0.5                                                                              0.0
                                                                              1.5                                                                          0.0

                                    0.0                                       1.0
                                                                                                                     -1.0
                                                                              0.5                                                                          -1.0
                                    -0.5
                                                                              0.0                                    -2.0
                                    -1.0                                      -0.5                                                                         -2.0
  0      10     20     30    40            0      10       20   30      40            0     10     20   30    40            0     10   20      30   40

  (e) Relative market share                (f) Markup                                 (g) Value of internal funds           (h) Value of marginal sales
                            pps.                                       pps.                                  pps.                                   pct.
                                    5.0                                       1.5                                    20.0                                  1.5

                                                                                                                     15.0                                  1.0
                                    2.5                                       1.0

                                                                                                                     10.0                                  0.5
                                    0.0                                       0.5
                                                                                                                     5.0                                   0.0

                                    -2.5                                      0.0
                                                                                                                     0.0                                   -0.5

                                    -5.0                                      -0.5                                   -5.0                                  -1.0
  0      10     20     30    40            0      10       20   30      40            0     10     20   30    40            0     10   20      30   40

 Note: The panels of the figure depict the model-implied responses of selected variables to a temporary increase
 in the time-varying equity dilution cost parameter ϕt . The sector consisting of financially strong firms is defined
 by the operating efficiency level φ1 = 0, whereas the sector consisting of financially weak firms has the operating
 efficiency level φ2 = 0.3. The aggregate responses are computed under the assumption that the two sectors are of
 equal sizes.




increase in equity dilution costs from their normal level (ϕ̄ = 0.3).
       The solid line in panel (a) of Figure 9 shows the response of relative prices (pkt = Pkt /Pt )
for financially weak firms, whereas the dashed line depicts the corresponding response of their fi-
nancially strong counterparts. In response to an adverse financial shock, financially healthy firms
cut their prices—behavior consistent with the concurrent decline in aggregate output—while the
financially vulnerable firms actually increase their prices in an effort to avoid costly external fi-
nancing. Panel (b) translates this difference in the price-setting behavior into the category-specific
inflation rates (πkt = Pkt /Pk,t−1 ). Clearly evident is the countercyclical behavior of the dispersion
in inflation rates, a result consistent with that documented by Vavra (2014).29
       Panel (c) shows the dynamics of output. As a result of “winning” the price war, financially
strong firms gradually expand output in order to satisfy the growing demand engendered by the
relative price cut. Financially weak firms, by contrast, slash production, a move that causes the
  29
    In our case, the countercyclical dispersion in inflation rates arises endogenously in response to the differences in
financial conditions across firms, whereas Vavra (2014) relies on an exogenous second-moment (that is, uncertainty)
shock that is calibrated to be countercyclical.



                                                                                 34
aggregate output and hours worked to decline moderately. Again, the dispersion in output and
hours worked at the micro level is generated endogenously by the distortions in financial markets.
   The dynamics of the relative market shares for the two categories of firms are shown in panel (e).
Consistent with their aggressive pricing behavior, financially healthy firms significantly expand their
market share during the economic downturn. Moreover, the customers that switched products
during the downturn form a loyal group, as a substantial part of them stays with the new products,
even after the relative prices of the goods produced in the two sectors return to their respective
steady-state levels. For example, after 20 quarters, the relative prices charged by financially strong
firms are for all practical purposes back to their normal level, but their relative market share
remains elevated, which highlights the primary reason why undercutting competitors’ prices can
be such a profitable investment.

5.3   The Paradox of Financial Strength
The above example highlights the willingness of firms with strong balance sheets to undercut prices
of firms with weak balance sheets during economic downturns. We now consider whether firms with
ample financial capacity can slash their prices so aggressively that they drive out the financially
weaker firms to such an extent so as to generate a sizable drop in aggregate output. Such a scenario
can be implemented in different ways. One way is to make the contribution of the habit to the final
demand more important and more persistent by choosing higher values for θ and ρ. Alternatively,
we can reduce the price elasticity of demand by lowering η. We follow the first approach and set
θ = −0.85 and ρ = 0.985, compared with the baseline values of θ = −0.8 and ρ = 0.9.
   Using this new calibration, we consider two model economies, distinguished only by the degree
of heterogeneity in the firms’ financial capacity. In the first economy, termed a financially fragile
economy, we assume that φ1 = 0.8φ2 with φ2 = 0.3; the second economy—termed a financially
robust economy—has φ1 = 0 and φ2 = 0.3. In both economies, the two categories of firms are of
the same size. Note that the financially fragile economy features a greater proportion of firms with
limited financial capacity. However, there is considerably less heterogeneity in financial capacity
across firms in that case. The dynamics of relative prices and output in response to our standard
financial shock are depicted Figure 10.
   The paradox of financial strength can be seen from the fact that a financially fragile economy
(panel (a)) experiences a noticeably less severe decline in aggregate output in response to an adverse
financial shock, compared with the economy that overall has greater financial capacity but more
pronounced heterogeneity in the relative strength of the firms’ balance sheets (panel (b)). By
comparing the top two panels, one can see that this difference reflects the inability of financially
strong firms in the financially fragile economy to cut prices as aggressively as their counterparts in
the financially robust economy: The price cut by financially strong firms in the former economy
is less than one-half of that implemented by the financially strong firms in the latter economy.
According to the bottom two panels, the aggressive pricing strategy of financially healthy firms in
the case with greater heterogeneity in financial conditions is a Pyrrhic victory because it drives down


                                                  35
                                Figure 10: The Paradox of Financial Strength
                                    (Economy with Heterogeneous Firms)


  Relative prices                                                    Relative prices
                                               Percent                                                         Percent

                Financially strong                       0.6                                      Financially strong     0.6
                Financially weak                                                                  Financially weak
                Aggregate                                0.4                                      Aggregate              0.4

                                                         0.2                                                             0.2

                                                         0.0                                                             0.0

                                                         -0.2                                                            -0.2

                                                         -0.4                                                            -0.4

                                                         -0.6                                                            -0.6
   0          10          20          30          40                  0          10       20          30           40

  Output                                                             Output
                                               Percent                                                         Percent
                                                         0.5                                                             0.5

                                                         0.0                                                             0.0

                                                         -0.5                                                            -0.5

                                                         -1.0                                                            -1.0
                Financially strong                                                                 Financially strong
                Financially weak                                                                   Financially weak
                Aggregate                                -1.5                                      Aggregate             -1.5

                                                         -2.0                                                            -2.0
   0          10          20          30          40                  0          10       20          30           40
            (a) Financially fragile economy                                   (b) Financially robust economy

 Note: Panels of the figure depict the model-implied responses of selected variables to a temporary increase in the
 time-varying equity dilution cost parameter ϕt . Panel (a): Financially fragile economy corresponds to a model
 with φ1 = 0.8φ2 , with φ2 = 0.3; and Panel (b): Financially robust economy corresponds to a model with φ1 = 0
 and φ2 = 0.3. In both cases, financially strong firms are in category 1, which is characterized by the operating
 efficiency level φ1 ; financially weak firms, in contrast, operate in category 2 with the efficiency level φ2 . The
 aggregate responses are computed under the assumption that the two categories of firms are of equal sizes.




the output of financially weak firms to such an extent that the economy experiences a significantly
more severe economic slump than in the case with less heterogeneity but an overall greater degree
of financial fragility.30
   30
      This finding also suggests that macroeconomic stabilization policies aimed at providing liquidity support to
financially vulnerable firms during periods of financial distress may offer an effective tool to avoid a severe deterioration
in economic activity associated with credit cycles.




                                                                36
6    Conclusion
This paper analyzes inflation dynamics during the recent financial crisis through the lens of cus-
tomer markets theory, while dispensing with the assumption of frictionless financial markets. The
theoretical exploration of this mechanism is motivated by new empirical evidence, which shows that
firms with limited internal liquidity significantly increased their prices in 2008, a period character-
ized by the widespread disruptions in credit markets and a sharp contraction in output.
    To explore theoretically the macroeconomic implication of financial frictions in customer mar-
kets, we develop a general equilibrium model, in which monopolistically competitive firms face costly
price adjustment and costly external finance, while setting prices to actively manage current versus
future expected demand. In this environment, a firm’s desire to preserve internal liquidity and
to avoid costly external finance creates an incentive to raise prices in response to adverse demand
or financial shocks. In economic booms, by contrast, the competition for market shares mitigates
the upward pressure on prices. The combination of financial frictions and customer markets thus
strengthens the countercyclical behavior of markups and significantly attenuates the response of
inflation to demand and financial shocks.
    Allowing for differences in financial conditions across firms, our model simulations show that in
response to an adverse financial shock, firms with limited financial capacity raise prices relative to
their financially stronger counterparts, pricing behavior observed during the nadir of the financial
crisis in 2008. The price cuts by firms with strong balance sheets and the resulting gains in their
market share lead to a further deterioration in the liquidity position of financially constrained firms,
which amplifies the decline in aggregate output. Both empirical results and model simulations thus
support the notion that in periods of widespread financial distress, the interaction of customer
markets with financial frictions can significantly dampen the downward pressure on prices and
account for the stabilization of inflation in the face of significant and long-lasting economic slack.
    Combining customer markets theory with financial market frictions also has important implica-
tions for the conduct of monetary policy. In the absence of financial frictions, inflation and output
exhibit strong comovement and reducing nominal interest rates successfully stabilizes inflation and
output in response to negative demand or financial shocks. With financial distortions, however,
adverse demand and financial shocks shift the Phillips curve upwards. As a result, the divine coin-
cidence fails to hold, and monetary authorities face an active tradeoff between inflation and output
stabilization in response to both demand and financial disturbances.



References
Antoun de Almedia, L. (2015): “Firms’ Balance Sheets and Sectoral Inflation in the Euro Area
 During the Financial Crisis,” Economic Letters, 135, 31–33.

Asplund, M., R. Eriksson, and N. Strand (2005): “Prices, Margins, and Liquidity Con-
 straints: Swedish Newspapers 1990–1992,” Economica, 72, 349–359.


                                                  37
Ball, L. M. and S. Mazumder (2011): “Inflation Dynamics and the Great Recession,” Brookings
 Papers on Economic Activity, 42, 337–405.

Barth, M. J. and V. A. Ramey (2001): “The Cost Channel of Monetary Transmission,” in
 NBER Macroeconomics Annual, ed. by B. S. Bernanke and K. Rogoff, Cambridge: The MIT
 Press, vol. 16, 199–249.

Bassett, W. F., M. B. Chosak, J. C. Driscoll, and E. Zakrajšek (2014): “Changes in
 Bank Lending Standards and the Macroeconomy,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 62, 23–40.

Bernanke, B. S., M. Gertler, and S. Gilchrist (1999): “The Financial Accelerator in a
 Quantitative Business Cycle Framework,” in The Handbook of Macroeconomics, ed. by J. B.
 Taylor and M. Woodford, Amsterdam: Elsevier Science B.V, 1341–1393.

Bhattarai, S., G. B. Eggertsson, and R. Schoenle (2014): “Is Increased Price Flexibility
 Stabilizing? Redux,” NBER Working Paper No. 19886.

Bils, M. (1989): “Pricing in a Customer Market,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 104, 699–718.

Bils, M. and J. A. Kahn (2000): “What Inventory Behavior Tells Us About Business Cycles,”
  American Economic Review, 90, 458–481.

Bils, M. and P. J. Klenow (2004): “Some Evidence on the Importance of Sticky Prices,” Journal
  of Political Economy, 112, 947–985.

Bils, M., P. J. Klenow, and B. A. Malin (2013): “Testing for Keynesian Labor Demand,” in
  NBER Macroeconomics Annual, National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc, vol. 27, 311–349.

Bolton, P. and D. S. Scharfstein (1990): “A Theory of Predation Based on Agency Problems
 in Financial Contracting,” American Economic Review, 80, 93–106.

Broda, C. and D. E. Weinstein (2006): “Globalization and the Gains from Variety,” Quarterly
 Journal of Economics, 121, 541–585.

Bronnenberg, B., J.-P. Dube, and M. Gentzkow (2012): “The Evolution of Brand Prefer-
 ences: Evidence From Consumer Migration,” American Economic Review, 104, 2472–2508.

Bureau of Labor Statistics (2014): “Quality Adjustment in the Producer Price Index,”
 http://www.bls.gov/ppi/qualityadjustment.pdf.

Calomiris, C. W., C. P. Himmelberg, and P. Wachtel (1995): “Commercial Paper, Cor-
 porate Finance, and the Business Cycle: A Microeconomic Perspective,” Carnegie-Rochester
 Conference Series on Public Policy, 42, 203–250.

Campello, M., E. Giambona, J. R. Graham, and C. R. Harvey (2011): “Liquidity Man-
 agement and Corporate Investment During a Financial Crisis,” Review of Financial Studies, 24,
 1944–1979.

Campello, M., J. R. Graham, and C. R. Harvey (2010): “The Real Effects of Financial
 Constraints: Evidence From a Financial Crisis,” Journal of Financial Economics, 97, 470–487.

Carpenter, R. E., S. M. Fazzari, and B. C. Petersen (1998): “Financing Constraints
 and Inventory Investment: A Comparative Study with High-Frequency Panel Data,” Review of
 Economics and Statistics, 80, 513–519.

                                             38
Chevalier, J. A. and D. S. Scharfstein (1996): “Capital-Market Imperfections and Counter-
 cyclical Markups: Theory and Evidence,” American Economic Review, 86, 703–725.

Christiano, L. J., M. S. Eichenbaum, and M. Trabandt (2015): “Understanding the Great
 Recession,” American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 7, 110–167.

Coibion, O. and Y. Gorodnichenko (2015): “Is The Phillips Curve Alive and Well After All?
 Inflation Expectations and the Missing Disinflation,” American Economic Journal: Macroeco-
 nomics, 7, 197–232.

Cooley, T. F. and V. Quadrini (2001): “Financial Markets and Firm Dynamics,” American
 Economic Review, 91, 1286–1310.

Del Negro, M., M. P. Giannoni, and F. Schorfheide (2015): “Inflation in the Great Reces-
 sion and New Keynesian Models,” American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 7, 168–196.

Eaton, J., M. Eslava, D. C. Jinkins, C. J. Krizan, and J. R. Tybout (2015): “A Search
 and Learning Model of Export Dynamics,” Working Paper, Dept. of Economics, Pennsylvania
 State University.

Falato, A., D. Kadyrzhanova, and J. Sim (2013): “Rising Intangible Capital, Shrinking Debt
  Capacity, and the U.S. Corporate Savings Glut,” Finance and Economics Discussion Paper No.
  2013-67, Federal Reserve Board.

Fitzgerald, D., S. Haller, and Y. Yedid-Levi (2016): “How Exporters Grow,” NBER Work-
  ing Paper No. 21935.

Foster, L., J. C. Haltiwanger, and C. Syverson (2016): “The Slow Growth of New Plants:
 Learning About Demand,” Economica, 832, 91–129.

Gilchrist, S. and C. P. Himmelberg (1998): “Investment: Fundamentals and Finance,” in
 NBER Macroeconomic Annual, ed. by B. S. Bernanke and J. J. Rotemberg, Cambridge: The
 MIT Press, 223–274.

Gilchrist, S. and E. Zakrajšek (2007): “Investment and the Cost of Capital: New Evidence
 from the Corporate Bond Market,” NBER Working Paper No. 13174.

——— (2016): “Customer Markets and Financial Frictions: Implications for Inflation Dynamics,”
 Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, Proceedings – Economic Policy Symposium – Jackson
 Hole.

Goldberg, P. K. and R. Hellerstein (2009): “How Rigid are Producer Prices?” Staff Report
 No. 407, Federal Reserve Bank of New York.

Gordon, R. J. (2013): “The Phillips Curve is Alive and Well: Inflation and the NAIRU During
 the Slow Recovery,” NBER Working Paper No. 19390.

Gorodnichenko, Y. and M. Weber (2016): “Are Sticky Prices Costly? Evidence from the
 Stock Market,” American Economic Review, 106, 165–99.

Gottfries, N. (1991): “Customer Markets, Credit Market Imperfections and Real Price Rigidity,”
 Economica, 58, 317–323.



                                             39
Gourio, F. and L. Rudanko (2014): “Customer Capital,” Review of Economic Studies, 81,
 1102–1136.
Hall, R. E. (2008): “General Equilibrium With Customer Relationships: A Dynamic Analysis of
 Rent-Seeking,” Working Paper, Dept. of Economics, Stanford University.
——— (2011): “The Long Slump,” American Economic Review, 101, 431–469.
Himmelberg, C. P. and B. C. Petersen (1994): “R&D and Internal Finance: A Panel Study
  of Small Firms in High-Tech Industries,” Review of Economics and Statistics, 76, 38–51.
Hottman, C., S. J. Redding, and D. E. Weinstein (2014): “What is ”Firm Heterogeneity”
 in Trade Models? The Role of Quality, Scope, Markups, and Cost,” CEP Discussion Paper No.
 1296, London School of Economics.
Kashyap, A. K., O. Lamont, and J. C. Stein (1994): “Credit Conditions and the Cyclical
 Behavior of Inventories,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 109, 565–592.
Kiley, M. T. and J. Sim (2012): “Intermediary Leverage, Macroeconomic Dynamics, and Macro-
  prudential Policy,” Working Paper, Federal Reserve Board of Governors.
Kimura, T. (2013): “Why Do Prices Remain Stable in the Bubble and Bust Period?” International
  Economic Journal, 27, 157–177.
King, R. G. and M. W. Watson (2012): “Inflation and Unit Labor Cost,” Journal of Money,
  Credit, and Banking, 44, 111–149.
Klemperer, P. (1987): “Market With Customer Switching Costs,” Quarterly Journal of Eco-
 nomics, 102, 375–394.
Krueger, A. B., J. Cramer, and D. Cho (2014): “Are the Long-Term Unemployed on the
 Margins of the Labor Market?” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 48, 229–298.
Lins, K. V., H. Servaes, and P. Tufano (2010): “What Drives Corporate Liquidity? An
  International Survey of Cash Holdings and Lines of Credit,” Journal of Financial Economics,
  98, 160–176.
Lundin, M., N. Gottfries, C. Bucht, and T. Lindström (2009): “Price and Investment
  Dynamics: Theory and Plant-Level Data,” Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking, 41, 907–934.
Milgrom, P. and J. Roberts (1982): “Limit Pricing and Entry under Incomplete Information:
 An Equilibrium Analysis,” Econometrica, 50, 443–459.
Montero, J. and A. Urtasun (2014): “Price-Cost Markups in the Spanish Economy: A Mi-
 croeconomic Perspective,” Working Paper No. 1407, Bank of Spain.
Nakamura, E. and J. Steinsson (2008): “Five Facts about Prices: A Reevaluation of Menu
 Cost Models,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 123, 1415–1464.
——— (2011): “Price Setting in Forward-Looking Customer Markets,” Journal of Monetary Eco-
 nomics, 58, 220–233.
Phelps, E. S. and S. G. Winter (1970): “Optimal Price Policy Under Atomistic Competition,”
 in Microeconomic Foundations of Employment and Inflation Theory, ed. by E. S. Phelps, New
 York: W. W. Norton & Co., 309–337.

                                             40
Ravn, M. O., S. Schmitt-Grohe, and M. Uribe (2006): “Deep Habits,” Review of Economic
 Studies, 73, 195–218.

Roberts, M. J., D. Y. Xu, X. Fan, and S. Zhang (2012): “The Role of Firm Factors in
 Demand, Cost, and Export Market Selection for Chinese Footwear Producers,” NBER Working
 Paper No. 17725.

Rotemberg, J. J. (1982): “Monopolistic Price Adjustment and Aggregate Output,” Review of
 Economic Studies, 49, 517–531.

Rotemberg, J. J. and M. Woodford (1991): “Markups and the Business Cycle,” in NBER
 Macroeconomics Annual, ed. by O. J. Blanchard and S. Fischer, Cambridge: The MIT Press,
 63–140.

Schoenle, R. (2010): “International Menu Costs and Price Dynamics,” Working Paper, Dept. of
  Economics, Princeton University. Forthcoming in the Review of International Economics.

Sharpe, S. A. (1994): “Financial Market Imperfections, Firm Leverage, and the Cyclicality of
  Employment,” American Economic Review, 84, 1060–1074.

Vavra, J. S. (2014): “Inflation Dynamics and Time-Varying Volatility: New Evidence and an Ss
  Interpretation,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 129, 215–258.

Weber, M. (2014): “Nominal Rigidities and Asset Pricing,” Society for Economic Dynamics
 Meeting Paper No. 53.

Woodford, M. (2003): Interest and Prices, Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.




                                             41
Appendices – For Online Publication
This Online Appendix consists of two parts: Data Appendix (Appendix A) and Model Appendix
(Appendix B).


A     Data Appendix
The Data Appendix consists of two subsections. Subsection A.1 compares the pricing patterns
in the matched PPI–Compustat sample with those in the full PPI sample; it also describes the
construction of our key Compustat variables and compares the various firm characteristics for
our sample of firms with those of the entire U.S. nonfinancial corporate sector. Subsection A.2
documents the effects of internal liquidity on other aspects of firms’ behavior (i.e., employment,
capital investment, R&D expenditures, and inventory accumulation).

A.1    Full PPI vs. Matched PPI–Compustat Samples
Compared with the full PPI sample, the matched PPI–Compustat panel is more heavily concen-
trated on the manufacturing sector (2-digit NAICS 31–33). More than 90 percent of goods in
the matched PPI–Compustat data set are produced by manufacturing firms, compared with about
60 percent in the full PPI data set. Table A-1 compares the key cross-sectional price-change charac-
teristics between the full PPI and matched PPI–Compustat data sets. In the first step, we calculate
the average price-change characteristic      for each good; in the case of good-level inflation, for exam-
                             −1 PTi
ple, we compute πi,j,· = Ti       t=1 πi,j,t , where Ti denotes the number of months that good i is in
the sample. In the second step, we compute the summary statistics of the average good-specific
price change characteristics for the two data sets.
    An average establishment in the PPI–Compustat panel reports in an average month price in-
formation on 5.4 goods, whereas its counterpart in the full PPI panel does so for 4.3 goods. In
addition, prices of goods produced by the former are, on average, sampled over a longer time
period—51.2 months compared with 42.3 months. Despite these differences, the cross-sectional
price change characteristics are very similar across the two samples. The price of an average good
in the full PPI panel increases 0.15 percent per month, on average, over its lifetime in the sample,
compared with 0.12 percent for an average good in the PPI–Compustat panel. Not surprisingly, the
dispersion of average good-level inflation rates in the full PPI sample is noticeably higher than that
in the matched PPI–Compustat sample, reflecting the fact that the former sample contains many
goods with very volatile prices. In both data sets, the distributions of positive and negative price
changes are also very comparable: The median of the average good-specific positive inflation rates
is 5.2 percent for the full PPI sample and 4.8 percent for the matched PPI–Compustat sample; the
corresponding medians of the average good-specific negative inflation rates are −4.8 percent and
−4.4 percent, respectively.
    On average, the probability with which prices of an average good are adjusted in the full PPI
panel is 16 percent per month, compared with 18 percent per month for the PPI–Compustat panel;
that is, an average good changes its price about every 6 months in both data sets. However, as
evidenced by the associated standard deviations, the frequency of price changes varies significantly
across goods, a pattern also documented by Nakamura and Steinsson (2008). Consistent with a
positive average inflation rate in both panels, the average frequency of upward price changes exceeds
that of the downward price changes in both cases.



                                                   42
   We now describe the construction of firm-specific indicators based on the quarterly Compustat
data. In variable definitions, xn denotes the Compustat data item n.

   • Cash and Short-Term Investments (x36 ): cash and all securities readily transferable to
     cash as listed in the current asset section of the firm’s balance sheet.

   • Selling, General, and Administrative Expenses (x1 ): all commercial expenses of oper-
     ation incurred in the regular course of business.

   • Net Sales (x2 ): gross sales (the amount of actual billings to customers for regular sales com-
     pleted during the quarter) less cash discounts, trade discounts, returned sales, and allowances
     for which credit is given to customers.

   • Cost of Goods Sold (x30 ): all costs directly allocated by the company to production, such
     as material, labor, and overhead. Selling, General, and Administrative Expenses are not
     included in the cost of good sold.

   • Total Assets (x44 ): current assets plus net property, plant & equipment, plus other noncur-
     rent assets.

    The liquidity ratio is defined as the ratio of cash and short-term investments in quarter t to total
assets in quarter t (x3 [t]/x44 [t]), and the SGAX ratio is defined as the ratio of selling, general, and
administrative expenses in quarter t to sales in quarter t (x1 [t]/x2 [t]). To ensure that our results
were not influenced by a small number of extreme observations, we deleted from the quarterly
Compustat panel data set all firm/quarter observations that failed to satisfy any of the following
criteria:

   1. 0.00 ≤ Liquidity Ratio ≤ 1.00;

   2. 0.00 ≤ SGAX Ratio ≤ 10.0;

   3. −2.00 ≤ ∆ log(Net Sales) ≤ 2.00;

   4. −2.00 ≤ ∆ log(Cost of Goods Sold) ≤ 2.00.

    Table A-2 contains the selected summary statistics for the key variables used in the analysis for
both the matched PPI–Compustat sample and for all U.S. nonfinancial firms covered by Compustat.
In general, the PPI–Compustat sample contains larger firms—the median firm size, as measured
by (quarterly) real sales, is more than $300 million, compared with only about $80 million for the
entire Compustat sample. Reflecting their larger size, the firms in the PPI–Compustat panel tend
to grow more slowly, on average, and also have less volatile sales. The difference in average firm size
between the two data sets helps explain the fact that the aggregate dynamics of sales and prices
of firms in the PPI–Compustat sample are representative of broader macroeconomic trends (see
Figure 1 in the main text).
    In terms of financial characteristics, the two sets of firms are fairly similar, especially if one com-
pares the respective medians of the two distributions. Nevertheless, firms in the PPI–Compustat
sample tend to have somewhat less liquid balance sheets, on balance, as measured by the liquidity
ratio. This difference is consistent with the fact that the PPI–Compustat sample consists of larger
firms that, ceteris paribus, have better access to external sources of finance and therefore less need
to maintain a precautionary liquidity buffer. An average firm in the PPI–Compustat sample also
tends to have a lower SGAX ratio compared with an average nonfinancial firm in Compustat.


                                                    43
    As noted in the main text, when sorting firms into low and high liquidity categories in month t,
we rely on the trailing average liquidity ratio over the preceding 12 months. When sorting firms
into low and high SGAX categories, by contrast, we rely on the average SGAX ratio computed over
the 2000–2004 pre-sample period. Table A-3 summarizes the first two moments of the (good-level)
price change characteristics—measured from month t − 1 to month t—for the various categories of
firms over the 2005–2012 sample period.
    Focusing first on the financial dimension—the top panel—prices of goods produced by firms
with relatively ample internal liquidity increase at a slower rate, on average, compared with prices
of goods produced by their low liquidity counterparts. In an accounting sense, the average inflation
differential of 12 basis points per month reflects the fact that the average price decline at high
liquidity firms is about 6.2 percent per month, whereas at low liquidity firms, the average price
decline is only 5.5 percent. These differences in the average inflation rates between financially strong
and weak firms do not reflect differences in the extensive margin of price adjustment, as the average
frequency of price changes—both overall and directional—is very similar between the two types of
firms. Finally, as noted in the Memo item, low liquidity firms have, on average, a significantly
less liquid balance sheets compared with their high liquidity counterparts: in the former category,
liquid assets account, on average, for only 3 percent of total assets, compared with 21 percent in
the latter category.
    As shown in the bottom panel of the table, pricing dynamics also differ across firms with varying
intensity of SG&A spending. Prices of goods produced by firms with a high SGAX ratio are
estimated to rise at an average rate of only 4 basis points per month, compared with an 18 basis
points rate of increase at firms with a low SGAX ratio. This systematic inflation differential
primarily reflects larger average price cuts by the high SGAX-ratio firms (6.5 percent), compared
with those at the low SGAX-ratio firms (5.5 percent). The intensity of SG&A spending is also
correlated with the frequency with which firms adjust their prices. On average, high SGAX-ratio
firms exhibit a markedly lower frequency of price adjustment compared with their low SGAX-ratio
counterparts (7 percent vs. 14 percent); moreover this difference extends to both positive and
negative price changes. As indicated by the Memo item, the average SGAX ratio over our sample
period differs significantly between the two types of firms, in a manner that is consistent with our
ex ante classification.
    Panel (a) of Figure A-1 shows the industry-adjusted inflation rates of low and high liquidity
firms within the durable and nondurable goods manufacturing sectors, while panel (b) displays
the same information for firms with varying intensity of SG&A spending. This analysis is based
on a subset of the matched PPI-Compustat data set, though, as noted in Section 2 of the main
text, more than 90 percent of goods in the matched PPI–Compustat data set are produced by
manufacturing firms, split about evenly between durable and nondurable goods producers.

A.2    Liquidity, Employment, and Investment During the Financial Crisis
In this section, we document that differences in the firms’ internal liquidity positions—as measured
by the liquidity ratio—had a differential effect not only on their price-setting behavior, but also
on their employment and other more traditional forms of investment (i.e., expenditures on fixed
capital and research and development (R&D) and inventory accumulation).
    To examine formally the role of internal liquidity in employment dynamics, we use the annual
Compustat data for the sample of matched PPI-Compustat firms to estimate the following fixed
effects panel regression:

                     ∆ log Ej,t+1 = βLIQj,t + θ∆ log S̃j,t+1 + ηj + λt+j + ǫj,t+1 ,               (A-1)


                                                  44
where ∆ log Ej,t+1 denotes the log-difference in the number of employees at firm j from year t to
year t + 1, and ∆ log S̃j,t+1 is the corresponding log-difference in the firm’s real sales, as defined in
the main text.31 With regards to capital and R&D expenditures, we estimate:
                            hxi
                        log            = βLIQj,t + θ ′ Zj,t+1 + ηj + λt+1 + ǫj,t+1 ,                (A-2)
                             K j,t+1

where, if x = I, [I/K]j,t+1 denotes the ratio of capital expenditures of firm j during year t + 1
to its capital stock at the end of year t, and if x = RD, [RD/K]j,t+1 denotes the ratio of R&D
expenditures during year t + 1 relative to capital stock at the end of year t.32 In all specifications,
LIQj,t denotes the firm’s liquidity ratio at the end of year t, a timing convention that is consistent
with our benchmark pricing regressions in the main text.
     The inclusion of the current growth in real sales ∆ log S̃j,t+1 in the employment regression (A-1)
captures the firm-specific cyclical factors associated with employment fluctuations, while the vec-
tor Zj,t+1 in equation (A-2) controls for the firm’s investment opportunities. In line with the
previous empirical literature (Himmelberg and Petersen, 1994; Gilchrist and Himmelberg, 1998;
Gilchrist and Zakrajšek, 2007), we measure investment fundamentals using the log of the operating-
income-to-capital ratio in year t+1, denoted by [Π/K]j,t+1 .33 One drawback of this measure is that
it is not explicitly forward looking. Accordingly, we also include the log of Tobin’s Q—measured
as of the end of year t—in the vector of fundamentals Zj,t+1 . Because it is based on the firm’s
equity valuations, Tobin’s Q is a forward-looking variable and thus contains information about
future investment opportunities that may not captured by the firm’s current profit rate.
     When analyzing the role of internal liquidity as a determinant of cyclical fluctuations in inven-
tory investment, we can work with quarterly, as opposed to annual, data. In that case, we estimate
the following specification:
                                     
                                     N
    ∆ log Nj,t+1 = βLIQj,t + θ1 log        + θ2 ∆ log Nj,t + θ3 ∆ log Sj,t + ηj + λt+1 + ǫj,t+1 , (A-3)
                                     S j,t

where ∆ log Nj,t+1 denotes the log-difference of (total) inventories from quarter t to quarter t + 1,
and log[N/S]j,t is the log of the firm’s inventory-to-sales ratio in quarter t. This “error-correction”
specification implicitly assumes the the firm’s target (log) inventory-to-sales ratio consists of a time-
invariant firm-specific component—subsumed into the firm fixed effect ηj —and a time-varying ag-
gregate component, captured by the time fixed effect λt+1 (Calomiris et al., 1995; Carpenter et al.,
1998).
    We estimate regressions (A-1), (A-2) and (A-3) by OLS, using the “within” transformation
to eliminate firm fixed effects.34 The results of this exercise are tabulated in Table A-4. As
shown in columns (1), (3), (5), and (7), differences in the firms’ internal liquidity positions are an
important determinant—both economically and statistically—of differences in employment growth,
capital accumulation, R&D expenditures, and inventory investment across firms over the 2005–2012
period. According to the estimates reported in those columns, a difference in the liquidity ratio of
10 percentage point between two firms in year t—a difference of less than one standard deviation
  31
     Similar employment regressions were estimated by Sharpe (1994). Note that because the micro-level producer
prices used to construct real sales growth at the firm level start in January 2005, the time-series dimension of the
resulting annual panel runs from 2006 to 2012.
  32
     We use the log transformation of the dependent variables because [I/K]j,t+1 and [RD/K]j,t+1 are positively
skewed, which may induce heteroskedasticity in the error term ǫj,t+1 across firms.
  33
     Because operating income may be negative, we use the transformation log(c + [Π/K]j,t+1 ), where c is chosen so
that c + [Π/K]j,t+1 > 0, for all j and t.
  34
     We applied a set of standard filters to the data in order to eliminate extreme observations.


                                                        45
(see Table A-2)—is associated with a differential growth of employment of about 3.5 percentage
points over the subsequent year. Such a difference in the firms’ internal liquidity also translates
into more than a 25 percentage point differential in the investment rate between financially weak
and strong firms and a 22 percentage point differential in R&D expenditures, relative to capital,
over the same period. The effects of internal liquidity on inventory accumulation are also sizable
in economic terms: a 10 percentage point difference in the liquidity ratio across firms in quarter t
implies a difference in the growth of inventory stocks of 2.3 percentage points (at an annual rate)
over the subsequent quarter.
    These results strongly support our hypothesis that firms holding less liquid assets not only
increased prices during the recent financial crisis, but they also slashed employment, cut back
capital and R&D spending, and reduced inventory stocks by significantly more than their liquidity
unconstrained counterparts. Our empirical results are also consistent with the survey evidence
compiled by Campello et al. (2010), who report that in 2008, companies in the U.S., Europe,
and Asia that identified themselves as credit constrained planned to lay off significantly more
workers and make substantially deeper cuts in their capital and tech spending than companies that
categorized themselves as credit unconstrained.
    Columns (2), (4), (6), and (8) of the table report the results from specifications in which the
coefficient on the liquidity ratio is allowed to differ between the crisis (1[CRISISt = 1]) and non-crisis
(1[CRISISt = 0]) periods.35 According to column (2), the firms’ internal liquidity positions had,
in economic terms, an appreciably larger effect on employment in 2008 and 2009—the coefficient
on the liquidity ratio during the crisis period is 0.418, compared with the non-crisis estimate of
0.346. Moreover, the same sort of asymmetry appears to be also evident in the case of inventory
investment (column 8). Thus, employment and inventories become markedly more sensitive to
corporate liquidity during the crisis period. As argued by Bils and Kahn (2000), these results
provide further evidence that markups of liquidity constrained firms become more countercyclical
in periods of widespread turmoil in financial markets.




  35
    For specifications that rely on annual data (columns (1)–(4)), the crisis indicator is equal to 1 in 2008 and 2009
(and 0 otherwise), reflecting the fact that the firm-level annual data are reported at fiscal year-ends. For specifications
that rely on quarterly data (columns (5) and (6)), the crisis indicator is equal to 1 in 2008 (and 0 otherwise), a
definition that is consistent with the pricing regressions reported in Tables 1 and 2 in the main text.


                                                            46
          Table A-1: Summary Statistics of Good-Level Price Change Characteristics
                   (Full PPI Sample vs. Matched PPI–Compustat Sample)

 Variable (percent)                        Mean           STD           Min           P50           Max
 Inflation
   Full PPI sample                          0.15           0.82     −42.80            0.02        55.59
   PPI–Compustat sample                     0.12           0.57      −7.15            0.08         5.04
 Positive price changes
   Full PPI sample                          7.52           0.26         0.00          5.21        99.32
   PPI–Compustat sample                     6.21           6.19         0.00          4.80        89.45
 Negative price changes
   Full PPI sample                        −7.72            9.73     −99.88          −4.76         −0.00
   PPI–Compustat sample                   −6.70            8.39     −88.53          −4.38         −0.00
 Freq. of price changes
   Full PPI sample                         15.52          25.90         0.00          4.88       100.00
   PPI–Compustat sample                    18.31          27.28         0.00          6.90       100.00
 Freq. of positive price changes
   Full PPI sample                          9.14          14.45         0.00          3.45       100.00
   PPI–Compustat sample                    10.44          14.67         0.00          4.76        75.00
 Freq. of negative price changes
   Full PPI sample                          6.37          13.09         0.00          0.00       100.00
   PPI–Compustat sample                     7.87          13.68         0.00          1.52       100.00

 Avg. number of goods per firm
  Full PPI sample                            4.3            2.6           1             4            77
  PPI–Compustat sample                       5.4            3.3           1            4.9           41
 Months in the panel
  Full PPI sample                           42.3           25.3           1            41            96
  PPI–Compustat sample                      51.2           20.2           1            52            95
 Note: Sample period: monthly data from Jan2005 to Dec2012. Full PPI sample: No. of goods = 202,281; No.
of respondents = 46,306; and Obs. = 8,551,681. Matched PPI–Compustat sample: No. of goods = 6,859; No.
of respondents = 1,242; and Obs. = 351,192. All price change characteristics correspond to good-level averages
computed using trimmed monthly data.




                                                     47
             Table A-2: Summary Statistics for Selected Firm Characteristics
          (U.S. Nonfinancial Corporate Sector vs. Matched PPI–Compustat Sample)

 Variable                               Mean          STD            Min           P50           Max
 Sales ($bil.)a
   Compustat sample                     0.96           4.44         <.01           0.08        200.25
   PPI–Compustat sample                 1.69           5.71         <.01           0.33        125.26
 Liquidity ratio
   Compustat sample                     0.21           0.24          0.00          0.12          1.00
   PPI–Compustat sample                 0.15           0.16          0.00          0.09          1.00
 SGAX ratio
   Compustat sample                     0.39           0.59          0.00          0.25          8.00
   PPI–Compustat sample                 0.26           0.29          0.00          0.21          7.77
 Sales growth (pct.)
   Compustat sample                     1.51         29.67      −199.87            2.11        199.92
   PPI–Compustat sample                 1.06         19.36      −196.52            1.83        176.88
 COGS growth (pct.)
   Compustat sample                     1.32         29.47      −199.80            2.03        199.86
   PPI–Compustat sample                 0.82         19.72      −187.27            1.70        177.74
 Note: Sample period: Jan2005 to Dec2012 at a quarterly frequency. Compustat sample (U.S. nonfinancial
sector): No. of firms = 6,138 and Obs. = 152,944. Matched PPI–Compustat sample: No. of firms = 584 and
Obs. = 16,052. Liquidity ratio = cash & short-term investments to total assets; SGAX ratio = sales & general
administrative expenses (SGAX) relative to sales; and COGS = cost of goods sold. All statistics are based on
trimmed data.
a
  Deflated by the U.S. nonfarm business sector GDP price deflator (2009:Q4 = 100).




                                                    48
                Table A-3: Summary Statistics of Price Change Characteristics
                            (By Selected Firm Characteristics)

                                                Low Liquidity Firms               High Liquidity Firms
Variable (percent)                              Mean          STD                 Mean           STD
Inflation                                      0.17             4.09           0.05             4.62
Positive price changes                         5.45             6.97           5.46             7.82
Negative price changes                        −5.52             7.89          −6.18            10.02
Freq. of price changes                        19.90            39.92          19.00            39.23
Freq. of positive price changes               11.56            31.97          10.56            30.73
Freq. of negative price changes                8.34            27.64           8.44            27.80

No. of goods                                             5,011                            3,956
Observations                                            189,277                          123,220
Memo: Liquidity ratio                           0.03              0.05            0.21             0.17
                                                 Low SGAX Firms                   High SGAX Firms
Variable (percent)                              Mean       STD                    Mean       STD
Inflation                                      0.19             4.43           0.03             3.88
Positive price changes                         5.42             6.89           5.27             7.91
Negative price changes                        −5.42             7.79          −6.25            10.48
Freq. of price changes                        23.83            42.60          12.99            33.61
Freq. of positive price changes               13.67            34.35           7.33            26.06
Freq. of negative price changes               10.16            30.21           5.66            23.12

No. of goods                                             3,891                            2,829
Observations                                            203,106                          141,455
Memo: SGAX ratio                                0.13              0.07            0.37             0.26
Note: Sample period: monthly data from 2005:M1 to 2012:M12; No. of firms = 547.




                                                   49
                                       Table A-4: Liquidity, Employment, and Investment During the Financial Crisis

                                                                                Annual Dataa                                                        Quarterly Datab
                                               Employment                   Capital Expenditures               R&D Expenditures                        Inventories
      Explanatory Variables                  (1)        (2)                   (3)          (4)                  (5)        (6)                     (7)             (8)
      LIQj,t                               0.362∗∗∗           .              1.232∗∗∗           .              0.860∗∗∗           .               0.058∗∗∗           .
                                          (0.047)                           (0.195)                           (0.166)                            (0.017)
      LIQj,t × 1[CRISISt = 1]               .                0.418∗∗∗         .                1.340∗∗∗         .                0.851∗∗∗          .                0.087∗∗∗
                                                            (0.056)                           (0.256)                           (0.187)                            (0.028)
      LIQj,t × 1[CRISISt = 0]                .               0.346∗∗∗          .               1.206∗∗∗          .               0.862∗∗∗          .                0.055∗∗∗
                                                            (0.047)                           (0.197)                           (0.170)                            (0.027)
      ∆ log S̃j,t+1                        0.229∗∗∗          0.230∗∗∗          .                .                .                .                .                 .
                                          (0.022)           (0.022)
      log[Π/K]j,t+1                         .                 .              0.196∗∗∗          0.196∗∗∗        0.089∗∗∗          0.089∗∗∗          .                 .
                                                                            (0.029)           (0.029)         (0.030)           (0.030)
      log Qj,t                               .                .              0.290∗∗∗          0.291∗∗∗        0.068             0.068             .                 .
                                                                            (0.059)           (0.060)         (0.060)           (0.060)
      log[N/S]j,t                            .                .               .                 .               .                 .             −0.125∗∗∗        −0.126∗∗∗
50




                                                                                                                                                (0.008)           (0.008)
      ∆ log Nj,t                             .                .                .                .                .                .              0.050∗∗∗          0.050∗∗∗
                                                                                                                                                (0.012)           (0.012)
      ∆ log Sj,t                             .                .                .                .                .                .             −0.072∗∗∗        −0.072∗∗∗
                                                                                                                                                (0.015)           (0.015)
      Pr > W c                              .               0.075             .               0.504              .               0.927            .                0.168
      R2 (within)                          0.226            0.227            0.259            0.259             0.172            0.172           0.150             0.150

      No. of firms                                   543                               553                               371                               571
      Observations                                  3,218                             3,454                             2,222                             14,516
      Note: The dependent variable in columns (1) and (2) is ∆ log Ej,t+1 , the log-difference in the number of employees from year t to year t + 1; the dependent variable
     in columns (3) and (4) is log[I/K]j,t+1 , the log of the ratio of capital expenditures in year t + 1 to the stock of capital at the end of year t; the dependent variable
     in columns (5) and (6) is log[RD/K]j,t+1 , the log of the ratio of R&D expenditures in year t + 1 to the stock of capital at the end of year t; and the the dependent
     variable in columns (7) and (8) is ∆Nj,t+1 , the log-difference of inventories from quarter t to quarter t + 1. In addition to the specified explanatory variables (see
     equations A-1–A-3 and the text for details), all specifications include firm and time fixed effects and are estimated by OLS. Asymptotic standard errors reported in
     parentheses are clustered at the firm level: * p < .10; ** p < .05; and *** p < .01.
     a
       Sample period: 2006 to 2012 at an annual (fiscal year-end) frequency in columns (1) and (2); and 2005 to 2012 at an annual (fiscal year-end) frequency in
     columns (3)–(6).
     b
       Sample period: 2005:Q1 to 2012:Q4 at a quarterly frequency.
     c
       p-value for the Wald test of the null hypothesis that the coefficients on the liquidity ratio (LIQj,t ) are equal between crisis and non-crisis periods.
                     Figure A-1: Industry-Adjusted Producer Price Inflation
                    (By Selected Firm Characteristics and Durability of Output )


                                                                                            Percentage points
                                                                                                                24
   3-month moving average, annualized
                                                                                                                16
                                                                                                                 8
                                                                                                                 0
                                                                                                                -8
                                                                     Low liquidity firms - durable goods
                                                                     High liquidity firms - durable goods       -16
                                                                     Low liquidity firms - nondurable goods
                                                                     High liquidity firms - nondurable goods    -24
                                                                                                                -32
                                                                                                                -40
      2005         2006         2007         2008          2009        2010          2011          2012
                               (a) By liquidity ratio and durability of output

                                                                                            Percentage points
                                                                                                                24
   3-month moving average, annualized
                                                                                                                16

                                                                                                                 8

                                                                                                                 0

                                                                                                                -8
                                                                     High SGAX firms - durable goods
                                                                     Low SGAX firms - durable goods
                                                                     High SGAX firms - nondurable goods         -16
                                                                     Low SGAX firms - nondurable goods
                                                                                                                -24

                                                                                                                -32
      2005         2006         2007         2008          2009        2010          2011          2012
                                (b) By SGAX ratio and durability of output
Note: The solid (dotted) lines in panel (a) depicts the weighted-average industry-adjusted inflation rate for
low (high) liquidity firms in durable and nondurable good manufacturing industries. The solid (dotted) lines in
panel (b) depicts the weighted-average industry-adjusted inflation rate for high (low) SGAX firms in durable and
nondurable good manufacturing industries. All underlying series are seasonally adjusted and annualized. The
shaded vertical bar represents the 2007–2009 recession as dated by the NBER.




                                                      51
B     Model Appendix
The Model Appendix consists of three subsections. Subsection B.1 describes the model with het-
erogeneous firms and nominal rigidities, which is introduced in Section 5 of the main text. Sub-
section B.2 provides details surrounding the derivation of the log-linearized Phillips curve. And
Subsection B.3 contains simulations of our benchmark model under alternative calibrations.

B.1    Model with Firm Heterogeneity and Nominal Rigidities
This section describes the key aspects of our full model—that is, the model featuring heterogeneous
firms and nominal rigidities. Without loss of generality, we assume that there exist a finite number
of firm types indexed by k = 1, . . . , N . Firms of different types are characterized by varying degree
of operating efficiency, measured by the size of the fixed operating cost. Formally, the production
technology of firm i of type k is given by
                                                   α
                                            At
                                 yit =          hit    − φk ; 0 < α ≤ 1,                           (B-1)
                                            ait

where φk ≥ 0 denotes the fixed operating costs, which can take one of N -values from a set Φ =
{φ1 , . . . , φN }, with 0 ≤ φ1 < · · · < φN . The measure of firms of type k is denoted by Ξk , with
P N
  k=1 Ξk = 1. We assume that each type of firm faces the same distribution of the idiosyncratic
                                iid
cost shock ait —that is, log ait ∼ N (−0.5σ 2 , σ 2 ), for all i and k.
    The presence of quadratic adjustment costs incurred when firms change nominal prices modifies
the flow-of-funds constraint as
                                                           2
                                        γp       pit                          
                 0 = pit cit − wt hit −     πt          − π̄ ct − dit + ϕt min 0, dit .    (B-2)
                                        2      pi,t−1

The firm’s problem of maximizing the expected present discounted value of dividends then gives
rise to the following Lagrangian:
                       ∞
                                (                    α             
                      X                        At
               L = E0      m0,t dit + κit          hit     − φk − cit
                                               ait
                      t=0
                         "                                     2                        #
                                            γp         pit                        
                   + ξit pit cit − wt hit −       πt        − π̄ ct − dit + ϕt min 0, dit   (B-3)
                                            2        pi,t−1
                         "                          #                               )
                            pit −η θ(1−η)                                          
                   + νit            sit−1 xt − cit + λit ρsi,t−1 + (1 − ρ)cit − sit ,
                            p̃t




                                                  52
and the associated first-order conditions for type-k firms:
                       (
                           1             if dit ≥ 0
         dit :   ξit =                                                                                       (B-4)
                           1/(1 − ϕt ) if dit < 0;
                                     
                                  wt                 1−α
         hit :   κit = ξit ait            cit + φk α ;                                                       (B-5)
                                 αAt
                 Et νit = Et ξit pit − Eat κit + (1 − ρ)Eat λit ;
                   a           a
                                                                
         cit :                                                                                               (B-6)
                                                                                                   
                   a
                               a
                                                                               a
                                                                                            ci,t+1
         sit :   Et λit = ρEt mt,t+1 λi,t+1 + θ(1 − η)Et mt,t+1 Et+1 νi,t+1                             ;    (B-7)
                                                                                                sit
                                      Eat νit
                                                                                
                        a
                                                          πt           pit
         pit :   0 = Et ξit cit − η             cit − γp            πt         − π̄ ct                       (B-8)
                                         pit              pi,t−1       pi,t−1
                                                                                            
                                           a
                                                            pi,t+1          pi,t+1
                      + γp Et mt,t+1 Et+1 ξi,t+1 πt+1 2                 πt+1          − π̄ ct+1 .
                                                               pit             pit

   The presence of heterogeneous operating costs and nominal rigidities implies that the type-
specific external financing trigger is given by
                                                  "                          2 #
                       E              cit      At         γp       pit          ct
                      at (φk ) =             1      pit −     πt         − π̄        ,   (B-9)
                                               w
                                 (cit + φk ) α t          2      p i,t−1        c it


which allows us to express the first-order condition governing the behavior of dividends (equa-
tion B-4) as                       
                                      1            if ait ≤ aEt (φk )
                             ξit =                                                       (B-10)
                                      1/(1 − ϕt ) if ait > aEt (φk ).
Using equation (B-10), one can show that the expected shadow value of internal funds for firms of
type k is equal to
                                         1                            ϕt 
        Eat ξit |φk = Φ(ztE (φk )) +
                                                                                         
                                              1 − Φ(ztE (φk )) = 1 +        1 − Φ(ztE (φk )) ≥ 1,
                                       1 − ϕt                        1 − ϕt

where ztE(φk ) denotes the standardized value of aEt (φk ). Note that daEt (φk )/dφk < 0, which implies
        a
                 
that dEt ξit |φk /dφk > 0. In other words, firms with lower operating efficiency are more likely to
experience a liquidity shortfall and hence face a higher expected premium on external funds.

B.1.1     Aggregation
In the presence of firm heterogeneity, the nature of the symmetric equilibrium is modified. Specif-
ically, all firms with the same φk choose the same price level Pkt :
                                                  N
                                       Pit1−η =                        1−η
                                                  X
                                                        1(φi = φk ) × Pkt  .                                (B-11)
                                                  k=1

Aggregate inflation dynamics are then given by a weighted average of the N types of firms. Because
                        R         1/(1−η)
                           1
πt ≡ Pt /Pt−1 = 1/Pt−1 0 Pit1−η di          , we can use equation (B-11) to express the aggregate




                                                          53
inflation rate as
                                                                                                     1
                                                       N
                                             "Z                                                   # 1−η
                                                      1X
                                      1                                                 1−η
                          πt =                                1(φi = φk ) ×            Pkt  di
                                  Pt−1               0 k=1
                                                                                                   1
                                                 N
                                             "                                                  # 1−η
                                                                          1
                                      1
                                                                  Z
                                                          1−η
                                                 X
                              =                          Pkt                  1(φi = φk )di
                                  Pt−1                                0
                                                 k=1
                                                                        1
                                      N
                                  "                            1−η # 1−η
                                      X                  Pkt
                              =              Ξk
                                                         Pt−1
                                      k=1
                                                                                                    1
                                      N
                                  "                              1−η                     1−η # 1−η
                                      X                   Pkt                     Pk,t−1
                              =              Ξk                                                           .
                                                         Pk,t−1                   Pt−1
                                      k=1

Hence, the aggregate inflation rate is determined as a weighted-average of inflation rates of hetero-
geneous groups:
                                         "N                     1
                                                             # 1−η
                                              Ξk p1−η    1−η
                                           X
                                   πt =           k,t−1 πkt        ,                          (B-12)
                                                     k=1
where πkt ≡ Pkt /Pk,t−1 is a type-specific inflation rate and pkt ≡ Pkt /Pt is a type-specific relative
price. Note that the relative price pkt can no longer be equalized to one in the symmetric equi-
librium. The notion of a symmetric equilibrium is restricted to “within types,” that is, within
categories, and in equilibrium, there exists a non-degenerate distribution of relative prices.
    The following Phillips curve describes the inflation dynamics of the k-type firms:
                              Eat νkit |φk ckt
                                          
                       ckt
               0 = pkt     − η a               − γp πkt πt (πkt πt − π̄)
                       ct     Et ξkit |φk ct
                           "                                                             #      (B-13)
                                   Eat+1 ξki,t+1 |φk
                                                    
                                                                                    ct+1
                   + γp Et mt,t+1                   πk,t+1 πt+1 (πk,t+1 πt+1 − π̄)        .
                                      Eat ξkit |φk
                                         
                                                                                     ct

The same notion of the modified symmetric equilibrium can be applied to equilibrium output:
                                                     N
                                          cjit             1(φi = φk ) × cjkt .
                                                     X
                                                 =
                                                     k=1

Because the household sector is still characterized by a symmetric equilibrium, we can drop the
“j” superscript. The individual demand for products produced by firms with efficiency rank k is
then given by                               −η
                                            pkt      θ(1−η)
                                     ckt =          sk,t−1 xt ,                          (B-14)
                                             p̃t
where                                                                                  1
                                                     N
                                                 "                                  # 1−η
                                                                   θ(1−η)
                                                           Ξk p1−η
                                                     X
                                      p̃t =                    kt sk,t−1                    ;                 (B-15)
                                                     k=1
and
                                            
                                                 N
                                                                               !1− 1  1−1 1
                                                                                   η       η
                                                 X               ckt
                                  xt =                  Ξk      θ
                                                                                            .                (B-16)
                                                 k=1
                                                                sk,t−1


                                                                54
   Aggregate demand should then satisfy
                                                                                                     1
                                  N                                                                    1
                              "                                                                 #
                                                                                                    1− η
                                  X                                                     1− 1
                                        Ξk exp(0.5α(1 + α)σ 2 )hαkt − φk
                                          
                       ct =                                                                 η              ,   (B-17)
                                  k=1

while the type-specific conditional labor demand satisfies
                                                                                 1
                                                     ckt + φk                       α
                                        hkt   =                                         ,                      (B-18)
                                                exp(0.5α(1 + α)σ 2 )

with ht = N                                     2
          P
            k=1 hkt . (The term exp(0.5α(1 + α)σ ) is the expected value of 1/ait , which is strictly
greater than one due to Jensen’s inequality.)

B.1.2   Equilibrium Relative Prices in the Steady State
In the steady state, the Phillips curve (equation B-13) implies

                                                Ea νi |φk
                                                         
                                          pk = η a       .                                                   (B-19)
                                                E ξi |φk

From the first-order conditions for the habit stock (equation B-7), we have

                                 Ea λi |φk
                                          
                                               θ(1 − η)β Ea [νi |φk ]
                                           =                    .                                          (B-20)
                                 Ea ξi |φk      1 − ρβ Ea ξi |φk

Combining equations (B-19) and (B-20) yields

                                 Ea λi |φk
                                          
                                                  θ(1 − η)β
                                           = pk           .                                                  (B-21)
                                   a
                                  E ξi |φk        η(1 − ρβ)

In the steady state, the first-order conditions for labor input (equation B-5) and production scale
(equation B-6) together imply

               Ea νi |φk        Ea ξi ai |φk w                              Ea λi |φk
                                                                                 
                                                          1−α
                         =−                (ck + φk )  α  + pk + (1 − ρ) a      .     (B-22)
               Ea ξi |φk         Ea ξi |φk αA                               E ξi |φk

Substituting equations (B-19) and (B-21) into equation (B-22) yields

                                                   Ea ξi ai |φk w
                                                               
                                η(1 − ρβ)                                   1−α
                pk =                                 a
                                                                (ck + φk ) α .                               (B-23)
                      (η − 1)[(1 − ρβ) − θβ(1 − ρ)] E ξi |φk αA

   The type-specific external financing triggers in the steady state are given by
                                                               pk c k
                                                                    A
                                                aEk =                 , 1                                      (B-24)
                                                         (ck + φk ) w   α


while the consumption aggregators imply
                                                         −η    θ(1−η)
                                                               sk
                                                
                                         ck         pk
                                            =                   θ(1−η)
                                                                            ;   k 6= l,                        (B-25)
                                         cl         pl         sl

                                                               55
and                                                                                     1
                                                      N                                   1
                                                  "                                #
                                                      X                 1− 1         1− η

                                                            Ξk c1−θ
                                                                               η
                                          x=                    k                               .                          (B-26)
                                                      k=1
General equilibrium consistency conditions require
                                                                               1
                                                            N
                                                       "                    # 1−η
                                                                  Ξk p1−η
                                                            X
                                               1=                     k                ,                                   (B-27)
                                                            k=1

which is the steady-state version of equation (B-12), with π = πk = 1.
    The household j’s preferences over the habit-adjusted consumption bundle xjt and labor hjt are
given by the following (CRRA) utility function:

                                                            x1−θ x
                                                                     ζ
                                     U (xjt , hjt ) =         t
                                                                   −     h1+θh .
                                                            1 − θx 1 + θh t
The resulting market-clearing conditions associated with the labor and goods markets imply
                                                       w −θx
                                                          x  = ζhθh ,                                                      (B-28)
                                                       p̃
and                                                                                                              1
                                   N                                                                               1
                               "                                                                            #
                                                                                                                1− η
                                   X                                                                1− 1
                                         Ξk exp(0.5α(1 + α)σ 2 )hαk − φk
                                           
                          c=                                                                            η
                                                                                                                       ,   (B-29)
                                   k=1
respectively, where the type-specific conditional labor demand satisfies
                                                                                          1
                                                     c k + φk                               α
                                          hk =                                                      ,                      (B-30)
                                               exp(0.5α(1 + α)σ 2 )
with
                                                                  N
                                                                  X
                                                            h=          hk .                                               (B-31)
                                                                  k=1
   In the steady state, the deep-habit adjusted price index is given by
                                                                                      1
                                                      N
                                                  "                                # 1−η
                                                                    θ(1−η)
                                                            Ξk p1−η
                                                      X
                                           p̃ =                 k ck                            ,                          (B-32)
                                                      k=1

which is the steady-state version of equation (B-15). The system of equations (B-23)–(B-32) can
then be solved numerically for 4N + 5 variables: pk , ck , aEk , and hk , k = 1, . . . , N ; and x, w, p̃, h,
and c.

B.2    The Log-Linearized Phillips Curve
To derive the log-linearized Phillips curve (equation 26 in the main text), we use the first-order
condition with respect to pit (equation B-8), impose the symmetric equilibrium conditions (that is,
pit = 1 and cit = ct ), and log-linearize the resulting expression to obtain
                                                      1
                                                         (ν̂t − ξˆt ) + βEt π̂t+1 ,
                                                                                
                                         π̂t = −                                                                           (B-33)
                                                      γp

                                                                  56
where x̂t denotes the log-deviation of a generic variable xt from its deterministic steady-state
                                                                                        a   value
                                           ˆ                                    a
of x̄. In equation (B-33), the term ν̂t − ξt is the log-deviation of the ratio Et νit /Et ξit , which
measures the value of internal funds relative to that of marginal sales:

                              Eat νit         Eat κit           Eat λit
                                                                
                                   = 1 − a   + (1 − ρ) a   .                              (B-34)
                              Eat ξit         Et ξit            Et ξit

    Using the first-order condition with respect to hit (equation B-5), one can show that the first
two terms
        on   the right-hand side of equation (B-34) are equivalent to (µ̃t − 1)/µ̃t , where µ̃t ≡
    a       a
µt Et ξit /Et ξit ait is the financially adjusted markup. By iterating the first-order condition with
respect to the habit stock sit forward, the closed-form solution for the last term in equation (B-34)
is given by                                  "∞                                     #
                       Eat λit                             Eas ξi,s+1
                                                                    
                                              X                           µ̃s+1 − 1
                            = θ(1 − η)Et         β̃t,s+1                             ,       (B-35)
                       Eat ξit                               Eat ξit ]
                                                                
                                               s=t
                                                                             µ̃s+1
where
                                             s−t
                                             Y                             
                   β̃t,s+1 ≡ ms,s+1 gs+1 ×           ρ + θ(1 − η)(1 − ρ)gt+j mt+j−1,t+j
                                             j=1

denotes the growth-adjusted discount factor and gt ≡ ct /st−1 = (st /st−1 − ρ)/(1 − ρ).
   To obtain the term ν̂t − ξˆt in equation (B-33), we substitute equation (B-35) into equation (B-34)
and log-linearize the right-hand side of the resulting expression. The log-linearized Phillips curve
can then be expressed as
                                                    ∞
                                        "                             #
                              ω(η − 1)             X
                                                       χδ̃ s−t+1 µ̂s+1 + βEt π̂t+1 ]
                                                                              
                  π̂t = −                 µ̂t + Et
                                  γ                s=t
                                                     ∞
                               1                                   h                      i
                                                        χδ̃ s−t+1 (ξˆt − ξˆs+1 ) − β̂t,s+1 ,
                                                    X
                          + [η − ω(η − 1)] Et
                               γ                    s=t

where ω = 1 − βθ(1 − ρ)/(1 − ρβ) and δ̃ = β[ρ + θ(1 − η)(1 − ρ)].

B.3     Alternative Calibrations
This section conducts a sensitivity analysis of the model’s main results with respect to alternative
calibrations. First, we consider the sensitivity of the results reported in the main text to alternative
values of the following key parameters: (1) the elasticity of labor supply (θh ); (2) the elasticity of
substitution between differentiated goods (η); and (3) the strength of deep habits (θ). As noted in
the main text, our benchmark values for these parameters are θh = 5, η = 2, and θ = −0.80. As
an alternative, we consider three different calibrations: (1) lower labor supply elasticity: θh = 2;
(2) higher elasticity of substitution between differentiated goods: η = 4, and (3) less powerful deep-
habit mechanism: θ = −0.40. In each of the three alternatives, the remaining model parameters
are fixed at their benchmark values.
    Figure B-1 shows the dynamics of output and inflation under these alternative calibrations in
response to a financial shock, a disturbance that temporarily boosts the cost of external finance.
For comparison purposes, the solid lines depict the corresponding responses from the baseline
model (see Figure 7 in the main text). Imposing a significantly less elastic labor supply and a
considerably greater degree of substitution across goods leads to responses that are qualitatively
and quantitatively very similar to those implied by our baseline calibration. In contrast, halving the


                                                       57
strength of the deep-habit mechanism does attenuate the response of both output and inflation to
financial shocks. The latter finding should not be at all surprising given that the main propagation
mechanism emphasized in our paper involves the interaction of customer markets and financial
market frictions. Nevertheless, this calibration fully preserves the main conclusion of our model—
namely, that a temporary deterioration in the firms’ internal liquidity positions reduces the financial
capacity of the economy and directly shifts the Phillips curve upward.
    To see how γp , the parameter governing the degree of price stickiness in our model, maps to
a Calvo-style price setting, consider a standard New Keynesian Phillips curve (Woodford, 2003),
which relates current inflation πt to expected future inflation and a measure of aggregate marginal
costs mct , according to
                                      πt = βEt πt+1 + λmct + ut ,
where 0 < β < 1 is the discount factor, the parameter λ is a function of the structural parameters,
and ut is a random disturbance interpreted as a shock to firms’ markups. Specifically, in this setup,
λ = (1 − γc )(1 − βγc )/γc , where 0 < 1 − γc < 1 is the fraction of firms that are allowed to optimally
reset prices in each period.
    The above Phillips curve can also be derived under the assumption of quadratic adjustment
costs for nominal prices (Rotemberg, 1982), in which case λ = (η − 1)/γp , where η is the elasticity
of substitution within the Dixit-Stiglitz aggregator and γp is the parameter in the quadratic ad-
justment cost function. Our baseline calibration of η = 2 and γp = 10 thus implies that λ = 0.1.
With β close to 1, solving (1 − γc )2 /γc = 0.1 implies that γc = 0.73 or γc = 1.37. By assumption
0 < 1 − γc < 1, so our calibration of γp = 10 implies that 1 − γc = 0.27, or that about 27 percent
of firms reset their prices in each quarter.
    To show how differences in the degree of price stickiness affect the model dynamics in cases
where the economy is perturbed by a financial shock, Figure B-2 shows the responses of output and
inflation under two alternative values of γp . Again, for comparison purposes, the solid lines depict
the corresponding responses from the baseline model with γp = 10 (see Figure 7 in the main text).
According to these simulations, doubling the degree of nominal price rigidities (γp = 20) dampens
the response of both output and inflation to financial shocks; conversely, halving the degree of price
stickiness (γp = 5) implies a more pronounced reaction of both macroeconomic aggregates to such
disturbances.
    The economics underlying these differences are clear. Because of frictions in financial markets,
firms would like to increase prices in response to the adverse financial shock in order to preserve
internal liquidity. When prices are more rigid, however, firms find it more costly to raise prices. As a
result, the markup increases by less, and the response of output is significantly attenuated, relative
to a model with more flexible prices. These dynamics stand in stark contrast to those implied by
the typical New Keynesian models, in which an increased degree of nominal price stickiness leads
to a more volatile output.36 It is worth noting that these results apply only to changes in the
degree of price stickiness—an increase in nominal wage rigidities makes the firms’ cost structure
less flexible and hence amplifies the financial mechanism in our model.




  36
     Increased price flexibility, however, can be stabilizing in cases where monetary policy does not respond strongly
to inflation, a special case of which is the zero lower bound (Bhattarai et al., 2014).


                                                         58
                                         Figure B-1: Financial Shock
                                           (Alternative Calibrations)


(a) Output                                                          (b) Inflation
                                                   %                                                        %
                                                                                                                 1.6
                                                        0.0
                                                                                                                 1.2
                                                        -0.2
                                                                                                                 0.8
                                        Baseline        -0.4
                                     θh = 2
                                     η=4                                                                         0.4
                                     θ = -0.4           -0.6
                                                                                                                 0.0
                                                        -0.8
0            5         10          15              20               0          5     10         15          20

Note: Panel (a) of the figure depicts the model-implied responses of output to a temporary increase in the
time-varying equity dilution cost parameter ϕt , while panel (b) depicts the corresponding responses of inflation.
All responses are based on models featuring nominal rigidities and financial frictions, with the level of financial
frictions calibrated to a non-crisis situation (ϕ̄ = 0.3); see the main text for details.




                                         Figure B-2: Financial Shock
                                        (The Role of Nominal Rigidities)


(a) Output                                                          (b) Inflation
                                                   %                                                        %
                                                                                                                 2.0
                                                        0.0

                                                                                                                 1.5
                                                        -0.2

                                                        -0.4                                                     1.0

                                     γ p = 10           -0.6
                                     γp = 5                                                                      0.5
                                     γ p = 20
                                                        -0.8
                                                                                                                 0.0
0            5         10          15              20               0          5     10         15          20

Note: Panel (a) of the figure depicts the model-implied responses of output to a temporary increase in the time-
varying equity dilution cost parameter ϕt , while panel (b) depicts the corresponding responses of inflation. All
responses are based on models featuring financial frictions, with the level of financial frictions calibrated to a
non-crisis situation (ϕ̄ = 0.3); see the main text for details.




                                                               59
