NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE OPTIMAL DISTRIBUTION OF POPULATION ACROSS CITIES
David Albouy
Kristian Behrens
Frédéric Robert-Nicoud
Nathan Seegert
Working Paper 22823
http://www.nber.org/papers/w22823

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 2016

This paper merges and supersedes Albouy and Seegert (2012) and Behrens and Robert-Nicoud's
(2014) pieces. We are grateful to Vernon Henderson for his detailed and extremely valuable
comments. We are also grateful to Costas Arkolakis, Richard Arnott, Spencer Banzhaf, Morris
Davis, Klaus Desmet, Pablo Fajgelbaum, Patrick Kline, David Pines, Esteban Rossi-Hansberg,
Bernard Salanie, William Strange, Jacques Thisse, Tony Venables, Wouter Vermeulen, Dave
Wildasin, and numerous conference and seminar audiences for discussions and feedback. Albouy
would like to thank the Lincoln Institute for Land Policy for generous assistance on this project.
Behrens and Robert-Nicoud gratefully acknowledge financial support from the CRC Program of
the Social Sciences and Humanities Research Council SSHRC of Canada for the funding of the
Canada Research Chair in Regional Impacts of Globalization. The study has been funded by the
Russian Academic Excellence Project '5-100' and the Michigan Center for Local, State, and
Urban Policy (CLOSUP). The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2016 by David Albouy, Kristian Behrens, Frédéric Robert-Nicoud, and Nathan Seegert. All
rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without
explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

The Optimal Distribution of Population across Cities
David Albouy, Kristian Behrens, Frédéric Robert-Nicoud, and Nathan Seegert
NBER Working Paper No. 22823
November 2016
JEL No. H73,J61,R12
ABSTRACT
The received economic wisdom is that cities are too big and that public policy should limit their
sizes. This wisdom assumes, unrealistically, that city sites are homogeneous, migration is
unfettered, land is given freely to incoming migrants, and federal taxes are neutral. Should those
assumptions not hold, large cities may be inefficiently small. We prove this claim in a system of
cities with heterogeneous sites and either free mobility or local governments, where
agglomeration economies, congestion, federal taxation, and land ownership create wedges. A
quantitative version of our model suggests that cities may well be too numerous and
underpopulated for a wide range of plausible parameter values. The welfare costs of free
migration equilibria appear small, whereas they seem substantial when local governments control
city size.
David Albouy
Department of Economics
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
214 David Kinley Hall
Urbana, IL 61801-3606
and NBER
albouy@illinois.edu
Kristian Behrens
Département des sciences économiques
Université du Québec à Montréal
Case postale 8888, Succ. Centre-Ville
Montréal, (Québec) Canada H3C 3P8
behrens.kristian@uqam.ca

Frédéric Robert-Nicoud
HEC Lausanne
University of Lausanne
Internef
Quartier UNIL-Dorigny
CH 1015 Lausanne
Switzerland
frederic.robert-nicoud@unige.ch
Nathan Seegert
University of Utah
Department of Finance
Spencer Fox Eccles Business Bldg. Room 1113
1655 East Campus Center Drive
Salt Lake City, Utah 84112
nathan.seegert@gmail.com

1. Introduction
Cities define civilization and epitomize modernity, and yet the received economic wisdom is
that they are too big. Positive urban externalities — from better matching, greater sharing, and
quicker learning — give rise to agglomeration economies that create a centripetal attraction
to cities. These are countered by negative externalities — congestion, crime, pollution, and
disease — that create a centrifugal repulsion from cities. In the standard argument, negative
externalities come to dominate positive ones with city size. Free migration then causes cities to
become inefficiently large because migrants to cities do not pay for their increasingly negative
externalities. This view is presented as fact in any first course in urban economics, and it
is easily accepted as it reinforces ancient negative stereotypes of cities. Ultimately, this view
legitimizes policies that limit urban growth, such as land-use restrictions and disproportionate
governmental transfers towards rural areas.
We question the received wisdom and argue that large cities are likely to be too small for
either of two simple, but profound, reasons. First, fiscal externalities from federal taxes and
land purchases — which arise as individuals do not internalize the consequences of their
location decisions on revenues from taxes and land ownership — increase with city size, and
generally benefit non-migrants.1 Second, city sites are of heterogeneous quality, and incentives
are generally poor at allocating individuals efficiently across those sites, especially when local
authorities or interest groups have some control over in-migration.2 As a result, both the
intensive (number of cities) and extensive (size of cities) margins of urbanization are generally
inefficient: large cities on high-quality sites will be too small, and cities will be developed on
sites of quality inferior to that of an efficient urban system.
We reconcile conflicting intuitions on city sizes by demonstrating how our conclusions
depend on economic, fiscal, and institutional circumstances.3 Consider first the presence of
fiscal externalities. With fiscal externalities, migrants respond to incentives described by their
1 Fiscal

externalities from land purchases are mentioned in the work of Helpman and Pines (1980) and are
connected to the much discussed ‘Henry George Theorem’ in Vickrey (1977), Stiglitz (1977), and Arnott and
Stiglitz (1979). For reviews, see Vickrey (2002) and Arnott (2004), who states (p. 1072) that “Ricardian differences
in land” have not to his knowledge “been investigated in the literature.” Externalities from federal taxation are
discussed in Hochman and Pines (1997), and Albouy (2009, 2012). Ades and Glaeser (1995) argue that migrants
to capital cities, in particular, tend to absorb federal funds rather than contribute to them.
2 Heterogeneous sites are a first-order feature of the world according to the work of Haurin (1980), Roback
(1982), Redding and Sturm (2008), Bleakly and Lin (2012), Davis and Weinstein (2002), Behrens, Mion, Murata, and
Suedekum (2011), Desmet and Rossi-Hansberg (2013), Allen and Arkolakis (2014), and Albouy (2016). However,
first nature is only one aspect that determines the location of cities. See, e.g., Powell (2012) for a detailed
description of how local interest-group thinking and colonial settlement policy jointly influenced the location
of New Orleans on what is arguably an inferior site.
3 For arguments that cities are too large, see Harris and Todaro (1970), Tolley (1974), Arnott (1979), Upton
(1981), Abdel-Rahman (1988), and Fenge and Meier (2002). Formal reasoning on optimal systems of regions was
pioneered by Buchanan and Goetz (1972) and Flatters, Henderson, and Mieszkowski (1974); developed extensively
by Henderson (1974a), Vickrey (1977), and Stiglitz (1977); and given comprehensive treatments by Fujita (1989)
and Abdel-Rahman and Anas (2004).

1

private average benefit instead of the social average benefit. If externalities increase with city
size — as they do, e.g., with federal income taxes — the private average benefit of large cities
may peek at population levels below the one that maximizes social average benefit. Since a local
government would maximize the former, whereas a social planner would maximize the latter,
cities may be too small when local governments have the power to restrict in-migration and
extract rents for its incumbent residents. Fiscal and institutional circumstances — free-riding
of local governments in the presence of federal income taxes — then cause cities to be too small
and too numerous. If cities can enforce cooperation, they would all be better off by enforcing a
higher population level, which runs counter to the canonical argument that cities are too large.
Consider next heterogeneous city sites. Heterogeneity in site quality can also lead to cities
being too small, especially on good sites. The latter is again particularly likely when local
governments can control city populations. The reason is simple: at the social optimum,
the planner balances the supramarginal gains of migrants moving from inferior to superior
sites with the inframarginal losses of residents staying at those sites. The marginal losses for
residents at the sending and receiving sites are generally more than offset by the discrete gains
of the migrants moving from inferior to superior sites. This is obvious with local governments
that maximize incumbents’ rents. At the city optimum, population changes induce local
welfare losses that are of second-order importance, whereas the reallocation of population
towards superior sites has a first-order social welfare effect.
We illustrate our model and gauge its quantitative implications by applying it to U.S. data.
Our simulations suggest that large American cities may be undersized by about a third, causing
about twice too many sites to be developed and more than half of the U.S. urban population
to be misallocated. Despite that sizable misallocation, the ensuing welfare costs are equal to
only around 1% of real consumption in the free-migration equilibrium. The main reason for
this low elasticity of welfare costs to the scope of urban misallocation is that the urban system
operates at close to constant returns.4 Misallocation costs are substantially higher if migration
is impeded by city governments who care only about the welfare of their residents. In that
case, local politics may generate welfare costs of about 18% of real consumption. While the
data suggest that large U.S. cities may be too small, urban systems in developing countries
— where fiscal externalities appear slight and coordination problems more rampant — may
be more prone to over-urbanization, with cities on the best sites suffering from the greatest
overcrowding.
Our paper contributes to several strands of the literature. First, our approach yields a
comprehensive characterization of the full urban system, thereby revisiting and encompassing
the canonical work of Buchanan and Goetz (1972), Flatters, Henderson, and Mieszkowsi (1974),
and the extensive literature that followed these pioneering works (see footnote 3).
4 Behrens

et al. (2011), Desmet and Rossi-Hansberg (2013), and Behrens, Duranton, and Robert-Nicoud (2014)
also find that the elasticity of welfare costs to the scope of urban misallocation is fairly small with free migration.

2

Second, we complement work on the consequences of fiscal externalities on the fabric of
urban systems pioneered by Stiglitz (1977), Vickrey (1977), and others (see footnote 1) and
contemporaneously revisited by Eeckhout and Guner (2016) and Hsieh and Moretti (2016).
The efficient urban scale is zero in the latter models because there are decreasing returns to
urban scale at all city sizes. As a result, these settings feature an intensive margin only (how to
allocate population among an exogenously given number of cities). Like these authors, we find
that fiscal externalities may severely distort current urban systems. Our distinctive contribution
is to show that allowing for adjustment at the extensive margin (allowing the number of cities
to vary) adds new insights and qualifies several positive and normative results. Our setting
with an extensive margin is also more amenable to the analysis of urbanization in developing
countries, which arguably represents one of the great challenges of urbanization today.
Finally, variable returns to city size and the presence of an extensive margins prevent
us from using the tools pioneered by Allen and Arkolakis (2014) to characterize and solve
quantitative economic geography models such as Fajgelbaum, Morales, Suarez Serrato, and
Zidar (2015) or Redding (2016) that do not feature that margin. Our solution is to simplify
the geography by lumping any local production advantages of a city into a single parameter.
Under this simplifying assumption, we can solve for different allocations of people to cities
and characterize the positive and normative properties of those allocations.
The rest of the paper is structured as follows. Section 2 builds intuition and introduces
the model. Section 3 characterizes three different spatial allocations: (i) the optimal federal
allocation, which prevails when choices are made at the federal level; (ii) the local politics
allocation, which prevails when choices are made locally by city governments; and (iii) the
free migration allocations, which prevail when choices are made by unconstrained individuals.
Section 4 discusses how the different externalities can (or cannot) be internalized using federal
fiscal instruments and derives the optimal policy. Section 5 discusses our baseline calibration,
quantifies distortions in the city size distribution, and puts numbers on the welfare costs of
population misallocation across cities, with either free migration or city governments. Section 6
summarizes and concludes. A collection of appendices contains proofs, extensions, and data
descriptions.

2. An urban system with heterogeneous sites and fiscal externalities
2.1 Preview of the model
We develop our argument using a parsimonious model of urban systems that extends the
seminal work of Henderson (1974b). We depart from the canonical setting by adding heterogeneous sites and fiscal instruments, including land purchases, federal taxes, and discounts
to congestion and housing costs. To understand how adding either fiscal externalities or

3

heterogeneous sites to the canonical model can overturn a central result in urban economics,
consider first the basic argument explaining why cities are too large.

benefits

Figure 1: Benefits curves and coordination problem with homogeneous sites.

net private average (other cities at ni )

M small

•
P

•

I/O
•

large
•M

social marginal

observed benefit

social average

net private average (other cities at np )

np nsmall
m

nlarge
m

ni

City population(n)

As drawn in Figure 1, the benefits migrants receive from entering a city are equal to the
average, rather than the marginal, benefit associated with urban life. Analogously to the
efficient scale of a firm, the efficient population scale of a city is attained at point I/O, where
the social marginal and social average benefits coincide. Yet, migrants who respond to the
(social) average benefit enter a city until it equals that of an outside option — possibly from
the countryside or another city — shown here by the ‘observed benefit’ equilibrium line. As
equilibrium population levels are only stable when benefits are falling with city size (to the
right of ni ), population levels such as nlarge
are possible, while levels below the optimum, such
m
small
5
as nm , are ruled out. If all potential sites were identical, local governments would optimally
reduce their respective populations to ni , thereby raising the benefits of residents everywhere.
All existing cities are hence too large in equilibrium, and there are too few of them, which is
the standard result. In this paper, we extend that basic model in two directions and show how
each of them, and their interactions, give rise to fundamentally different results.
Consider first the presence of fiscal externalities. With fiscal externalities — or any other
kind of cross-city externality — migrants respond to incentives described by the dash-dotted
net private average benefits curve instead of the (social) average benefit in Figure 1. Assume
that the fiscal externalities are zero on net when all cities are the same size (through budget
balance), and that these externalities increase with city size. Therefore, private average benefits
are below social benefits when a city is larger than the others. As externalities increase with
city size, the private average benefit curve peaks to the left of point I/O. Hence, each local
5 Using

a similar reasoning, Knight (1924) already pointed out almost a century ago that free-access highways
tend to become overly congested.

4

government has an incentive to shrink its city population to the new peak np — which is to
the left of the optimum ni — thereby free-riding off the benefits from other cities. If all city
governments lower their population to np , the reduction in fiscal externalities shifts the net private average benefit curve down. At the resulting equilibrium, point P , which achieves budget
balance, residents everywhere are worse off. Free-riding of local governments causes cities to
be too small and too numerous. If cities can enforce cooperation, they would all be better off by
enforcing a higher population level, ni , which runs counter to the canonical argument that cities
are too large. With free migration by atomistic agents and fiscal externalities, all population
levels to the right of np are potentially stable, provided other cities are of the same size. While
cities may be too large, at nlarge
, they may also be too small, at size nsmall
. A priori the social
m
m
average benefit curve is unobserved: we do not know if it is upward or downward sloping at
an observed population and benefit level. Without further information, we do not know if the
population is to the left or right of the optimum.
Figure 2: Population split between superior (1) and inferior (2) sites.

I1

social average 2

•

•

•

◦
•

I2

O1

social average 1

benefits

benefits

social marginal 1

• M1
O2

social marginal 2

• M2
n1 = 0

n1i

=

n1p

n1∗

n2 = 0

Consider next heterogeneous city sites. Heterogeneity in site quality can also lead to cities
being too small, particularly when city populations are constrained by local governments.
Consider an example with two cities — and no fiscal or other cross-city externalities — in
a classic ‘bucket’ diagram in Figure 2. Distance from the left vertical axis represents the
population in city 1, whereas the remaining population — given by the distance to the right
vertical axis — lives in city 2. As seen by its higher benefit curve, city 1 is located on a
superior site to that of city 2, e.g., a natural harbor on an ocean shore versus a landlocked
location in a scorching desert. Say that, by coincidence, with city governments, the cities are
each at the peak of their social average benefit (denoted sab) at I1 and I2 , with the population
divided equally between the two: n1p = n1i = n2p = n2i . Yet, the social optimum is where the social
5

marginal benefit (denoted smb) curves cross at points O1 and O2 , where city 1 is larger than city 2:
n1∗ > n2∗ . The optimum balances the supramarginal gains of migrants with the inframarginal
losses of residents. The marginal losses for residents at sites 1 and 2 (the decrease along
the benefits curve due to in- or out-migration) are more than offset by the discrete gains
of the migrants moving from the inferior site 2 to the superior site 1 (the upwards jump
between the benefits curves due to site switching). From the point of view of local voters,
the better site is over-populated at O1 , whereas the worse site is under-populated at O2 . Thus,
benefit-maximizing voters in city 1 would vote to curb migration since they bear the costs of
those moves. Note, however, that free migration could still lead to city 1 being overcrowded
and city 2 to be uninhabited, at points M1 and M2 , respectively.
The foregoing simple examples consider separately fiscal externalities or two heterogeneous
sites. Moving to a general city-systems model that allows for both fiscal wedges and numerous
heterogeneous sites is a demanding task (Henderson, 1988), particularly when cities have bellshaped benefit curves. We approach the problem by taking site heterogeneity as continuous
— following the pioneering work of Aumann (1964) — and using concrete functional forms.6
The latter involve reduced forms of urban externalities, with economies and diseconomies
changing with the scale of a city at constant rates. Specific functional forms aid our analysis
in several ways. First, they transparently reveal the core economic mechanisms at work and
uncover the subtle interactions among them. Second, they enable us to easily compare different
economic parametrizations, reflecting a range of estimates on agglomeration economies and
diseconomies in the literature. They provide a unified framework within which to revisit
findings in urban and public economics, such as how efficient population allocations equalize
social marginal returns across space.7 The simplified but varied policy parameters allow us to
incorporate competing effects of federal taxation, payments to land, benefits to owner-occupied
housing, and congestion charges, all of which can vary tremendously across urban systems in
different countries. The presence of the extensive margin of urbanization also makes our model
relevant for applications to developing countries, where both the growth of existing cities and
the formation of new cities are important drivers of current urban change.
2.2 Urban production, site heterogeneity, and agglomeration
Having distilled the intuitions of our key results, we now more fully lay out the model. The
economy comprises a mass N of homogeneous worker-households, or agents, to be allocated
in a spatial economy. The economy is made of various cities with a total urban population
6 On

his assumption of a continuum of traders, Aumann (1964, p.41) writes: “The idea of a continuum of
traders may seem outlandish to the reader. Actually, it is no stranger than a continuum of prices or of strategies
or a continuum of ‘particles’ in fluid mechanics.” We assert that a continuum of cities is conceptually no stranger
than a continuum of traders.
7 Examples include Flatters et al. (1974), Arnott and Stiglitz (1979), Kanemoto (1980), Henderson (1988), and
Abdel-Rahman and Anas (2004).

6

of N, and a rural area, with a population N R . By definition, N ≡ N + N R . Sites that can
host cities are given a measure of one, and are heterogeneous in that they are not all equally
amenable to urban production.8 More precisely, we denote by a ∈ A ≡ [a, a] ⊆ R + the
local exogenous production amenity. It is distributed according to the twice differentiable
cumulative distribution function G(·) over the interval A, which may be unbounded. The
(largely unexplored) extensive margin of urban systems is important for the analysis when the
worst developed site is better than a. In that case, there is room to develop additional cities.
Note that our analysis does not require an upper bound, i.e., a = ∞, accommodating many
distributions, such as the Pareto and Log-normal. While differentiability of the distribution
rules out mass points — as implied by Figure 2 — our results cover multi-peaked distributions
and the limiting homogeneous site case in Figure 1 where a = a so that A reduces to a singleton.
In what follows, we refer to a city with productivity a as ‘city a’ for short. The population of a
single city is denoted n. The gross output of a worker in city a is given by w (n, a) = anǫ , where
nǫ is a scale effect external to the representative firm, parameterizing the elasticity of output
with respect to city size. We are agnostic about the precise microeconomic foundations of
these agglomeration economies.9 The representative firm uses labor only, is perfectly competitive,
produces under constant returns to scale, and trades freely across cities. This makes the traded
good a natural choice as the numéraire. Total city production is given by an1+ǫ , implying a
social marginal product of (1 + ǫ)anǫ . The firm only captures the average social product, anǫ .
2.3 Urban costs and land
Urban dwellers work and consume two goods: the traded good, x, and land, l. One unit of land
is essential and utility increases linearly in the consumption of x. Thus, utility is u(l, x) = I (l )x,
where I (l ) = 1 if l ≥ 1 and I (l ) = 0 if l < 1. Hence, in equilibrium, utility is u(x) = x.
Costly commuting and scarce land mean that urban costs increase with city size.10 We
assume that total urban costs are given by n1+γ , where the parameter γ > 0 characterizes
urban diseconomies of scale. The difference, γnγ , between social marginal costs (1 + γ )nγ
and social average costs nγ provides the per-capita (differential) shadow-price of land in the
8 We

can extend the model to allow for sites that differ in (additive) amenities and congestion cost levels. As
this is not necessary to our main argument, we alleviate notation by focusing just on heterogeneous sites in terms
of productivity. Results with heterogeneous quality-of-life are available upon request.
9 Agglomeration economies include knowledge spillovers and human capital externalities that are the engine
of modern economic growth (Lucas, 1988; Romer, 1990). Duranton and Puga (2004) survey a wide class of models
that deliver this reduced form via sharing, matching, and learning mechanisms. The evidence for agglomeration
economies is surveyed in Combes and Gobillon (2015).
10 We follow the seminal work of Alonso (1964), Muth (1969), and Mills (1967) in taking urban costs as a
combination of costly commuting and competition over accessible land (see Duranton and Puga, 2015, for a
modern synthesis). It is restrictive, yet standard in the literature, to assume that all urban diseconomies are
related to land values. Pollution and noise are, for example, pure diseconomies that affect the city as a whole but
do not directly show up in land values (other than by influencing city size via migration).

7

city.11 We impose γ > ǫ in order to ensure that urban costs come to dominate agglomeration
economies as cities grow large. This implies that optimal and equilibrium city sizes are finite.
Taking the social product net of urban costs, we characterize the social average benefit as
sab(n, a) = anǫ − nγ , and the social marginal benefit as:
smb(n, a) = (1 + ǫ)anǫ − (1 + γ )nγ .

(1)

2.4 Land ownership and federal taxation
To determine equilibrium allocations, an important (and often hidden) assumption addresses
who claims land rents generated in the city. We let ρ define the share of the land value γnγ
that a migrant purchases, on the margin, to inhabit the city. It is fairly general to assume that
land payments accrue to the federal government, and are rebated lump-sum to all individuals.
The case of ρ = 1 is standard in a Roback (1982) equilibrium, while ρ = 0 is the most frequent
assumption in the optimal-city size literature. As migrants are rarely given land in the location
they move to, a value of ρ closer to one seems realistic for modeling migration. A lower value
may be justified if property rights for land are weak — whereby migrants ‘squat’ on land, as
in many developing countries (Jimenez, 1984) — or if land rents are collected through local
property taxes at a rate 1 − ρ, and redistributed through perfectly rival public goods.12 A
key observation is that the purchase of land, ργnγ , is a private cost to migrants but, unlike
commuting, is not a social cost. They are a transfer to another party whose receipt of the
transfer does not depend on her residence, making them a positive fiscal externality in the
urban system.
We assume the federal government taxes nominal wages at a uniform rate τ ≤ 1.13 We
11 The

Alonso-Muth-Mills monocentric model is the classic way to deliver such urban costs (Fujita, 1989;
Duranton and Puga,
p 2015). Our expression for urban costs fixes a choice of units. Consider a radial monocentric
city, with radius n/(dΘ ), where d is density and Θ is the arc of expansion. Set per-unit commuting costs as t,
and assume that commuting costs at distance z from the central business district are tz 2γ . Land rent leaves agents
indifferent between locations within a linear city. The differential land rent — normalizing land values at the city
fringe to zero — is given by R(z ) = t{[n/(dΘ )]γ − z 2γ }. This implies Aggregate Urban Costs, Aggregate Land
Rent, and Aggregate Commuting Costs of:
AUC =

t
n1 + γ ,
d1+γ Θγ

ACC =

1
AUC and
1+γ

ALR =

γ
AUC,
1+γ

with ALR + ACC = AUC. We set t = d1+γ Θγ by choice of units to obtain our expression for aggregate urban
costs. The normalization of a in numéraire production causes it to be in proportion to such transportation costs.
12 If squatters tend to live near the urban fringe, a positive value of ρ may still be justified. The literature on the
Henry George Theorem is in fact predicated on values of ρ = 0 and perfectly non-rival public goods. Yet, most
public services such as schools, roads, and police seem largely rival, in accordance with a central assumption of
Tiebout (1956). In the presence of local politics, we may alternatively interpret ρ as the political strength of specific
special interest groups, as discussed in subsection 3.2.
13 We follow Albouy (2009) in assuming that the progressivity of the tax schedule is a secondary concern for
earners. The numeric model of Eeckhout and Guner (2015) pursues the importance of tax progressivity and takes
a different stance on landownership.

8

further assume that urban costs are discounted at a uniform rate δ ≤ 1. This accounts for how
housing and commuting both receive implicit (and sometimes explicit) subsidies, e.g., from
the non-taxation of commuting time and implicit rental income of owner-occupiers. We use a
single rate, noting that discount rates to commuting are often similar to those for land.
We assume that all federal tax and land revenues are rebated lump-sum, so that everyone
receives a net payment T . These payments are independent of location, although they could
be indexed. A benefit of our closed system — where all fiscal revenues are redistributed — is
that all social benefits are internal to the system. Our normative results hence do not depend
on how welfare weights are assigned to absentee landlords or others.
2.5 Externalities within and across cities
Assembling the ingredients laid out in the foregoing, the utility an individual receives from
residing in city a of size n is equal to
u(n, a) = (1 − τ )anǫ − (1 − δ )nγ − ρ(1 − δ )γnγ + T ≡ pab(n, a) + T .

(2)

The first term is the after-tax wage; the second, the after-discount average commuting cost; the
third, the after-discount land payment; and the fourth, a uniform rebate given lump-sum to
each urban resident. The sum of the first three terms in (2) is the (gross) private average benefit
(denoted pab) of residing in city a of size n. The transfer transforms this into a net measure and
does, by definition, not affect location choices. It is determined by the entire urban system.
Externalities per capita are found by differencing the social marginal benefit of being in city
a from the private average benefit of being there:
smb(n, a) − pab(n, a) = ǫanǫ − γnγ + τ anǫ + ρ(1 − δ )γnγ − δnγ .
| {z } |
{z
}
smb−sab

sab−pab

The first term, smb − sab, expresses the standard urban externalities from agglomeration and
congestion within cities, independent of policies. This is the wedge considered in most of the
literature, and our approach acknowledges how it varies with amenities a and population n.
The second term, sab − pab, expresses fiscal externalities across cities due to federal taxes
and land payments, net of discounts. This externality increases with n for most standard
values, meaning that urban growth provides positive externalities to the economy. It exists
even without explicit federal policy, so long as migrants must purchase some land, i.e., if
τ = δ = 0 and ρ > 0.14
14 If

there are specific interest groups, such as incumbent homeowners, and if city size is determined by a
political voting process, 1 − ρ may be viewed as the share of local voters who (may) benefit from higher land
values, as in Fischel’s (2002) ‘homevoter hypothesis.’ Under this interpretation, the larger is ρ, the more powerful
are migrants relative to incumbents, and the smaller is the private efficient scale for a city.

9

Cities in isolation exhibit positive but finite efficient scales. The fiscal parameters create
a wedge between the sizes, ni and np , that maximize social and private average benefits,
respectively (see Figure 1). Some basic properties of efficient city scales that will be useful
in what follows are summarized in the following lemma:
Lemma 1 (Properties of efficient city scales) In the social (equation (1)) and private (equation (2))
frameworks above, cities exhibit unique social and private efficient scales, ni (a) and np (a), determined
by smb [ni (a), a] = sab [ni (a), a] and pmb [np (a), a] = pab [np (a), a], respectively. These scales exhibit
the following properties:
(i) Population size: The private efficient scale is a multiple of the social efficient scale. More precisely:
ni (a) =



ǫ
a
γ



1
γ −ǫ

and

1

np (a) = ni (a)Φ γ −ǫ ,

where

Φ≡

1−τ
> 0.
(1 − δ )(1 + ργ )

(3)

(ii) Utility benefits: Efficient scales yield benefits sabi (a) ≡ sab[ni (a), a] and pabp (a) ≡ pab[np (a), a]
given by


γ
γ
γ
and pabp (a) = (1 − δ ) (1 + ργ )
− 1 [ni (a)]
− 1 [np (a)]γ .
(4)
sabi (a) =
ǫ
ǫ

(iii) Relative size: The elasticity of both efficient scales to site productivity, a, are constant, positive,
and equal to 1/(γ − ǫ). Using hat notation, b
x = dx(a)/x, we have
n
bi = n
bp =

1
b
a,
γ−ǫ

c i = pab
cp =
and sab

γ
b
a > 0.
γ −ǫ

(5)

Proof The proof is immediate from smb [ni (a),a] = sab [ni (a),a] and from pmb [np (a),a] =
pab [np (a),a] , and by using the definitions in the text.
Part (i) of Lemma 1 establishes that efficient scales naturally increase with site quality a.
They also increase with agglomeration economies, ǫ, and decrease with urban diseconomies, γ.
The ratio of these elasticities, γ/ǫ, equals the ratio of average urban benefits to costs, either
anǫ /nγ or Φanǫ /nγ . The parameter bundle Φ — which collects fiscal and landownership
parameters — reflects the private benefit-to-cost ratio relative to the social one. When Φ < 1,
the private efficient scale, np (a), falls short of the socially efficient scale, ni (a). Part (ii) shows
that benefits are a multiple of urban costs, nγ . Finally, part (iii) shows that np and up increase
at constant rates in a: better sites host larger cities and offer larger benefits to their residents.
2.6 The non-urban sector
Our model features an extensive margin of urbanization by allowing for an endogenous
number of cities. Yet, if all agents are assumed to live in cities, then the model is silent on the
issue of ‘urbanization’ in general, which is especially important when thinking of developing
10

countries. We introduce a rural sector in order to address the issue of overall urbanization, and
to close the model in a general fashion. The rural population, N R ≡ N − N produces the
traded good (from agriculture) using a concave technology X R = F (N R ). Rural workers earn
the competitive wage wR = F ′ (N R ). The omitted factor, agricultural land, LR , receives the
remaining product, F − N R F ′ (N R ). A fraction ρR of land rents from agriculture is collected
by a ‘federal land trust’, while 1 − ρR is distributed to agricultural workers. Let τ R be the tax
on the agricultural wages, and T R be a transfer. The net-of-tax income a rural migrant receives
is then uR (N R ) = (ρR − τ R )F ′ + (1 − ρR )F /N R + T R .
We assume weakly positive but diminishing returns of adding people to the countryside:


′
F (N ) ≥ 0 and F ′′ (N ) ≤ 0 for N ∈ 0, N . For concreteness, assume the agricultural
production function takes a constant-elasticity-of-substitution (ces) form:
h
iσ/(1−σ )
X R = aR N R (1 − α) + α(LR /N R )(1−σ )/σ
,

(6)

where aR ≥ 0, α ≥ 0, and σ ≥ 0 are scale, distribution, and substitution parameters,
respectively. Two important limiting cases are covered with ρR = 1. The first case is when
the rural population is fixed, corresponding to perfect complementarity, i.e., σ → 0. The
second is that of an outside option uR which is of a constant value, corresponding to perfect
substitution σ → ∞. In general, the rural sector provides a supply curve of urban population,
and may be as elastic as circumstances merit.

3. Three urban allocations
We now turn to the allocation of people between the urban system and the rural area, as well
as their allocation within the urban system. The question is to determine: (i) the rural-urban
population split (the extent of urbanization); (ii) which sites host cities (the extensive margin of
urban development); and (iii) how many urban dwellers are allocated to each of these cities
(the intensive margin of urbanization). We characterize three different allocations:
1. The centralized optimum (indexed with ∗), i.e., the one that a federal central planner would
choose, taking into account site heterogeneity. This allocation can be implemented, under
certain conditions, by competitive land developers;
2. The local politics allocation (indexed with p), i.e., when city sizes are chosen at the city level
by uncoordinated local governments who can restrict in-migration; and
3. The free migration equilibria (indexed with m), i.e., when households make individual
location decisions based on private incentives. Although there are multiple equilibria
in that case, we focus on a constrained-efficient equilibrium.

11

In what follows, the subscripts for the centralized optimum, the local politics allocation,
and free-migration equilibria are given by ‘∗’, ‘p’, and ‘m’, respectively. Each of these three
allocations z ∈ {∗, p, m} is a mapping nz : a ∈ A → R + that satisfies the population adding-up
constraint:
Z a
N=

a

nz (a)dG(a)

and N R + N = N.

(7)

3.1 Centralized optimum allocation
The federal planner’s problem is to maximize aggregate consumption of the numéraire good
in the spatial economy by setting the intensive, n∗ (a), and extensive, a∗ , margins of the urban
system, as well as the degree of urbanization, N∗ . All agents have a constant and identical
marginal utility of income. Hence, utility is transferable, and uniform transfers do not affect
location (Mirrlees, 1982). The problem of the federal planner is to optimize the following
Lagrangian:
"
#
Z a
Z a

L ≡ F (N R ) +

n(a) [ an(a)ǫ − n(a)γ ] dG(a) + µ N − N R −

a∗

n(a)dG(a) .

a∗

(8)

The first-order condition with respect to µ yields the population adding-up constraint in
equation (7). The first-order condition for the optimal rural population, N R , is given by
µ∗ ≥ F ′ (N∗R ),

N∗R ≥ 0,

(9)

while the first-order conditions for the optimal city sizes, n(a), are characterized by
smb[n∗ (a), a] ≡ a(1 + ǫ)n∗ (a)ǫ − (1 + γ )n∗ (a)γ ≤ µ∗ , n∗ (a) ≥ 0.

(10)

Equation (10) states that the social marginal benefit of residing in any city must be equal across
all occupied sites (Flatters et al., 1974). It equals µ∗ — the Lagrange multiplier evaluated at the
(highest) optimal value — which itself equals the marginal benefit in the rural area from (9).
Each case has complementary slackness. While complementary slackness is not crucial in
(9) because we assume that there is an interior rural-urban split, it is more interesting and
important in (10) since not all sites need to develop cities. The first-order condition for the
optimal extensive margin of urban development, a∗ , yields

γ
− 1 ni (a∗ )γ = ui (a∗ ).
(11)
µ ∗ = a∗ n∗ (a∗ )ǫ − n∗ (a∗ )γ ≤
ǫ
In addition, observe that by the envelope theorem,
∂
(12)
L (n∗ (a), µ ∗ )
∂N
holds at the optimal allocation. In words, the social marginal value of population equals both
agricultural productivity and urban productivity net of urban costs.
We may now show our first set of results describing the centralized optimum allocation:
µ∗ =

12

Lemma 2 (Structure of the centralized optimum allocation) There exists a unique solution to
equations (9), (10), and (11), which characterizes the optimal allocation. In particular:
(i) Extent of urbanization: There exists a unique urban population size N∗ ∈ [0, N ];
(ii) Urban extensive margin: There exists a unique threshold a∗ ∈ A such that
N∗ =

Z

a

n∗ (a)dG(a),

a∗

n∗ (a) > 0

for all

a ≥ a∗ ,

and n∗ (a) = 0 otherwise;

(iii) Minimum city size: the optimal size of the smallest city is no smaller than its efficient scale, i.e.,
n∗ (a∗ ) = k ∗



ǫ
a∗
γ



1
γ −ǫ

= k∗ ni (a∗ ),

k∗ ≥ 1,

(13)

with k∗ = 1 if a > a. The worst site developed is at its efficient scale unless all sites are occupied;
(iv) Urban intensive margin: For all a > a∗ , the optimal city size n∗ (a) is increasing in a, with
n
b∗
1
Γ
=
> 0,
b
a
γ (n∗ /ni )γ −ǫ − Φ∗

where Γ ≡

γ
Φ∗
ǫ

and Φ∗ =

1+ǫ
;
1+γ

(14)

(v) Implicit solution: The optimal solution n∗ = n∗ (a) is implicitly determined by the equation


a
a∗



γ
γ −ǫ

Γ k∗ǫ − k∗γ
,
=
Γ (n∗ /ni )ǫ − (n∗ /ni )γ

(15)



for n∗ /ni ∈ 1, Γ 1/(γ −ǫ) . For all a > a∗ , n∗ (a) is (weakly) larger than its efficient scale, ni (a), and
lower than the size with zero marginal net production: n0 (a) ≡ (aΦ∗ )1/(γ −ǫ) .
Proof See Appendix A.1.
Part (i) of Lemma 2 first establishes that there is a unique rural-urban population split that
pins down the extent of urbanization. Part (ii) states that there is a minimal site quality, a∗ , with
all inferior sites undeveloped. Unless all sites are occupied, the inferior site is at its efficient
scale ni (a∗ ) in (3) by part (iii), in analogy with producer theory. Part (iv) establishes the relative
size of cities on sites of quality superior to a∗ , expressed in elasticity form. It also shows that,
as expected, city size is increasing in site quality a. Last, the implicit solution for n∗ (a) is seen
in (v), expressed as a ratio to ni (a) as introduced in Lemma 1.
Figure 3 illustrates properties of an optimal allocation with productivity a1 > a2 > a3 .
For each city, j, the social marginal benefit curve, smbj , intersects the average benefit curve,
sabj , at the social efficient scales nji . The optimal sizes, nj∗ with equal social marginal benefits
are (weakly) larger than nji . Furthermore, the gap between nji — the top of the ∩-curves —
and nj∗ — which equalizes the social marginal benefits across cities — increases with a: the
agglomeration distortion is worse for better sites. In the centralized optimum allocation, superior
13

Benefits

Figure 3: Centralized optimum city sizes and socially efficient scales.
sabp (a) = smbp (a)

smb1
smb2

I1

I2

smb3

•

O3 /I3•

sab∗ (a)

•

O1

•

O2

•
◦

◦

sab3

n3∗ = n3i n2i n1i n2∗

µ∗ = smb∗ (a)

sab2

n1∗

sab1
City population (n)

Population size, n (log scale)

Figure 4: Optimal populations, n∗ (a), and productivity, a, with and without an extensive margin.
Optimum: high population, N2
all sites crowded, n∗ (a)

Optimum: low population, N1
some sites uninhabited, n∗ (a)

Efficient scale: ni (a)

Productivity of site, a (log scale)

sites are pushed beyond their efficient scale to benefit outsiders. From an isolated point-ofview, everyone believes their city is “too big” — the more so the bigger is the city — although
globally it is not.
Figure 4 further illustrates properties of the optimum. The socially efficient scale, ni (a),
increases with a at a constant rate of 1/(γ − ǫ). The optimal population, n∗ (a), increases at
a much greater, albeit declining rate. At reasonably low population levels, N1 , some sites are
uninhabited. As N rises, more sites are inhabited, and populations on all inhabited sites rise:
urbanization proceeds along the intensive and extensive margins. With a very high urban
population N2 > N1 , all sites become occupied, and all are crowded beyond ni (a), as the
extensive margin is shut down. Observe that the elasticity of city size to amenities a falls
throughout the urban system as worse sites are progressively put into use. As the urban
system runs out of sites, the city size distribution tends to become more even.
14

We now turn to the welfare properties of the optimal allocation.
Proposition 1 (Welfare in the centralized optimum allocation) The normative properties of the
optimal allocation characterized by equations (9), (10), and (11) when a∗ > a are the following:
(i) Urban benefits: For a ≥ a∗ , the social marginal benefit is constant at
smb [n∗ (a), a] = µ∗ = ui (a∗ ) = F ′ (N∗R ),

(16)

while social average benefits increase with site quality a as follows:
1 Γ − Φ∗ (n∗ /ni )γ −ǫ
≥ µ∗ ,
sab∗ (a) ≡ sab [n∗ (a), a] = µ∗
1 + ǫ Γ − (n∗ /ni )γ −ǫ

sab′∗ (a) ≥ 0;

(ii) Decreasing returns of the economy: The economy as a whole features decreasing returns with
respect to population
L∗
∂ L∗
>
= µ∗ ;
N
∂N
(iii) Decreasing returns of the urban system: For any given rural population N R , the urban system
exhibits decreasing returns, i.e., the social marginal benefit of urban dwellers is below the social average
benefit. The decreasing returns occur at both the intensive and the extensive margins:
da∗
<0
dN

and

dn∗ (a)
> 0 for all a > a∗ .
dN

Proof See Appendix A.2.
Part (i) of Proposition 1 establishes that urban benefits and congestion increase in a, as
described in Figure 4. Parts (ii) and (iii) establish that there are decreasing returns to the
economy in general — and to the urban system in particular — for all values of N and N,
which is illustrated in Figure 5. This bucket diagram plots the urban share of the population,
N /N , as the distance from the left axis and the rural share, N R /N , as the distance from the
right. Social average and marginal benefits of the urban system fall with the urban share, while
rural average and marginal benefits rise, as derived from the ces function (6). The intersection
of urban and rural marginal benefit curves determines the optimal degree of urbanization, N∗ ,
and the marginal benefit of urbanization, µ∗ .
3.2 Local politics allocation
Consider next the allocation that arises if city governments maximize the average utility of their
residents, ignoring the consequences of their choices for potential migrants. Local authorities
have the power to exclude people either directly — by using urban growth boundaries and
other controls — or indirectly — by using land-use regulations that impose a ‘regulatory tax’
on potential newcomers (Glaeser, Gyourko, and Saks, 2005). Then, local authorities expand
15

Per capita benefit

Figure 5: Benefits of an optimal urban system, and the extent of urbanization.

Optimal urban smb

Optimal rural sab

M
Optimal urban sab

Efficient scale sab

◦

P

O

◦

Optimal rural smb

◦

Share of population in the urban system

their city only as long as the benefits of doing so outweigh the costs, meaning that they choose
the privately efficient scale, np (a), described in Lemma 1.
We assume that only the best sites are populated in the local politics allocation, namely,
there exists ap ∈ A such that np (a) > 0 if and only if a ≥ ap and np (a) = 0 otherwise. With
migration limited, cities offer different returns, and if all sites are occupied (i.e., ap = a), the
rural sector may offer a lower return than the worst city. The following conclusions ensue:
Proposition 2 (Normative properties of the local politics allocation) Assume that local governments maximize the average utility of their residents. If some sites are unoccupied at the optimum, i.e.,
a∗ > a, then:
(i) If Φ < 1, large cities are undersized and there are too many cities. The excess small cities are oversized
by virtue of existing;
(ii) If Φ = 1, the optimum is achieved if sites are homogeneous. With site heterogeneity, there are too
many cities, with large cities being undersized and small cities being oversized;
(iii) If 1 < Φ < Γ , there are too few cities that are all oversized if sites are homogeneous. With site
heterogeneity, small cities are oversized, there are (generically) too many or too few cities, and large cities
are undersized if a < ∞.
(iv) If Φ ≥ Γ , there are too few cities and all cities are oversized.
(v) Urban benefits: In all cases, urban benefits increase with a as a constant multiple of urban costs.
Private average benefits increase with a according to pabp (am ) defined in (4).
Proof See Appendix A.3.
Several comments are in order. First, Proposition 2 is stated for the case where some sites are
left unoccupied. If all sites are occupied at the optimum, a∗ = a, then Proposition 2 still holds if
16

1/(γ −ǫ)

< 1 in the cases above. In words, when all sites are occupied, larger
we replace 1 with k∗
cities are quite naturally less likely to be undersized than when some sites are left vacant.
Second, in the absence of fiscal externalities, Φ = 1, local politics allocate the efficient scale
to each city, i.e., ni (a) = np (a). With homogeneous sites, the classic “Henry George Theorem”
(Flatters et al., 1974; Vickrey, 1977; Arnott and Stiglitz, 1979) holds and land rents are equal
to the value of each city’s positive economies. With heterogeneous sites, this theorem breaks
down: at the optimum, land rents exceed those economies in all but the smallest city. At their
minimum efficient scale, ni (a), large cities with a > a∗ are undersized, while sites with a = a∗
are just the right size. The excess population due to restricted entry into larger cities is put
into sites that would not otherwise exist, and those cities are therefore ‘oversized’ by virtue of
existing. Thus site heterogeneity is sufficient to overturn a central result in urban economics.
This is generally made worse with the extensive margin or fiscal externalities.
Which case of Proposition 2 is the most plausible one? The case where Φ < 1 appears to
describe modern oecd economies, where tax and land payments resulting from agglomeration
are high relative to congestion discounts. This then reduces the private benefit of urbanization
below its social value. In that case, the private efficient scale is below the social one, i.e.
np (a) < ni (a), and thus by transitivity, the local politics population is lower than the optimal
one, n∗ (a). Additional population is then pushed out onto inferior sites, which are over-sized
by virtue of existing. If 1 < Φ < Γ , local incentives to stay small are generally dominated by
generous fiscal benefits to large cities. The incentives to ‘go big’ can only dominate for the few
best sites, whereas the bulk of the other sites remains too small. For Φ > Γ , an unlikely case
especially for modern oecd economies, cities are always too big.
As Figure 3 shows in the simplest case of Φ = 1 , i.e., no externalities, the sabp (a) = pabp (a)
schedule is much steeper than the sab∗ (n) schedule of the optimum. Local governments at
the best sites keep out migrants to preserve benefits for their constituents, thereby leading to
undersized large cities and a proliferation of cities on inferior sites. These types of nimby-istic
policies used to control local populations appear commonplace. They can take the form of
urban containment in some North-American cities such as Portland, Oregon, and Vancouver,
British Columbia, and in the United Kingdom (Cheshire and Sheppard, 2002), or of restrictive
land use regulations (Glaeser et al., 2005; Hilber and Robert-Nicoud, 2013). The normative
implication of the model is that policies that heavily restrict urban development should not be
designed by local authorities alone because they fail to internalize the benefits of these policies
to outsiders.15
15 Vermeulen

(2016) reaches a similar conclusion in a very different setup.

17

3.3 Free-migration equilibria
The other important, and often more realistic, case is that of decentralized free-migration
equilibria. In that case, migrants move to the city that offers the highest utility. Consequently,
with identical households, utility is the same across all inhabited sites. Formally, the mobility
condition is
pab(n, a) = µm = um − Tm
(17)
R ). Equilibria must satisfy the additional
for all sites a ∈ A with nm (a) > 0, and um ≥ uR (Nm
requirement of each city’s population being stable, which is guaranteed if ∂pab(n, a)/∂n ≤ 0
and ∂uR (N R )/∂N R < 0. The foregoing conditions imply that urban population levels in a
free-migration equilibrium are at least as large as with local politics, nm ≥ np . Without further
refinement, um may take different values, corresponding to different free-migration equilibria.
While multiple equilibria are interesting, we focus on a constrained-efficient free-migration
equilibrium, and compare it to the optimum. Besides free mobility, the additional constraint
this equilibrium imposes, is that households will seek out new sites if they can profit from
them by later selling the land to other migrants.16 It produces the smallest stable cities in a
free-migration equilibrium, characterized below.
The constrained-efficient free-migration equilibrium is characterized by the following
lemma, which mirrors Lemma 2, with equations (9) and (11) being replaced by
R
),
um ≥ uR (Nm

R
≥0
Nm

(18)

(with complementary slackness) and
um = (1 − τ )am nm (am )ǫ − (1 − δ )(1 + ργ )nm (am )γ ,

(19)

respectively:
Lemma 3 (Structure of the constrained-efficient free-migration allocation) There exists a unique
solution to equations (17), (18), and (19) which characterizes the free-migration allocation. In particular:


(i) Extent of urbanization: There exists a unique urban population size Nm ∈ 0, N ;
16 The

free-migration equilibrium, which has the smallest city at its privately efficient scale, can be rationalized
as the result of forward looking residents and potential developers in a multi-stage game (Seegert 2011, 2013).
Potential developers do not choose smaller sizes because of stability problems, which results in no profits being
made and lower welfare. They do not choose larger sizes, as any migrant is better off in a new city at a ≥ am ,
acquiring land for free, than joining an existing city. This is an extreme equilibrium that Milgrom and Roberts
(1994) suggest is most useful for comparisons. In our simulations below, assuming cities are larger by a factor
of km ∈ (1,1.5] does not result in substantially different results, especially for welfare. See also recent work by
Henderson and Venables (2009) that discusses the dynamics of city formation without large agents and comes
close to solving the coordination failure.

18

Figure 6: Centralized optimum, local politics, and free migration city sizes with Φ = 1.
benefits

sabp (a) = smbp (a)
sab∗ (a)
sabm (a) = µm

I1
M2 /I2

•

• •
M1
◦

O2

•

O3 /I3
•
I4

O1

•
◦

smb∗ (a) = µ∗

•

smbm (a)

np (ap ) nm (am ) n∗ (am )
n∗ (a∗ ) np (a)

City population (n)

n∗ (a )
nm (a)

(ii) Urban extensive margin: There exists a unique threshold am ∈ A such that
Nm =

Z

a

nm (a)dG(a),

nm (a) > 0 for all a ≥ am ,

am

and

nm (a) = 0

otherwise;

(iii) Minimum city size: The equilibrium size of the smallest city is no smaller than its private efficient
scale

 1
γ −ǫ
ǫ
= km np (am ), km ≥ 1,
(20)
nm (am ) = km Φ am
γ
with km = 1 if am > a, i.e., if some sites are uninhabited;

(iv) Urban intensive margin: For all a > am , the equilibrium city size nm (a) is increasing in a, with
γ

n
bm
1
1
1
ǫΦ
=
=
;
γ
−
ǫ
b
a
γ (nm /ni )
−Φ
ǫ (nm /np )γ −ǫ − 1

(21)

(v) Implicit solution: The free-migration solution satisfies the equation


a
am



γ
γ −ǫ

=

γ
γ ǫ
ǫ km − km
,
γ
ǫ
γ
ǫ (nm /np ) − (nm /np )

(22)

where km ≡ nm (am )/np (am ) equals 1 if am > a. For all a > a∗ , the equilibrium city size nm (a) is
(weakly) larger than its privately efficient scale, np (a), and lower than the size with zero marginal net
production: n0 (a) ≡ (aΦ)1/(γ −ǫ) .
Proof See Appendix A.4.
A free-migration equilibrium is contrasted to the optimal and local politics allocations in
Figure 6, for the special case with Φ = 1. Disregard sites 3 and 4 for now and consider only
19

sites 1 and 2. The smaller city at M2 /I2 is at its private efficient scale, i.e., nm (am ) = np (am ).17
City 1 offers the same sabm as this city, which determines its population at point M1 . The
marginal site with city 2 is superior to the optimal one a∗ . Yet, the free-migration population
at am is too small: nm (am ) < n∗ (am ), seen at O2 , although larger than the smallest city at the
optimum n∗ (a∗ ) at O3 . However, the best site with city 1 has a higher population than the
optimum at O1 . As Figure 6 shows, local politics — by restricting city sizes — forces residents
onto more numerous and inferior sites, reaching down to ap , with low benefits at I4 because of
diminishing returns in the rural sector. With free migration, social marginal benefits fall with
the productivity of the city, as better sites are increasingly over-crowded from the global (not
just the local) perspective.
With large positive fiscal externalities, Φ < Φ∗ , for example when the tax rate on urban
wages is higher than the discount rate on urban costs, the free-migration equilibrium becomes
generically suboptimal, including the case with homogeneous sites — recall Figure 1.18 With
Φ < Φ∗ , the best sites are always underpopulated, which we can see as we consider welfare:
Proposition 3 (Normative properties of the constrained-efficient free-migration equilibrium)
Consider the constrained-efficient free-migration equilibrium with nm (a) > 0 for all a ≥ am , nm (a) =
0 for all a < am , and nm (am ) = np (am ). This equilibrium is such that:
(i) If Φ ≤ Φ∗ , cities are too numerous. Large cities are too small, whereas small cities are too large by
virtue of existing;
(ii) If Φ∗ < Φ < 1, then cities are too small and numerous if sites are homogeneous. If sites are
heterogeneous, there are (generically) too many or too few cities, and large cities are over-sized if a < ∞;
(iii) If Φ = 1, then the optimum is achieved with homogeneous sites. If sites are heterogeneous, there are
too few cities, and large cities are oversized;
(iv) If Φ > 1, then large cities are oversized, and there are too few cities.
When all sites are occupied at the optimum, a∗ = a, then cities are optimally sized if Φ = Φ∗ ; large
(small) cities are too small (big) if Φ < Φ∗ ; large (small) cities are too big (small) if Φ > Φ∗ .
(v) Urban benefits: The private average benefit received uniformly across cities is µm ≡ pabm (a) =
pabp (am ), defined in (4), while the social marginal benefits vary with a according to
1 + ǫ Γ − Φ (nm /np )γ −ǫ
smbm (a) ≡ smb[nm (a), a] = µm
,
1 − τ Γ − Φ∗ (nm /np )γ −ǫ

(23)

which increases with a if Φ < Φ∗ .
17 If

sites were homogeneous, this would also produce the optimal Henry George result.
upper tail of the free-migration equilibrium city size distribution, nm (a), inherits the properties of the
distribution of site characteristics in the same way that np (a) does (see also Behrens and Robert-Nicoud, 2015).
If very good sites are very scarce — there are not many natural harbors of the same quality as New York’s —
and if those sites are developed in priority, then large cities are also scarce and the city size distribution displays
properties consistent with Zipf’s law.
18 The

20

Proof See Appendix A.5.
Relative equilibrium population sizes for case (i), when Φ < Φ∗ , are covered in Figure 7. The
smallest equilibrium city, am , is at the private efficient scale, np (a), and below the social one,
ni (a). The elasticity of size with respect to productivity is initially infinite, but then tapers off.
In this case, there is a point where the equilibrium and optimal city sizes, n∗ (a) cross, after
which city sizes are too smalll. While we argue this case holds for most oecd countries, it may
exist with no explicit federal policies just from land purchases alone. When τ = δ = 0, but
ρ ≥ (1 − ǫ/γ )/(1 + γ ), large cities are underpopulated with free migration.

Relative population size, n (log scale)

Figure 7: Optimal, free-migration, and local politics city sizes.
Free migration equilibrium, not
constrained efficient: nm2 (a)

Free migration equilibrium,
constrained efficient: nm1 (a)

Federal optimum: n∗ (a)

Efficient scale: ni (a)

Local politics: np (a)

Relative productivity of site, a (log scale)

The three other cases (ii), (iii), and (iv) under heterogeneity, as well as the case of all
sites being populated, are illustrated further in the proof in Appendix A.5. With Φ = Φ∗ ,
the optimum cannot be achieved since the city at a∗ would be too small due to the fiscal
externality. With the optimal population rate of change with respect to a, the population
adding-up constraint would be violated. Therefore more cities will exist. With Φ = 1 (in the
absence of fiscal wedges), making the city at a∗ optimally sized leads to all superior sites being
too large. Therefore fewer cities will exist. When Φ ≥ Γ (the fiscal system discounts urban
costs more than it taxes wages), the optimal size is always below the private efficient scale, and
very few cities exist. Finally, when all sites are occupied but Φ < Φ∗ , then differences in city
size are smaller than in the optimum: small cities are too large, while large cities are too small,
similar to Albouy (2009).
Although we emphasize issues arising from heterogeneity and fiscal externalities, much of
the work on urban systems is concerned about coordination failures related to inadequate
decentralization — the so-called ‘migration pathology’. The initial benefit of occupying a site
in our ∩-shape formulation for net benefits is essentially zero. For a city to reach a stable
21

population it must provide a threshold utility as good as the value of living elsewhere, which
requires a quantum leap of population. In a system with growing N, existing cities risk
becoming overcrowded if marginal (inferior) sites are not developed quickly enough. Multiple
equilibria can be characterized in our formulation by setting km > 1 for a marginal site am > a.
This means some sites remain unoccupied, while even the worst-sited city is crowded beyond
its private efficient scale. The equilibrium that can arise by coordination failure of decentralized
migration decisions is illustrated in Figure 7, where all cities are too big for the highest curve.
While an equilibrium with smaller cities is reasonable, larger cities cannot be ruled out.
3.4 Optimal urban systems and the urban-rural fringe
The middle and bottom panels of Table 1 summarize the results of the foregoing subsections.
The top panel completes the picture by emphasizing that — on top of what is going on in the
urban system — urbanization itself may be excessive or insufficient. To see why this is so,
recall that efficiency requires the marginal product of labor to be equal to the economy-wide
social marginal benefit, i.e., F ′ (N R ) = µ∗ . When ρR < 1, i.e., rural land ownership is granted to
migrants (at least partially), the rural private average benefit is greater than the social marginal
benefit. A spatial allocation with free migration is generally inefficient in this case because the
marginal benefit of being in the rural sector exceeds the marginal benefit of being in the urban
sector. With fiscal wedges and urban externalities, the spatial allocation of agents is, in general,
inefficient at the rural-urban margin. The top panel of Table 1 covers the various possibilities.
Table 1: Comparisons of allocations with the centralized optimum when a∗ > a.
Urbanization.
uR ( N R ) < µ ∗
uR ( N R ) ≥ µ ∗

Local politics.
Large cities
Small cities
Number of cities
Φ < Φ∗
Free migration.
Large cities
Small cities
Number of cities

ρ=1

ρ<1

Too little
Too much

Too little
Ambiguous

Φ<1

Φ=1

Φ ∈ (1, Γ )

Φ≥Γ

undersized undersized§
oversized† oversized§
too many
too many§

undersized‡
oversized
ambiguous

oversized
oversized
too few

Φ ∈ [Φ∗ , 1)

Φ ∈ (1, Γ )

Φ≥Γ

oversized
ambiguous
too few

oversized
oversized
too few

Φ=1

undersized oversized‡ oversized§
oversized† undersized undersized§
too many
ambiguous too few§

Notes: § optimal if homogeneous; † by virtue of existing; ‡ if a is sufficiently large.

Without fiscal externalities in either the urban or rural system, free migration between the
rural and urban sector can result in under-urbanization even if the urban sector is efficiently
organized. This case is represented by point M in Figure 5, where urban-rural migration
22

equalizes (ex ante) average benefits in each sector, whereas the equalization of marginal benefits
would entail a larger urban population at point O. Sub-optimal organization of the urban
system can aggravate this problem. If urban populations are determined by local politics,
urbanization may be even lower, at point P .19

4. Internalizing wedges using federal fiscal instruments
Since fiscal wedges and urban externalities prevent the urban system from being efficient, a
natural question is how policies or fiscal instruments may help neutralize distortions.
4.1 Implementing the optimal allocation through developers
With no fiscal wedges (ρ = τ = δ = 0, so that Φ = 1), the optimum with heterogeneity may
be implemented as an equilibrium outcome with perfectly competitive land developers, as in
Henderson’s (1974) work with homogeneous land (see Appendix B for the proof). Competitive
developers offer subsidies to, and collect land rents from, urban dwellers. These payments
internalize all urban externalities within cities, which could lead to inefficient migration as
discussed before. What is most remarkable is that the developer result extends to our setting
with heterogeneous land. The key assumption is that land developers are atomistic and behave
competitively. Developers who own superior sites make strictly positive profits since better
sites are in limited supply and hence command Ricardian rents. The major caveats are that
developers lack incentives to create optimal city sizes if there are fiscal externalities or they
have market power (market power also prevents land developers to implement the socially
efficient allocation in the model with homogeneous land).
4.2 Internalizing urban externalities
The parameters that provide the optimal allocation with free-migration may be determined by
finding values of km and Φ that allow nm = n∗ to satisfy both (15) and (22):
Proposition 4 (Implementing the optimal allocation) With free migration, the optimal allocation
can be implemented using the following policy:
(i) Social marginal benefits are equalized across sites by setting Φ = Φ∗ , thus neutralizing the wedge
due to agglomeration economies and urban costs;
1

∗.
(ii) The smallest site is set at its socially efficient scale: if a∗ < a, km = (Φ∗ )− γ −ǫ k∗ ≡ km

Proof See Appendix A.6.
19 The assumption of free urban-rural migration equalizing average expected benefits is similar to that of Harris
and Todaro (1970), who argue that this leads to over-urbanization, while we still find the opposite to be possible.

23

With three fiscal parameters in Φ, there are an infinite number of ways of equalizing social
marginal benefits. Two particularly interesting solutions that allow to equalize Φ and Φ∗ are
τ ∗ = −ǫ < 0,

and either

ρ∗ = 1 and δ ∗ = 0,

or

δ∗ = −

γ (1 − ρ∗ )
≤ 0.
1 + ρ∗ γ

(24)

Setting τ = ǫ provides a Pigouvian subsidy for agglomeration spillovers, so that workers
internalize those benefits. Setting ρ = 1 requires that workers pay for land costs completely.
Combined, these two results suggest an alternative “Henry George Theorem”, whereby the
federal government fully taxes land, and uses it to subsidize agglomeration spillovers (which
could be generalized to include public goods). At the optimum, this scheme generates a
surplus with heterogeneous sites, as cities beyond their social efficient scales have land values
greater than agglomeration benefits. The second alternative, with δ ∗ < 0 raises revenue through
what is essentially a congestion charge.20
As implied by Proposition 4, equalizing social marginal benefits is generally insufficient when
some sites are unoccupied. The development externality at Φ = Φ∗ distorts the value of marginal
sites. In the constrained-efficient migration equilibrium, the smallest site is undersized by the
1/(γ −ǫ)
< 1. As a result, too many sites are occupied. Internalizing urban externalities
ratio Φ∗
by creating fiscal wedges distorts the extensive margin (see also Vermeulen, 2016). Achieving
the efficient outcome requires additional coordination to abandon inferior sites to crowd better
ones. The politics to coordinate such abandonment may be insurmountable.
This result is important for two reasons. First, it implies that any analysis of the consequences of fiscal policies on the spatial allocation of agents that does not allow for adjustments
at the extensive margin is incomplete. This applies to existing models of ‘optimal city systems
and taxation’ that work with a fixed number of cities (Eeckhout and Guner, 2015; Hsieh
and Moretti, 2015; Fajgelbaum, Morales, Suarez Serrato, and Zidar, 2015). It is a corollary
of a standard result in public economics and second-best theory: when there are multiple
externalities, fixing one may exacerbate another (Tinbergen, 1952; Lipsey and Lancaster, 1956).
Second, this policy entails subsidizing wages and taxing land and congestion. This is the
opposite of what most current oecd tax systems do, and our results suggest that this may
skew the population distribution away from the better sites.
4.3 Generalized optimal transfers and tax systems
To achieve the optimum in equilibrium, we consider two alternative policies, extending the
model slightly.21 The first is that of a system of city-specific transfers, T (a), so that net
20 By

controlling two parameters, both of these schemes work to equalize social marginal benefits, even when
cities vary in quality of life.
21 To simplify, we abstract from rural-urban migration. It is straightforward to add a tax or transfer to the rural
sector to implement the efficient rural-urban margin.

24

private average benefits for each city are u(n, a) = pab(n, a) + T (a). Two requirements
must be met. First, social marginal benefits are equalized across cities. This means that
smb(n, a) − u[n(a∗ ), a∗ ] = ∆, where ∆ is a constant. Second, the extensive margin is corrected by setting ∆ = 0. Together, these requirements mean that the optimal transfer is
T∗ (a) = smb(n, a) − pab[n(a∗ ), a∗ ].
Altenatively, we can consider non-linear policies. We may solve for an optimal nonlinear
tax, τ (a), which is proportional to the wedge between average and marginal benefits within
cities:
sab∗ (a) − smb∗ (a)
[n∗ (a)/ni (a)] γ −ǫ − 1
(25)
τ∗ (a) =
=γγ
γ −ǫ ,
sab∗ (a)
ǫ − [n∗ (a)/ni (a)]
which is zero at the smallest city and increases with city size as the wedge grows. It does not
depend on the other policy parameters. To not distort other behavioral responses, Φ should be
kept equal to one. If we take ρ to be fixed by local decree, this implies
γ
− 1 + (1 − ρ) [an∗ (a)ǫ − n∗ (a)γ ]
1 smb∗ (a)
 .

δ∗ (a) = 1 −
=γǫ
1 + ργ sab∗ (a)
(1 + γ ) γǫ − [n∗ (a)/ni (a)] γ −ǫ

(26)

It is easy to show that δ∗ (a) ≥ τ∗ (a), with equality if ρ = 0. Thus, when residents own land,
they are paid a subsidy to amortize their costs, counteracting the development externality.
When all land values are appropriated locally, τ = δ, and larger cities pay more on net to the
federal government. Using these, we can establish the following results.
Proposition 5 (Optimal fiscal policy) The fiscal policy that implements the efficient allocation displays
the following features:
(i) The (marginal) income tax rate is non-negative and increasing in city size;
(ii) The congestion discount rate is positive and increasing in city size;
(iii) If ρ = 0 then δ∗ (a) = τ∗ (a).
Proof In the text above.
Several comments are in order. First, allowing for endogenous adjustments at the extensive
margin of the urban system changes the qualitative features of the optimal fiscal policy in a
fundamental manner. With an exogenous extensive margin, Proposition 4 suggests that the
optimal fiscal policy is to subsidize labor earnings and tax urban congestion. By contrast,
Proposition 5 establishes that the optimal tax and discount rates are both positive. Second,
the optimal fiscal policy is progressive even though agents are homogeneous. This is because
congestion dis-economies dominate agglomeration economies at the margin; and because even
if agents are homogeneous ex ante, they are ex post heterogeneous in their location choices
across sites of different quality. Finally, when all land is owned locally and the allocation is
25

the one with local politics, the optimal policy is to set a common, city-specific tax rate on labor
and land earnings net of congestion costs. In all cases, tax rates are increasing in nominal
earnings but this does not necessarily violate the principle of treating equals equally: at the
free-migration allocation, equals end up being equally well-off anyway, regardless of the tax
scheme that is implemented.

5. Population (mis)allocations and welfare costs
We now explore some quantitative implications of the model. We are most interested in putting
numbers on the extent of population misallocations — both at the extensive and the intensive
margins — and to evaluate the welfare costs due to these misallocations. First, we briefly
describe the model calibration — leaving a more detailed discussion for Appendix C. Second,
we simulate the system of cities under the three solution concepts (federal optimum, free
migration, and local governments). Finally, we provide estimates of the welfare losses due to
the misallocation of population. Using a system of cities calibrated to the United States, we find
that the largest cities may be undersized by about a third, the smallest cities are too big, and
that about twice too many sites may be developed. The welfare losses are fairly small under
free migration, equal to only around 1% of real consumption. Yet, they can be substantial with
local governments, reaching about 18% of real consumption.
5.1 Model calibration
Table 2 summarizes the calibration of the amenity distribution and the selection of the urban
and fiscal parameters. To estimate the amenity distribution, we use two moment conditions and data on wages and population from the American Community Survey. The first
moment condition relates wages to amenities, population, and agglomeration: wj = aj nǫj .
The second moment scales amenities to ensure that gross congestion costs are 15 percent of
wages: ∑j anγj = 0.15 ∑j wj , for some scaling parameter a > 0. For both moments, we use
wages controlling for skill differences. Using the calculated values for aj , we fit a power law,
ln(aj ) = β0 + β1 ln(rank ), to match the observed upper tail of the distribution and use the
b0 and β
b1 to parametrize G(a).
predicted values β
We consider a range of parameter values for agglomeration and congestion from the literature. Our base estimates use ǫ = 0.03 and γ = 0.25, which implies Φ∗ = (1 + ǫ)/(1 + γ ) = 0.824.
Similarly, we consider a range of values for taxes, land rebates, and urban discounts to
match the U.S. Our base estimates use τ = 0.34, ρ = 1, and δ = 0.17, which implies
Φ∗ > Φ = (1 − τ )/[(1 − δ )(1 + ργ )] = 0.636. This parameter configuration leads to free
migration and local politics allocations featuring undersized big cities and oversized small
cities (see Table 1). We consider several other cases of Φ and Φ∗ in Table 3.

26

Table 2: Parameter values used for the simulations.
Parameter
Urban parameters
Agglomeration ǫ
Congestion γ

Baseline

Range

Source

0.03

[0.03, 0.06]

0.25

[0.25, 0.50]

Fiscal parameters
Tax rate τ
0.34
[0, 0.34]
Land rebate ρ
1
[0, 1]
Urban discount δ
0.17
[0, 0.17]
Estimated distribution of amenities G(a)
Wage moment
aj = wj nj−ǫ
Urban cost moment a = 0.15(∑j wj )/(∑ j nγj )

Combes et al. (2008); Rosenthal and Strange (2004);
Melo et al. (2009)
Combes et al. (2016); Glaeser and Gottlieb (2009);
Saiz (2010); Desmet and Rossi Hansberg (2013)
Albouy (2009)
Jimenez (1984)
Albouy and Lue (2015)
From wages & population in Seegert (2013)
Gross urban costs = 15 % of wages

Notes: This table reports our calibration. We vary the different parameters selectively within the indicated ranges as robustness checks. In our model, a
parametrizes the productivity of the site. We estimate a using two moment conditions and data on wages and population from the American Community
Survey. Wages are mincerized and populations combined into metropolitan areas, using the calculations in Seegert (2013).

Table 3: Parameter values and fiscal externalities
Case
Base
High Agglomeration
High Congestion
Developing
Land Reform

Parameters
ǫ
0.03
0.06
0.03
0.03
0.03

γ
0.25
0.25
0.5
0.25
0.25

τ
0.34
0.34
0.34
0
0

ρ
1
1
1
0
1

δ
0.17
0.17
0.17
0
0

Optimal

Private

Φ∗
0.824
0.848
0.687
0.824
0.824

Φ
0.636
0.636
0.530
1.000
0.800

The parameters (ǫ, γ, τ , ρ, δ ) capture agglomeration, congestion, tax rate, land rebate, and urban discount,
respectively. The optimal ratio Φ∗ = (1 + ǫ) /(1 + γ ) and the private ratio Φ∗ = (1 − τ ) /((1 − δ )(1 + ργ )).

The second and third rows of that table consider a doubling of the agglomeration and
congestion parameters. In both cases, Φ∗ > Φ remains true. The fourth row considers the
benchmark where all of the fiscal parameters are set to zero (τ = ρ = δ = 0), which could
characterize the extreme case of a developing country with weak property rights and no
taxation. In contrast to the other cases, Φ∗ < Φ holds under that parameter constellation,
which features oversized large cities in the free migration allocation and may feature oversized
large cities in the local politics allocation (see Table 1). The fifth row in Table 3 shows that even
if τ = δ = 0, just having to purchase land fully upon migrating, which corresponds to ρ = 1,
is sufficient for Φ∗ > Φ to hold. The ratio Φ is likely smaller for oecd countries other than the
U.S. For example, France has a higher tax rate and no mortgage interest deduction, implying
a lower Φ. Many countries, such as Canada, also have strong fiscal equalization systems that
greatly favor smaller cities and non-urban areas (Albouy, 2012).
5.2 Simulation of city sizes under the three solution concepts
We simulate a system of cities with a total urban population of 280 million people using the
three solution concepts — optimal allocation, free mobility, and local politics. Because the
actual distribution of population is somewhere between the free mobility and local politics
27

allocations, these solution concepts provide bounds on the misallocation of the actual distribution of population. Our simulations highlight three determining factors of the distribution
of population. First, government policies such as taxes, land rebates, and urban cost discounts
have a large impact on that distribution. Varying government policies in the simulations
demonstrates that output is not a sufficient statistic for optimal government policies. In fact,
policies that increase total output can often decrease total welfare. Second, the optimal distribution
of population must balance both the tradeoff between agglomeration and congestion inside
each city (intensive margin) and the tradeoff between overfilling productive cities and creating
new, less productive cities (extensive margin). Finally, heterogeneity in city amenities is a
fundamental feature of cities and interacts with both government policy and the extensive
margin in ways that exacerbate the welfare consequences of population misallocations.
Figure 8: Distribution of city sizes and comparative statics.
(a) Three solution concepts.

(b) Varying fiscal parameters.

3

3

10

10

2

2

City Rank

10

City Rank

10

1

1

10

10

0

10
4
10

0

5

6

10

10

7

10

10
4
10

8

10

City Population
Optimal

Free−Mobility

5

10

6

7

10

10

Developed

Local−Politics

Developing

Figure 8 graphs the distribution of population in the traditional format, with log population on the horizontal axis and log rank (where the largest city is rank 1) on the vertical
axis. As one can see, the city-size distributions match closely the empirical distribution in
Gabaix (1999), where the size distribution of large cities, in particular, follows Zipf’s law. In
panel (a), the free-migration distribution (solid curve) features undersized large cities and
oversized small cities relative to the optimal distribution (dashed curve), which can be seen
by the free-migration distribution being a clockwise rotation of the optimal distribution. The
local-politics distribution (dotted curve) consists of substantially more numerous and smaller
cities, which again can be seen by the local-politics distribution being a clockwise rotation of
the optimal distribution.
Panel (b) of Figure 8 graphs two free-mobility distributions for our baseline calibration. In
the first one, we use the fiscal parameters of the U.S.; in the second one, we simulate a ‘developing country’ with no taxes and weak property rights. The developing country case features
28

8

10

City Population

larger large cities and smaller (and fewer) small cities relative to the actual calibration using
U.S. fiscal parameters. The magnitudes in this comparison suggest that the fiscal parameters
have the potential to distort the size distribution of cities substantially. Put bluntly, with the current
government policies in the U.S., New York and Los Angeles are quite substantially undersized.
In contrast, San Bernardino, California, is 60 percent too large in the free-migration allocation.
As can be seen in Figure 8, an implication of under-populating the largest cities on superior
sites is that more cities, in inferior sites, are populated than need be.
5.3 Welfare costs
Table 4 reports statistics on the differences in population distributions and the welfare consequences of the population misallocations. The first column reports statistics for the baseline
estimates, which are calibrated to the U.S. urban system. The optimal distribution suggests the
largest city of optimal size would host 30 million people. By contrast, the free-mobility and
local-politics distributions have largest cities with populations of 14.8 million and 58 thousand,
respectively. As a result, the free-mobility allocation populates almost four times as many cities
as the optimal allocation, whereas the local-politics allocation populates a myriad of additional
sites. In total, 61 percent of the population in the free-mobility allocation is misallocated relative
to the optimal allocation. The welfare costs of these misallocations are 67 billion us dollars —
about 1% — with free mobility, and 1.12 trillion us dollars — about 18% — with local politics.22
The impact of government policy on the distribution of population is shown by contrasting
the baseline estimates (Column 1 in Table 4), calibrated to the U.S. and its fiscal parameters,
with the developing country estimates (Column 2 in Table 4). The latter is an extreme example
with no taxes and weak property rights. In contrast to the baseline calibration, the latter
allocation overcrowds the largest cities and populates too few sites. With weak property rights
and no taxes, the largest city in the free-mobility allocation hosts almost 50 million people, 20
million more than in the optimal allocation and 35 million more than in the baseline calibration.
As a consequence of overcrowding the largest cities, the free-mobility allocation populates
only 43 sites, less than half the number of sites in the optimal allocation and substantially
fewer than in the baseline calibration. Table 4 shows that the welfare consequences of these
misallocations are even smaller than in the U.S. baseline case. It is worth noting that, because
the free-mobility allocation overpopulates the cities with the highest production amenities,
output at the free-mobility allocation is larger than at the optimal allocation. In other words,
gross output is a poor measure of welfare because welfare is output net of congestion costs,
22 Remarkably, the welfare consequences in this simulation are comparable to those of Behrens et al. (2011),
Desmet and Rossi-Hansberg (2013), and Behrens, Duranton, and Robert-Nicoud (2014), though the underlying
microeconomic foundations of all four papers are entirely different and though Behrens et al.’s model features a
more realistic geography than our own. Market access is encapsulated in the distribution of a’s in our model. It
depends on the distribution of bilateral trade costs in Behrens et al. (2011) and is thus endogenous.

29

Table 4: Welfare calculations under the three solution concepts.
(1) Baseline
(Developed)
Largest city
Optimal
Free mobility
Local politics
Smallest city
Optimal
Free mobility
Local politics
Number of cities
Optimal
Free mobility
Local politics
Welfare
Optimal
Free mobility
Local politics
Output
Optimal
Free mobility
Local politics

(2)
(3) High
Developing agglomeration

(4) High
congestion

(5) Low
heterogeneity

(6) High
heterogeneity

30,525,000
14,790,000
58,500

30,525,000
49,915,000
457,000

50,000,000
44,410,000
1,434,700

2,760,000
1,740,000
39,800

11,370,000
4,870,000
58,500

30,525,000
40,900,000
58,500

230,000
25,000
13,300

230,000
260,000
150,200

10,990,000
830,000
556,600

100,000
25,000
20,400

315,000
40,000
30,300

230,000
15,000
3,000

99
392
17,539

99
43
1,557

9
33
418

804
1,633
12,541

199
796
8,424

99
165
20,000

22,200
21,960
18,148

22,200
22,060
20,148

25,114
24,737
21,183

21,548
21,427
19,354

23,530
23,333
21,721

22,200
20,358
13,365

28,977
27,002
19,649

28,977
30,313
22,896

35,495
32,955
25,000

24,630
23,682
19,990

28,688
27,099
23,517

28,977
27,444
14,470

Notes: Baseline (Developed) has a calibration with [τ , ρ, δ, ǫ, γ ] = [0.34, 1, 0.17, 0.03, 0.25]. Developing calibration [τ , ρ, δ, ǫ, γ ] = [0, 0, 0, 0.03, 0.25]. High agglomeration
[τ , ρ, δ, ǫ, γ ] = [0.34, 1, 0.17, 0.06, 0.25]. High congestion [τ , ρ, δ, ǫ, γ ] = [0.34, 1, 0.17, 0.03, 0.5]. Baseline heterogeneity a = 19,550 × rank −0.0333 , comes from estimating
the function log (aj ) = β0 + β1 log (rank ) from the calculated a values. We calculate the a values from the moment condition aj = wj nj−ǫ using data on wages, wj ,
and population, nj , from the American Community Survey, where skill differences have been controlled for in the wage. Low heterogeneity, a = 19,550 × rank −0.016 .
High heterogeneity, a = 19550 × rank −0.066 .

and some allocations may feature massive excessive congestion. The presence of excessive
congestion suggests a key role for taxes to correct for the congestion externality.
The impact of agglomeration economies and congestion diseconomies on the distribution
of population is shown in Columns 3 and 4 of Table 4. Column 3 doubles the agglomeration
parameter to 0.06 and Column 4 doubles the congestion parameter to 0.5. Not surprisingly,
more population is allocated to the largest cities when agglomeration forces are stronger
and/or congestion diseconomies are weaker.
The impact of heterogeneity in amenities across cities is shown in Columns 5 and 6 of
Table 4, and its welfare effects are depicted in panel (a) of Figure 9. Changing the difference in
amenities across cities changes the tradeoff between increasing congestion in cities with high
amenity levels and populating cities with lower amenity levels. As expected, the impact of
heterogeneity is large. The reason for this is that the urban system operates at close to constant
returns to scale, i.e., the difference between agglomeration economies ǫ and urban costs γ is
relatively small. Small amenity changes then translate into large population changes by giving
better sites an additional advantage. To make the analogy with heterogeneous firms, small
cost advantages imply large differences in market shares when products are good substitutes.
In the case of cities, small differences in a imply large differences in population when γ − ǫ is
small. Although the parameters we have chosen for the ‘low’ and ‘high’ heterogeneity cases
are arbitrary, this exercise illustrates that getting those parameters right is of fundamental
importance in any quantitative exercise.
Last, to highlight the extensive margin tradeoff, panel (b) of Figure 9 compares the change in
30

Figure 9: Welfare in the federal optimum and with free migration.
(b) Extensive margin.
24

24

23

Average Welfare ($ Thousands)

Average Welfare ($ Thousands)

(a) Heterogeneity in amenities.
24.5

23.5

23

22.5

22

21.5

21

20.5

20

22

21

20

19

18

17

16

0

50

100

150

200

250

300

350

Population (Millions)
Optimal

Free−Mobility

More Heterogeneity

15

0

50

100

150

200

250

300

350

Population (Millions)
Less Heterogeneity

Free−mobility

Free−mobility Censored

average welfare as total population increases when additional cities can and cannot be created.
Average welfare decreases substantially faster when the number of cities is capped at 100
(dotted curve) than in the baseline case when the number of cities is allowed to grow (dashed
curve). This suggests that the ability to create new cities is critical to maintaining high welfare
as total population increases. This result has implications for urbanizing countries that tend to
concentrate population in a few large cities (World Bank, 2009). In countries like China, India,
or Brazil, the increasing urban population needs to be accommodated in an increasingly large
number of cities to mitigate the decreasing returns that operate sharply in individual cities.

6. Conclusions
The theory and evidence in this paper suggest that the received economic wisdom — that cities
are too big — is likely to fail in most developed countries. Fiscal externalities from taxes and
land purchases generally discourage urbanization. They discourage urban development as the
returns to land and labor are common resources, not fully given to migrants. Though not
necessary for our key result, local politics naturally keeps the best areas from being sufficiently
inhabited, thus resulting in the best areas being substantially undersized. Overall, we expect
to see an inefficient urban system, characterized by lower welfare, over-ruralization, and too
many minor cities developed on inferior sites. While the welfare costs of these misallocations
are small with free migration, they are large under local politics. Hence, local control over
land-use regulations leads to a seriously inefficient allocation of population across cities.
The circumstances involving urbanization in developing countries is less certain. Weak
taxation and incomplete property rights over land may limit the effective tolls migrants pay for
entering a city. This can easily cause the best sites in a country to become overcrowded. Local
31

governments seem unlikely to have the power to stop this. Meanwhile, capital cities may be
prone to gigantism due to the concerns of central governments. Thus, the conventional wisdom
may still apply in some countries, with large cities being too big, and possibly too much urbanization overall. Nevertheless, our work highlights the importance of considering fiscal policy,
site heterogeneity, and incentives to develop before making specific policy recommendations
about whether urban development should generally be discouraged.

References
Abdel-Rahman, Hesham M. 1988. “Product differentiation, monopolistic competition and city
size.” Regional Science and Urban Economics 18(1): 69–86.
Abdel-Rahman, Hesham, and Alex Anas. 2004. “Theories of systems of cities.” In: Henderson,
J. Vernon, and Jacques-François Thisse (eds.) Handbook of Regional and Urban Economics, vol. 4.
North-Holland: Elsevier B.V., pp. 2293–2339.
Ades, Alberto F., and Edward L. Glaeser. 1995. “Trade and circuses: Explaining urban giants.”
Quarterly Journal of Economics 110(1): 195–227.
Albouy, David. 2016. “What are cities worth? Local productivity, land values, and the total
value of amenities.” Review of Economics and Statistics 98(3): 477–487.
Albouy, David. 2012. “Evaluating the efficiency and equity of federal fiscal equalization.”
Journal of Public Economics 96(9): 824–839.
Albouy, David. 2009. “The unequal geographic burden of federal taxation.” Journal of Political
Economy 117(4): 635–667.
Albouy and Lue. 2015. “Driving to opportunity: Local rents, wages, commuting, and submetropolitan quality of life.” Journal of Urban Economics 89: 74-92.
Allen, Treb, and Costas Arkolakis. 2014. “Trade and the topography of the spatial economy.”
Quarterly Journal of Economics 129(3): 1085–1140.
Alonso, William. 1964. Location and Land Use: Toward a General Theory of Land Rent. Harvard
Univ. Press, Cambridge, ma.
Arnott, Richard. 2004. “Henry George Theorem and optimal city size.” American Journal of
Economics and Sociology 63(5): 1057–1090.
Arnott, Richard. 1979. “Optimal city size in a spatial economy.” Journal of Urban Economics;
65–89.
Arnott, Richard, and Joseph E. Stiglitz. 1979. “Aggregate land rents, expenditure on public
goods, and optimal city size.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 93(4): 471–500.
Aumann, Robert J. 1964. “Markets with a continuum of traders.” Econometrica 32(1/2): 39–50.
32

Bleakly, Hoyt, and Jeffrey Lin. 2012. “Portage and path dependence.” Quarterly Journal of
Economics 127(2): 587–644.
Behrens, Kristian, Giordano Mion, Yasusada Murata, and Jens Suedekum. 2011. “Spatial frictions.” cepr Discussion Paper #8572, Centre for Economic Policy Research, London, UK.
Buchanan, James M., and Charles J. Goetz. 1972. “Efficiency limits of fiscal mobility: An
assessment of the Tiebout model.” Journal of Public Economics 1(1): 25–43.
Cheshire, Paul, and Stephen Sheppard. 2002. “The welfare economics of land use planning.”
Journal of Urban Economics 52(2): 242–269.
Ciccone, Antonio and Robert E. Hall. 1996. “Productivity and the density of economic activity.”
American Economic Review 86(1): 54–70.
Combes, Duranton, and Gobillon. 2016. “The costs of agglomeration: House and land prices
in French cities.” Mimeo, University of Pennsylvania.
Combes, Pierre-Philippe, Gilles Duranton, and Laurent Gobillon. 2008. “Spatial wage disparities: Sorting matters!” Journal of Urban Economics 63(2): 723–742.
Combes, Pierre-Philippe, and Laurent Gobillon. 2015. “The empirics of agglomeration
economies.” In: Duranton, Gilles, J. Vernon Henderson, and William C. Strange (eds.)
Handbook of Regional and Urban Economics, vol. 5. North-Holland: Elsevier B.V., pp. 247–348.
Davis, Donald R., and David E. Weinstein. 2002. “Bones, bombs, and break points: The
geography of economic activity.” American Economic Review 92(5): 1269–1289.
Desmet, Klaus, and Esteban Rossi-Hansberg. 2013. “Urban accounting and welfare.” American
Economic Review 103(6): 2296–2327.
Duranton, Gilles, and Diego Puga. 2015. “Urban land use.” In: Duranton, Gilles, J. Vernon
Henderson, and William C. Strange (eds.) Handbook of Regional and Urban Economics, vol. 5.
North-Holland: Elsevier B.V., pp. 476–560.
Duranton, Gilles, and Diego Puga. 2004. “Micro-foundations of urban agglomeration economies.” In: Henderson, J. Vernon, and Jacques-François Thisse (eds.) Handbook of Regional and
Urban Economics, vol. 4. North-Holland: Elsevier B.V., pp. 2063–2117.
Eeckhout, Jan, and Nezih Guner. 2015. “Optimal spatial taxation: Are big cities too small?"
cepr Discussion Paper #10352, Centre for Economic Policy Research, London, UK.
Fajgelbaum, Pablo D., Eduardo Morales, Juan Carlos Suárez Serrato, and Owen M. Zidar. 2015.
“State taxes and spatial misallocation.” nber Working Paper #21760, National Bureau for
Economic Research, Cambridge, ma.
Fenge, Robert, and Volker Meier. 2002. “Why cities should not be subsidized.” Journal of Urban
Economics 52(3): 433–447.
Fischel, William A. 2001. The Homevoter Hypothesis: How Homevalues Influence Local Government
Taxation, School Finance, and Land-Use Policies. Harvard University Press, Cambridge, ma.
33

Flatters, Frank, J. Vernon Henderson, and Peter Mieszkowski. 1974. “Public goods, efficiency,
and regional fiscal equalization.” Journal of Public Economics 3(2): 99–112.
Fujita, Masahisa. 1989. Urban Economic Theory. mit Press, Cambridge, ma.
Gabaix, Xavier. 1999. “Zipf’s law for cities: An explanation.” Quarterly Journal of Economics
114(3): 739–767.
Glaeser, Edward L., and Joshua D. Gottlieb. 2009. “The wealth of cities: Agglomeration
economies and spatial equilibrium in the United States.” Journal of Economic Literature 47(4):
983–1028.
Glaeser, Edward L., Joseph Gyourko, and Raven Saks. 2005. “Why Is Manhattan so expensive?
Regulation and the rise in housing prices.” Journal of Law and Economics 48(2): 331–369.
Glaeser, Edward L., and David Maré. 2001. “Cities and skills." Journal of Labor Economics 19(2):
316–342.
Harris, John R., and Michael P. Todaro. 1970. “Migration, unemployment and development: A
two-sector analysis.” American Economic Review 60(1): 126–142.
Haurin, Donald R. 1980. “The regional distribution of population, migration, and climate.”
Quarterly Journal of Economics 95 (2): 293–308.
Helpman, Elhanan, and David Pines. 1980. “Optimal public investment and dispersion policy
in a system of open cities.” American Economic Review 70(3): 507–514.
Henderson, J. Vernon. 1988. Urban Development: Theory, Fact, and Illusion. New York and Oxford:
Oxford University Press.
Henderson, J. Vernon. 1974a. “Optimum city size: The external diseconomy question.” Journal
of Political Economy 82(2): 373–388.
Henderson, J. Vernon. 1974b. “The sizes and types of cities.” American Economic Review 64(4):
640–656.
Henderson, J. Vernon, and Anthony J. Venables. 2009. “The dynamics of city formation.” Review
of Economic Dynamics 12(2): 233–254.
Hilber, Christian A.L., and Frédéric Robert-Nicoud. 2013. “On the origins of land use regulations: Theory and evidence from us metro areas.” Journal of Urban Economics 75: 29–43.
Hochman and Pines. 1993. “Federal income tax and its effects on inter-and intracity resource
allocation.” Public Finance Quarterly 21(3): 276–304.
Hsieh, Chang-Tai, and Enrico Moretti. 2015. “Why do cities matter? Local growth and
aggregate growth.” nber Working Paper #21154, National Bureau for Economic Research,
Cambridge, ma.
Jimenez, Emmanuel, 1984. “Tenure security and urban squatting.” Review of Economics and
Statistics, 6675(4): 556–67.
34

Kanemoto, Yoshitsugu. 1980. Theories of Urban Externalities. North-Holland, Amsterdam.
Knight, Frank H. 1924. “Some fallacies in the interpretation of social cost.” Quarterly Journal of
Economics 38(4): 582–606.
Krugman, Paul R. 1996. “Confronting the mystery of urban hierarchy.” Journal of the Japanese
and International Economies 10(4): 399–418.
Lee, Sanghoon, and Qiang Li. 2013. “Uneven landscapes and city size distributions." Journal of
Urban Economics 78(C): 19–29.
Lipsey, Richard G., and Kelvin Lancaster. 1956. “The general theory of second best.” Review of
Economic Studies 24(1): 11–32.
Lucas, Robert E. 1988. “On the mechanics of economic development.” Journal of Monetary
Economics 22(1): 3–42.
Melo, Patricia C., Daniel J. Graham, and Robert B. Noland. 2009. “A meta-analysis of estimates
of urban agglomeration economies.” Regional Science and Urban Economics 39(3): 332–342.
Milgrom, Paul, and John Roberts. 1994. “Comparing equilibria.” American Economic Review
84(3): 441–459.
Mills, Edwin S. 1967. “An aggregate model of resource allocation in a metropolitan area.”
American Economic Association Papers and Proceedings 57(2): 197–210.
Mills, Edwin S. and David M. Ferranti. 1971. “Market choices and optimum city size.” American
Economic Association Papers and Proceedings 61(2): 340–345.
Mirrlees, James A. 1982. “Migration and optimal income taxes.” Journal of Public Economics
18(3): 319–341.
Muth, Richard F. 1969. Cities and Housing. University of Chicago Press, Chicago, il.
Redding, Stephen J. 2016. Goods trade, factor mobility and welfare. Journal of International
Economics 101(C): 148–167.
Redding, Stephen J. and Daniel M. Sturm. 2008. “The costs of remoteness: Evidence from
German division and reunification.” American Economic Review 98(5): 1766–1797.
Roback, Jennifer 1982. “Wages, rents, and the quality of life.” Journal of Political Economy 90(6):
1257–1278.
Romer, Paul M. 1990. “Endogenous technological change.” Journal of Political Economy 98(5):
71–102.
Saiz, Albert. 2010. “The geographic determinants of housing supply.” Quarterly Journal of
Economics 125(3): 1253–1296.
Seegert, Nathan. 2013. “Rushing to opportunities: A model of entrepreneurship and growth.”
SSRN Discussion Paper #2857105.
35

Seegert, Nathan. 2011. “Land regulations and the optimal distribution of cities.” SSRN Discussion Paper #2557399.
Stiglitz, Joseph E. 1977. “The Theory of Local Public Goods.” in Feldstein, Martin S. and Robert
P. Inman, eds. The Economics of Public Services. London, MacMillan Press.
Tiebout, Charles M. 1956. “A pure theory of local expenditures.” Journal of Political Economy
64(5): 416–424.
Tinbergen, Jan. 1952. On the Theory of Economic Policy. North-Holland, Amsterdam.
Tolley, George S. 1974. “The welfare economics of city bigness.” Journal of Urban Economics 1(3):
324–345.
Upton, Charles 1981. “An equilibrium model of city size.” Journal of Urban Economics 10(1):
15–36.
Vermeulen, Wouter. 2016. “Agglomeration externalities and urban growth controls.” Journal of
Economic Geography, forthcoming (doi:10.1093/jeg/lbv047).
Vickrey, William S. 1992. “Henry George, economies of scale, and land value taxation.” Presented at a COPE meeting in Rio de Janeiro, Jan. 9, 1992, reprinted in Kenneth C. Wenzer
(1999, ed.), Land-Value Taxation: The Equitable and Efficient Source of Public Finance.
Vickrey, William S. 1977. “The city as a firm.” In: Feldstein, Martin S. and Robert P. Inman
(eds). The Economics of Public Services, London, MacMillan Press.

Appendix material
This set of appendices is structured as follows. First, Appendix A contains the proofs of the
propositions. Second, Appendix B shows that the optimal allocation can be implemented by
perfectly competitive land developers, as in Henderson (1974a, b). Last, Appendix C contains
details on our data and the procedure used to calibrate the model.

Appendix A: Proofs
Preliminaries. The proofs are simplified through a change in variables for a and n(a), using
the notation
  1


γ −ǫ
ǫ
n(a) γ − ǫ
ni (a) ≡
.
a
and v (n(a)) ≡
γ
ni (a)
Given the expressions in Lemma 1, we have vi ≡ v (ni (a)) = 1 and vp ≡ v (np (a)) = Φ. v gives
us the ratio of the city’s size relative to the social efficient scale, ni (a), raised to the power γ − ǫ.
Thus, it gives us the ratio of urban costs to urban benefits at the given n(a) relative to this ratio
36

at ni (a), which replaces a as the underlying productivity parameter. We use this notation to
re-express the social and private, average and marginal, benefits as follows:
sab(n, a)

ǫ

= v γ −ǫ nγi

γ
ǫ

−v
ǫ



= f v; γǫ

smb(n, a) = (1 + γ ) v γ −ǫ nγi (Γ − v )

ǫ
τ γ −ǫ γ γ
v
Φ
−
v
n
pab(n, a) = 1−
i ǫ
Φ
ǫ
(1+γ )(1−τ ) γ −
ǫ nγ
v
i
Φ

pmb(n, a) =



= (1 + γ ) f (v; Γ )
γ 
τ
= 1−
f
v;
Φ
ǫΦ

(Γ Φ − v ) =

(1+γ )(1−τ )
f
Φ

(A-1)

(v; Γ Φ) ,

ǫ

where f (v; C ) ≡ v γ −ǫ nγi (C − v ) is a function of v, parametrized by (a bundle of) parameters C;
and where (as defined in the main text)
Φ≡

1−τ
,
(1 − δ ) (1 + ργ )

Φ∗ ≡

1+ǫ
,
1+γ

and Γ ≡

γ
Φ∗ .
ǫ

Figure 10 depicts the general, quasi-concave shape of f as a function of v for a fixed value of
C. It is always a multiple of nγi , the urban costs at the efficient scale. We are generally more
interested in the positive values located between that of f at v = 0 and v = C.
Figure 10: Properties of f (v; C ) for 1 ≤ C ≤ γǫ .
f (v; C )

•

•

f (1; C )

v

(0,0)

•

ǫ
γC

•
C

1

v

It is easy to show that at the maximum
ǫ
arg max f (v; C ) = C,
v
γ

and

max f (v; C ) =
v



ǫ
C
γ



γ
γ −ǫ

γ
ǫ



− 1 nγi .

b−b
a.
Using hat notation, b
x ≡ dx/x, then nbi = b
a/ (γ − ǫ), and b
v = (γ − ǫ) ( n
b − nbi ) = (γ − ǫ) n
Taking into account the dependence of f on both v and implicitly on ni , we have
fb = −

γ
ǫ

γ
ǫ v− C

− 1 (C − v )

b
v + γb
ni = −ǫ

γ
ǫv

−C
C
n
b+
b
a.
C−v
C −v

(A-2)

where the second expression reintroduces the original population and productivity notation.
Therefore, f is always increasing in a, for given n, if v < C; and increasing in n, for given a,
37

if 0 < v < γǫ C and decreasing if γǫ C < v < C. We are generally interested in this latter range.
Substituting in the proper value of C, the relevant ranges of our four functions in (A-1) are
sab smb pab pmb
ǫ
1
Φ∗
Φ Φ∗ Φ
γC
γ
ǫ

C

Γ

γ
ǫΦ

ΓΦ

As far as values of C are concerned, the most relevant values obey 1 ≤ C ≤ γǫ . For v this
implies that γǫ < v < γǫ . For this range, the function f (1; C ) = 1 has two real solutions, 1, and
v, a second value, which does not have a simple analytical expression, but by the continuity
of f (.; C ) exists by the Intermediate Value Theorem. See Figure 10 for an illustration of v’s
existence.
Translating from (v,ni ) back to n,a gives us relevant ranges of n for social and private,
average and marginal, benefits:
sab
smb
pab
pmb
C = γ/ǫ
C=Γ
C = (γ/ǫ)Φ
C = ΓΦ
  1 
 1
 1
 1


γ −ǫ
γ −ǫ
γ −ǫ
γ −ǫ
a γǫ
a γǫ Φ∗
a γǫ Φ
a γǫ Φ∗ Φ


 1
2
γ −ǫ
n0 ≡ Ca γǫ 2

 1
γ −ǫ
nmax ≡ Ca γǫ

1

a γ −ǫ

1

(aΦ∗ ) γ −ǫ

1

(aΦ) γ −ǫ

1

(aΦ∗ Φ) γ −ǫ

Values of n outside these parameter ranges are generally not pertinent to the analysis.

A.1. Proof of Lemma 2
max

N R ,a∗ ,n(a),µ

Consider the problem given by the Lagrangian

Z
Z a
ǫ
γ
R
R
L ≡ F (N ) + n(a) [ an(a) − n(a) ] dG(a) + µ N − N −
a∗

a
a∗



n(a)dG(a) .

The first-order condition with respect to µ is simply the adding-up constraint. The first-order
condition with respect to N R yields µ = F ′ (N R ), the necessary condition for (i). Using the
continuum of a The first-order necessary condition with respect to a∗ is
µ∗ ≤ a∗ n(a∗ )ǫ − n(a∗ )γ = sab [n(a∗ ),a∗ ] ,

(A-3)

with equality if a∗ > a. Let k∗ = n∗ (a∗ )/ni (a∗ ) be the ratio of the optimal size of the worst
city relative
h to itsi efficient size. Solving for µ∗ from the smb using the notation in (A-1), with
(1 + γ )f k∗γ −ǫ , Γ , gives us the result of (iii)
µ∗ = (1 + γ ) (Γ k∗ǫ − k∗γ ) [ni (a∗ )]γ .

(A-4)

The precise value of a∗ needed for (ii) depends on the (unspecified) distribution G. Condition
(A-3) shows that the Lagrange multiplier is pinned down by the social average benefit of the
38

site at the extensive-margin (or worst-populated site), a∗ , if the extensive margin of urban
development is relevant. The multiplier also equals the marginal benefit of residing in the
rural area. The latter decreases in N R because F is concave in population.
The first-order condition with respect to n(a) for the intensive margin is
µ ∗ ≥ a(1 + ǫ)n∗ (a)ǫ − (1 + γ )n∗ (a)γ ,

(A-5)

with equality for all sites a such that n(a) > 0. Using the smb expression in A-1 again and our
solution for µ∗ , we have through a change of notation that
ǫ

v∗γ −ǫ [ni (a)] γ [Γ − v∗ ] (1 + γ ) = (1 + γ ) (Γ k∗ǫ − k∗γ ) [ni (a∗ )]γ .
γ

Using the fact that [ni (a)] γ = (a/a∗ ) γ −ǫ [ni (a∗ )]γ , this simplifies to


γ
ǫ
γ
γ
−
ǫ
γ
−
ǫ
= Γ k∗ǫ − k∗γ
(a/a∗ ) γ −ǫ Γ v∗ − v∗
for Φ∗ < v∗ < Γ by the second order condition. This range is tightened further into k∗ < v∗ < Γ
by our solution for a∗ . These results translate immediately into result (v). Note this solution
γ
may be written as (a/a∗ ) γ −ǫ = f [k∗γ −ǫ , Γ ]/f [(n∗ /ni )γ −ǫ , Γ ]
To see that optimal city size is increasing in a, take the elasticity formula (A-2) for smb, using
C = Γ and f̂ = 0, which means
γ
v∗ − Γ
Γ
ǫǫ
n̂∗ =
â.
Γ − v∗
Γ − v∗

By cross-multiplying the result in (iv), it becomes apparent
n̂∗
1
Γ
= γ
â
ǫ ǫ v∗ − Γ
once v is substituted in for. This expression is positive over the relevant range v > 1 > Φ∗ .
Furthermore, it is possible to show that
v̂∗
γΓ −v
= γ
â
ǫ ǫ −v

(A-6)

which is positive, implying that the ratio of n∗ to ni continues to grow, albeit at a declining
1

rate. If A is unbounded above, then at a → ∞, v∗ → Γ , and n∗ (a) → Γ γ −ǫ ni (a).
Clearly, a∗ > 0 must hold if F ′ (N ) > 0, since smb(n,0) = −(1 + γ )nγ < 0 for all n >
0. In other words, it is always better to work in the countryside than live in a completely
unproductive city due to urban costs. This establishes (i) for the extensive margin. This puts a
1

limit on k∗ < (γ/ǫ) γ −ǫ .
As will be shown in Proposition 1, da∗ /dN < 0, which implies that dµ∗ /dN < 0. Since
R
N + N = N , then dµ∗ /dN R > 0, there is a unique rural population N R ∈ (0, N ).
This completes the proof.

39

A.2. Proof of Proposition 1.
obtain

To see (i), take the ratios of sab to smb in (A-1) evaluated at v∗ to

sab∗ (a) =

γ

1 ǫ − v∗
,
1 + γ Γ − v∗

and smb∗ =

1 Γ − Φ∗ v∗
µ∗ .
1 + ǫ Γ − v∗

Substituting in for v∗ creates the required formula in (i). Evaluated at v∗ (a∗ ) = k∗γ −ǫ , we have

sab∗ (a∗ ) = γǫ k∗ǫ − k∗γ [ni (a∗ )]γ , which equals µ∗ if k∗ = 1, when a∗ > a. Taking the elasticity,
c∗ =
sab

γ
ǫ (1 − Φ ∗ )v∗

( γǫ − v∗ )(Γ − v∗ )

from Φ∗ < 1 and 1 < v < Γ < γǫ . The elasticity of sab with respect to v grows with v from the
denominator. In logarithmic scales, the optimized ln[sab∗ (a)] is convex in ln(n).
To establish (ii), observe that the Lagrangian can be rewritten as follows:
Z

L∗
F (N R ) − F ′ (N R )N R
1 a
n∗ (a) [an∗ (a)ǫ − n∗ (a)γ − µ∗ ] dG(a).
= µ∗ +
+
N
N
N a∗
From the first-order condition (A-5), we have an∗ (a)ǫ − n∗ (a)γ = µ∗ + γn∗ (a)γ − aǫn∗ (a)ǫ .
Inserting this into the Lagrangian above, and using µ∗ = F ′ (N R ), yields


Z
1 a
L∗
N R F (N R )
′
R
− F (N ) +
n∗ (a) [ γn∗ (a)γ − aǫn∗ (a)ǫ ] dG(a).
= µ∗ +
NR
N
N
N a∗
The first expression in brackets is positive because of decreasing returns in the rural sector,
whereas the second bracketed expression is increasing in n(a) and zero at n(a) = ni (a). Since
n∗ (a) > ni (a), it follows that the integral term is positive. Then,
L∗
∂ L∗
> µ∗ =
,
(A-7)
N
∂N
where the last equality comes from the definition of the Lagrangian and the envelope theorem.
Expression (A-7) shows that there are decreasing returns in the economy because the marginal
Lagrangian is always below the average Lagrangian. Adding people to the system reduces
average welfare. This occurs from both diminishing returns in the rural sector (F ′′ < 0) and
urban system. To see the latter, and to prove (iii), note that we can apply the same reasoning
as above to the social average benefit in all the cities, given by
1
SAB = µ∗ +
N

Z a
a∗

n∗ (a) [γn∗ (a)γ − aǫn∗ (a)ǫ ] dG(a) > µ∗ = smb.

Since the social average benefit exceeds the social marginal benefit, adding urban dwellers to
the cities reduces welfare.
Finally, holding rural population constant, the sources of the decreasing urban returns (ii)
can be shown by differentiating the first-order condition (A-5) to obtain:23
i
∂n∗ (a) h
∂µ∗
ǫ− 1
γ −1
.
a(1 + ǫ)ǫn∗ (a)
− (1 + γ )γn∗ (a)
=
∂N
∂N

hold N R fixed and investigate the implications of an exogenous increase in N . This is different from a
redistribution from N R to N , which is more complicated to analyze.
23 We

40

The term in brackets is negative by the second-order condition of the optimization problem.
Hence, ∂µ∗ /∂N and ∂n∗ (a) /∂N have opposite signs. By differentiating the adding-up constraint for the urban population, we get:
1=

Z a
∂n∗ (a)
a∗

∂N

dNdG(a) − n∗ (a∗ )

∂a∗
.
∂N

(A-8)

Since the sign of ∂µ∗ /∂N is the same as that of ∂a∗ /∂N , it is then obvious that ∂a∗ /∂N < 0
and ∂n∗ (a) /∂N > 0 must hold, since opposite signs cannot yield a positive value as required
by the left-hand side of (A-8). This completes the proof.

A.3. Proof of Proposition 2. Part (v) follows directly from Lemma 1. Substituting in v = Φ into
the smb equation in (A-1), it is quickly calculated that
ǫ

smbp = smb[np (a),a] = Φ γ −ǫ [Γ − Φ] (1 + γ ) [ni (a)]γ .
Combining this with the solution for µ∗ ,
ǫ

smbp
Φ γ −ǫ [ Γ − Φ]
=
smb∗
Γ k∗ǫ − k∗γ



a
a∗



γ
γ −ǫ

f (Φ,Γ )

= 
f k∗γ −ǫ ,Γ



a
a∗



γ
γ −ǫ

(A-9)

which may hold for values a < a∗ .
In order for the optimum to be achieved, this ratio needs to stay equal to one. This cannot
happen if a varies. Therefore the optimum is only obtained if a = a∗ for all developed asites,
and Φ = k∗γ −ǫ , which will be one, unless all sites are occupied. This is case (ii).
1
If Φ < k∗γ −ǫ, case (i), then np (a∗ ) = Φ γ −
ǫ ni (a∗ ) < k∗ ni (a∗ ) = n∗ (a∗ ), and therefore, the
optimal marginal site is undersized. All cities with a > a∗ , will be undersized, since v̂∗ is
positive for 0 < v < Γ , meaning that the gap between the optimum and the political allocation
will continue to grow. If k∗ = 1, so that a∗ > a, then sites with a < a∗ , are “too big” in the sense
that they should not have been developed. For a given N, these will exist due to the adding
up constraint.
1

If Φ ≥ Γ , case (iv), then the smallest optimal site is oversized since np (a∗ ) = Φ γ −ǫ ni (a∗ ) ≥
1

1

1

1

Γ γ −ǫ ni (a∗ ), while n∗ (a) < Γ γ −ǫ ni (a) for any a. Or simply v∗ (a) < Γ γ −ǫ < Φ γ −ǫ = vp (a) for all
a. Moreover, the value of smbp is negative for all a, which never occurs at the optimum (better
to not have a city at all), and hence, np is clearly too large.
In the intermediate case of k∗γ −ǫ Φ < Γ , the marginal optimal city, a∗ , is too large. Nonetheless, the optimal elasticity v∗ is positive, so that the ratio of the v∗ to vp rises with a, and can
exceed it, so that some cities are too small. If A is unbounded, then v∗ → Γ , and there will be
a point ap∗ , where the political allocation is optimal. Cities with a > ap∗ , will be undersized with
local politics. This covers case (iii) and finishes the proof.
41

A.4. Proof of Lemma 3 The proof for Lemma 3 is nearly identical to that of Lemma 2, using
results based on f , with previous values of C multiplied by the parameter Φ. The rest of the
mathematics is straightforward and does not need repeating.
It remains to be shown that the solution is constrained-efficient. Since relative values of nm
are determined by (iv), the question involves the determination of am and km . The argument is
that free entry in city development will continue so long as profits are positive. This will occur
for any city with n ≥ np . Therefore, migrants will continue to inhabit marginal sites, so long
as they can.
A.5. Proof of Proposition 3. Substituting in the solution for vm , the social marginal benefit
evaluated at the decentralized equilibrium city size nm (a) is
smbm (a) ≡ smb(nm (a), a) = µm

1+ǫ
Γ − vm
.
1 − τ Γ − (Φ/Φ∗ )vm

(A-10)

This establishes part (v) with elementary substitution. Taking the ratio of this to smb∗ (a),
ǫ
Γ −v
smbm
= Φ γ −ǫ γ
smb∗
ǫΦ−v



am
a∗



γ
γ −ǫ

γ ǫ
ǫ km
Γ k∗ǫ

γ
− km
.
− k∗γ

(A-11)

This expression increases in vm if Φ < Φ∗ , which is the same condition for n̂m /â < n̂∗ .
With these results in hand, the proof is straightforward, especially with the illustrations in
Figures 7 and 11. First cover cases with a∗ > a, starting with case (i).
When Φ ≤ Φ∗ the population at the optimal extensive margin is too low np (a∗ ) < nm (a∗ ),
while the elasticity of nm is (weakly) less than that of n∗ . Therefore cities from a∗ to a will have
nm (a) < n∗ (a). By the population constraint, there is left-over population that must go into
sites worse than a∗ , and so am < a∗ . Thus, too many sites are occupied, and all of those sites
that should be occupied are underpopulated. Sites that should not be populated are trivially
overpopulated.
When Φ∗ < Φ < 1 the population at the optimal extensive margin is too low np (a∗ ) <
nm (a∗ ), while the elasticity of nm is greater than that of n∗ . Whether or not am > a∗ , we have
nm (am ) = np (am ) < n∗ (am ) ≤ nm (am ). Therefore, the worst site is under-populated. If the
range of [am ,a] is sufficiently large, then eventually the greater elasticity of nm with respect to
a will cause it to overtake nm (a∗). If it never does, then by the population constraint, there will
be too many cities. If it does eventually, then it is possible that there will be too few cities if
the best sites are sufficiently crowded.
Take the all-important knife-edge case of Φ = 1. When a is homogenous, am = a = a, the optimum is reached. If a 6= a, then am ≤ a∗ is impossible since nm (a) > n∗ (a) for a > am because
of the greater elasticity. This would violate the population constraint. Therefore, it must be that
am > a∗ and that there are too few cities. However at am , nm (am ) = ni (am ) < n∗ (am ) because
42

Figure 11: Optimal and free-migration city sizes for different Φ.

of Lemma 2. The worst sites must be underpopulated. The population constraint requires that
eventually nm (a) > n∗ (a) for some value of a > am , and therefore the most productive cities
will be too large.
If 1 < Φ < Γ , it must still hold that am ≥ a∗ . However, whether nm (am ) < n∗ (am ) depends
on Φ and the distance between am and a∗ . As with Φ = 1, the population constraint eventually
requires cities to be too large.
Finally, if Φ ≥ Γ then the floor populations for nm (a) of np (a) are always larger than n∗ (a),
as in Propostion 2.
When all sites are filled in free-migration am = a, then either the results of am < a∗ from
above hold, or a∗ = am = a and there is no extensive margin in either solution. In this case, if
Φ < Φ∗ , the elasticity of nm is lower than that of na , so larger cities will be relatively smaller
than what is optimal. By the population constraint, they will be absolutely smaller, while the
smaller, inferior cities must be absolutely larger. The opposite holds true when Φ > Φ∗ , while
the optimum will hold with Φ = Φ∗ . This completes the proof.
A.6. Proof of Proposition 4. We see from (23) that the smb is equalized across sites if and only if
Φ = Φ∗ , which is a necessary condition for optimality as in (i). Yet, it is not sufficient since not

43

all sites need to be occupied (i.e., the planner has to adjust optimally the extensive margin).
This is done as follows. We have, by definition, Γ /Φ = γ/ǫ. Evaluating condition (15) at a = a∗
yields the condition
 ǫ  γ
n∗
n∗
Γ
−
= Γ k∗ǫ − k∗γ .
ni
ni

Using condition (22), and the equality np (a) = ni (a)Φ1/(γ −ǫ) , and evaluating it at a = am = a∗ ,
we also have
Γ
Φ



n∗
ni

ǫ

γ
γ
Γ ǫ
− km
.
k − km
 γ
= h  ǫ Φ m γ i
= 1.
n∗
n∗
n∗
−
ǫ/
(
γ
−
ǫ
)
−
γ/
(
γ
−
ǫ
)
−
γ/
(
γ
−
ǫ
)
Φ
− ni Φ
Φ
Γ ni − ni
Γ ǫ
Φ km

Substituting the foregoing expression yields

γ
Γ ǫ
Φ km − km
Γ k∗ǫ − k∗γ

= Φ−γ/(γ −ǫ) .

This equation has the solution km = k∗ Φ−1/(γ −ǫ) , which establishes (ii) since Φ = Φ∗ by (i).

Appendix B: Competitive land developers
Local land developers attract urban dwellers by offering (possibly negative) subsidies, s, such
that the net utility is weakly larger than the economy-wide utility level, denoted by ud , where
subscript ‘d’ stands for ‘developers’. They collect aggregate land rents in the site they develop.
Each developer takes the federal fiscal parameters τ , δ, and ρ as given. A developer who owns
site a solves the following maximization problem:
max π (n, s; a, ud ) = (1 − δ )γ (1 − ρ)nγ +1 − ns
n,s

s.t.

ud ≤ (1 − τ )anǫ − (1 − δ )(1 + γ )nγ + s,

where the first term in π is the aggregate land rent collected and the second term is the cost of
the subsidy to attract n people to the site. Local land developers set agents at their reservation
utility, i.e., s = ud − (1 − τ )anǫ + (1 − δ )(1 + γ )nγ . Plugging s into the profit and optimizing
with respect to n, the first-order condition is given by
a(1 − τ )(1 + ǫ)nǫ − (1 − δ )(1 + ργ )(1 + γ )nγ − ud [1 + E (ud , n, ·)] = 0,

(B-1)

if n(a) is positive (the term on the left-hand side is negative otherwise). In (B-1), E (·) denotes
the elasticity of ud with respect to n, and the dot stands for the choices of the other developers.
In our case with a continuum of sites, developers are atomistic and have no impact on
the aggregate variable ud (like in the case with monopolistically competitive firms). Hence,
E (ud , n, ·) ≡ 0 for all developers, so that condition (B-1) simplifies to
a(1 − τ )(1 + ǫ)nǫ − (1 − δ )(1 + ργ )(1 + γ )nγ = ud
44

(B-2)

for all developed sites. Observe that (B-2) is isomorphic to (A-5) if τ = δ = ρ = 0, i.e., in the
absence of federal taxation, with ud instead of µ∗ . Then, nd (a) = n∗ (a) if ud = µ∗ . Note that
ud > µ∗ is not possible (the allocation with developers cannot Pareto dominate the optimal
allocation by definition). Assume hence that ud < µ∗ . Then, cities are more populated and
fewer than at the optimal allocation. This implies that land developers who own empty land
with a slightly below a∗ can attract workers by offering them a utility higher than ud and yet
make profits. To see this, use (B-2) to solve for ud and substitute into the definition for land
developer profit to see that the profit is positive for nd (a) > n∗ (a). Thus, ud = µ∗ and the
allocation with developers coincides with the federal optimum allocation.
It is easy to verify that the equilibrium profits of land developers are strictly positive for all
a > a∗ . When land is homogeneous, the equilibrium profits of land developers are zero. Here,
positive rents remain because sites are (vertically) differentiated goods.24
Last, note that in the presence of federal taxation, (B-2) and (A-5) no longer coincide. In that
case, the allocation with developers is no longer optimal. The reason is that the developers
take into account the fiscal wedges when attracting people to their sites. If τ and δ are large,
developers have to offer high subsidies to attract agents — especially on sites with high a —
but are heavily taxed by the federal government on their profits (the land rents). Hence, large
cities may end up being too small.

Appendix C: Parametrization
C.1. Economic parameters. For the elasticity of agglomeration economies, ǫ, we consider 0.03
from French estimates that control for sorting (Combes, Duranton, and Gobillon, 2008). For the
elasticity of urban congestion, γ, we use 0.25, which corresponds roughly to the elasticity of 4
percent with respect to income from Combes et al. (2016), after dividing it by 15 percent. For
robustness, we also consider ǫ = 0.06, closer to traditional estimates (e.g., Ciccone and Hall,
1996), and γ = 0.50, based on the traditional mono-centric city model with linear transportation
costs. See also Rosenthal and Strange (2004) and Melo, Graham, and Noland (2009), who
review the literature and report estimates of ǫ in the range of [0.01, 0.8]. The value of γ = 0.5 is
used recently in Saiz (2010) and Desmet and Rossi Hansberg (2013). For lower values of γ see
also Glaeser and Gottlieb (2009).
24 It

is useful to make the analogy between our problem at hand and that of imperfect competition between
firms. In our model, developers differ by ‘productivity’ (i.e., the quality of the site they own), but varieties
(i.e., sites) are viewed as perfect substitutes by mobile workers (consumers). The developer with the lowest cost
(i.e., the best site) cannot capture the whole market because her production cost is convex in city size (because
of increasing urban costs). This limits the size of any city. Since all agents eventually have to end up in some
location — they can ‘opt out’ of the urban system, but there are decreasing returns in the rural area — this implies
that some of the less efficient developers also end up developing sites. The outcome with developers is optimal
when developers cannot strategically manipulate ud , because for any site there always exists another one that is
arbitrarily similar, which constrains developers since sites are viewed as perfect substitutes by mobile agents.

45

C.2. Fiscal parameters. As our base case, meant to approximate the U.S., we choose a tax rate
of τ = 0.34, following Albouy (2009). This rate incorporates the average marginal income tax
rate (net of federal transfers), but also the net-of-benefit burden of payroll tax rates (Medicare
and Social Security), as well as an average sales tax rate applied to consumption. The value of
δ = 0.17 accounts for tax advantages to owner-occupied housing, such as the mortgage interest
deduction, and the lack of sales taxes on housing consumption. The discount for transportation
costs is roughly similar due to the fact that the time costs of commuting — which account for
the majority of commuting costs — are not taxed. See Albouy and Lue (2015) for more. Finally,
ρ = 1 is based on the assumption that migrants either pay rent or purchase land (i.e., housing)
in the city they migrate, too. While we do not model the ownership of land, such ownership
in a ‘home city’ would not negate the opportunity cost of not selling the home to another
potential migrant.
Turning to a stylized developing economy, we choose τ = δ = ρ = 0 based on the idea that:
(i) income taxes are low, or tax evasion is ubiquitious, so that τ = 0; (ii) transfers and subsidies
for land and commuting are inexistent, i.e., δ = 0; and (iii) property rights are weakly enforced
so that many urban migrants can squat on land, i.e., ρ = 0.
C.3. Distribution of productive amenity, a. We next choose a parametrization for the distribution
G(a) of sites. There appears to be considerable heterogeneity in productivity across U.S.
cities. We estimate G(a) from U.S. population and wage estimates which control for worker
characteristics (see Albouy, 2016). We shrink the estimates by a factor of 2/3 to correct
for possible unobserved sorting (Glaeser and Maré, 2001). The productivity parameters are
inferred from a = wn−ǫ, and they are independent of any solution concept for city sizes
(see Section 3). The empirical (productivity) distribution, depicted by the solid black line in
Figure 12, appears to be close to log-normal, with a log-mean of 5.06 and a log standard
deviation of 0.04. This empirical distribution should not be taken as the literal distribution
G(a) of potential sites, however, since we observe only a truncated distribution (the sites that
are developed). There are likely to be an abundant number of sites with low productivity. Yet,
most of them are not observed as there are no cities on them. Also, sites may be inhabited for
advantages other than productivity, such as quality of life. The lower the productivity of a site
is, the better it must be in other positive unobserved characteristics for it to be observed in our
sample, i.e., for a city to be developed there. With this insight, we model G(a) with a Pareto
distribution, whereby the frequency of sites a diminishes with their quality at a constant rate.
The rationale for using a Pareto distribution is that: (i) it is virtually indistinguishable from the
empirical log normal distribution in the upper tail, thus providing a good approximation of
the distribution of high-productivity sites where we observe cities; and (ii) it has a much larger
mass on low-productivity sites which, as argued above, are clearly underrepresented in the
observed sample of city sites. While we do not — by definition — observe the sites on which
46

there are no cities, the idea that there are ‘many’ of them implies that the Pareto distribution
provides a good approximation.

Logarithm of productivity a

2
5.

15
5.

1
5.

05
5.

5

95
4.

2
5.

1
5.

5

4.

9

−8

Tail function of a: ln[1−G(a)]
−6
−4
−2
0

Probability distribution function of a: dG(a)
0
10
20
30

Figure 12: Fitted values of ln[1 − G(a)] and g (a) with ǫ = 0.03, γ = 0.25.

Logarithm of productivity a

Empirical distribution (solid) with ε = 0.03, γ = 0.25; Log normal (dash): mean = 5.06, s.d.= 0.04; Pareto (dash−dot): shape = 10.7, lnscale(min) = 4.95
Pareto top 150 cities (shortdash) shape = 32.2, lnscale(min) = 5.05 Truncated Pareto (longdash) shape = 30.0, lnscale(min,max) = 4.95, 5.20

With a Pareto distribution, the tail distribution ln [1 − G(a)] of the true distribution should
decrease at a constant rate. Fitting the entire empirical distribution produces a distribution
with a relatively small Pareto parameter of 10.7, thus implying that the distribution is relatively
dispersed. But if we look instead at the upper 150 cities, located to the left of the mode, the
estimated Pareto parameter is 32.2. This is likely to be more accurate, since superior sites
are more likely to be inhabited and therefore observed. Furthermore, the fit of the upper tail
appears to be far more accurate. We thus extrapolate a similar shape parameter of 30 for the
entire distribution of a, using a truncated Pareto distribution that begins at the lowest value of
ln a = 4.95 and stops at ln a = 5.20.25 That distribution is depicted by the purple long-dashed
distribution in Figure 12, and we henceforth take it as our benchmark. We also consider Pareto
parameters that are twice or half the size — thereby implying different degrees of heterogeneity
in the distribution of sites — for comparison.
C.4. Fiscal parameters and city sizes. Figure 13 depicts the regions of fiscal parameter values for
τ , δ, and ρ that generate the different cases summarized in Table 1 for our benchmark values
of ǫ = 0.03 and γ = 0.5. The left panel graphs the congestion rebate parameter, δ, against the
federal tax rate, τ , assuming ρ = 1. The unit square is divided into four gray-shaded regions:
the two darkest delimit the parameter ranges for which free-migration leads to oversized cities.
25

By the central limit theorem, Lee and Li (2013) show that a is log-normally distributed when it is the product
of numerous amenities that enter multiplicatively into a. The authors do not consider the case of truncated
distributions, however.

47

Figure 13: Fiscal policies and expected solutions.

0

0

.2

Tax Rate (τ)
.4
.6

.8

Fraction of Land Owned Nationally (ρ)
.2
.4
.6
.8
1

(b) Land-ownership and congestion rebate.

1

(a) Congestion rebate and federal tax rate.

0

.2

.4
.6
Rebate Urban Costs(δ)
Φ>Γ
Φ in [(ε / γ) Γ, 1)

.8

1

0

Φ in [1,Γ)
Φ <(ε / γ) Γ

.2

.4
.6
Rebate Urban Costs(δ)
Φ>Γ
Φ in [(ε / γ) Γ, 1)

.8

1

Φ in [1,Γ)
Φ <(ε / γ) Γ

Observe that the darkest shade of grey delimits the parameter space for which cities are too
few and oversized at both the free migration equilibrium and the local politics allocation. This
case occurs for a narrow range of fiscal parameters that does not seem to characterize any fiscal
system, such as a discount rate that is higher than the tax rate. The lighter two gray zones
characterize combinations for which local politics leads to too many cities, with undersized
large cities and trivially oversized small cities. The free migration allocation also features these
properties for parameters in the lightest area. This areas includes values (τ , δ ) = (0.34, 0.17)
that apply to the U.S., and most developed oecd countries, which feature significant taxes and
property rights over land. As Figure 13 shows, this configuration arises for a ‘large’ subset of
parameters values and can, therefore, not be dismissed as a ‘rare special case’.
The right panel of Figure 13 varies the land-ownership parameter ρ and the congestion
rebate δ. It emphasizes the distorting role of local land ownership on the urban system at the
local politics allocation. Local incentives to reduce the size of a city increase in δ and decrease
in ρ. Thus, the local politics allocation is more likely to feature undersized (large) cities for
parameter configurations that belong to the north-west space. Observe also that when rebates
to urban costs are low — as seems empirically the case — undersized large cities are again
more likely to occur.

48

