NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

DURABLE COALITIONS AND COMMUNICATION:
PUBLIC VERSUS PRIVATE NEGOTIATIONS
David P. Baron
Renee Bowen
Salvatore Nunnari
Working Paper 22821
http://www.nber.org/papers/w22821

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 2016

We are grateful to Marina Agranov, Alessandra Casella, Giovanni Andreottola, Guillaume
Frechette, Drew Fudenberg, Dimitri Landa, Thomas Palfrey, Eduard Talamas, and seminar
audiences at the 2014 Mini-Conference on Experimental Economics at Caltech, the 2014
Behavioral Models in Politics Conference at Duke, the 2016 Mini-Conference on Political
Economy at Stanford University, the University of Warwick, the London School of Economics,
Bocconi University, the University of Padua, the 12th CSEF-IGIER Symposium on Economics
and Institutions, the 2nd EIEF Political Economy Workshop, and the University of Granada for
helpful comments and interesting discussions. Elliott Ash and Anselm Rink provided excellent
research assistance. Nunnari acknowledges financial support from the European Research
Council (Grant No. 648833) The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2016 by David P. Baron, Renee Bowen, and Salvatore Nunnari. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Durable Coalitions and Communication: Public versus Private Negotiations
David P. Baron, Renee Bowen, and Salvatore Nunnari
NBER Working Paper No. 22821
November 2016
JEL No. C73,C78,C92,D71,D72,D78
ABSTRACT
We present a laboratory experiment to study the effect of communication on durable coalitions –
coalitions that support the same allocation from one period to the next. We study a bargaining
setting where the status quo policy is determined by the policy implemented in the previous
period. Our main experimental treatment is the opportunity for subjects to negotiate with one
another through unrestricted cheap-talk communication before a proposal is made and comes to a
vote. We compare committees with no communication, committees where communication is
public and messages are observed by all committee members, and committees where
communication is private and any committee member can send private messages to any other
committee member. We find that the opportunity to communicate has a significant impact on
outcomes and coalitions. When communication is public, there are more universal coalitions and
fewer majoritarian coalitions. With private communication, there are more majoritarian coalitions
and fewer universal coalitions. With either type of communication coalitions occur more
frequently and last longer than with no communication. The content of communication is
correlated with coalition type and with the formation and dissolution of durable coalitions. These
findings suggest a coordination role for communication that varies with the mode of
communication.

David P. Baron
Graduate School of Business
Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305-5015
dbaron@stanford.edu
Renee Bowen
Graduate School of Business
Stanford University
655 Knight Way
Stanford, CA 94305
and NBER
trbowen@stanford.edu

Salvatore Nunnari
Bocconi University
Via Roentgen 1, Office 5-C2-05
20136 Milano, Italy
salvatore.nunnari@unibocconi.it

1

Introduction

In this paper, we present a laboratory experiment to study durable coalitions in a dynamic
legislative bargaining setting where the current status quo is the policy implemented in the
previous period. An endogenous status quo is a feature of many policy domains—for instance,
tax rates, regulations, and entitlements—where policies can be changed by the legislature
but continue in effect in the absence of a new agreement. This makes the policy-making
process an intrinsically dynamic game that cannot be studied as a static competition among
different constituencies, or even as a sequence of independent competitions as in a repeated
game. In choosing a policy proposal and coalition partners, a policy-maker must not only
consider the direct effect of the agreement but also the indirect effect of the agreement on
future policy decisions. This creates incentives for a coalition to continue from one period
to the next. We refer to this as a durable coalition.
Recent theoretical research on dynamic divide-the-dollar bargaining (Kalandrakis 2004,
2010, Diermeier and Fong 2011, Bowen and Zahran 2012, Battaglini and Palfrey 2012, Richter
2014, Anesi and Seidmann 2015, Baron and Bowen 2015) has produced a rich assortment
of predictions. Baron and Bowen (2015) identify a large class of Markov Perfect Equilibria
(MPE), and Anesi and Seidmann (2015) show that almost all allocations can be supported
as stationary MPE. Anesi and Duggan (2015) show that there is a continuum of equilibria
and a form of indeterminacy in more general dynamic legislative bargaining theory, even
with restrictions to Markovian, stationary and weakly undominated strategies. Reviewing
this literature, Binmore and Eguia (2016), referring to Anesi and Seidmann (2015), note
that this “powerful result leaves us with shattered predictive power. [...] it is not the case
that in real world applications anything happens in totally unpredictable fashion (budgets
could be burned but are not; and in most assemblies some subsets of members are known
to more frequently cooperate and coalesce with each other) and we still wish to explain and
predict these coalitional patterns and bargaining outcomes in real world applications. One
might conjecture that we need to include other elements [...] into the choice set in order to
obtain more realistic predictions.”
The experiments in this paper include such “other elements” by focusing on an aspect of
bargaining processes that has received little attention in models of dynamic bargaining, that
of communication. Social interaction among individuals is an integral part of such processes,
and it is difficult to find examples in which democratic decisions are made without people
engaging in negotiations beforehand. Committee members are allowed to—and do—engage
in sometimes intense communication over both proposal-making and voting. In the complete
information, dynamic models studied to date there is no role for communication, and models

1

with incomplete information are typically complex to study.1 Communication can play a
role in complete information models with multiple equilibria by coordinating the strategies
of players.
In particular, we explore experimentally how free-form communication affects bargaining
outcomes and the formation and durability of coalitions in a dynamic environment. Laboratory experiments provide a direct and powerful tool for investigating the effect of communication on dynamic bargaining processes. We study the behavior of laboratory committees
in a simple dynamic bargaining game with an endogenous status quo. In each period of an
infinite horizon in the game, one of three committee members is randomly selected to make
a proposal for the allocation of a divisible resource. The proposed allocation is implemented
if it receives at least two affirmative votes (that is, a simple majority). Otherwise, the status
quo policy prevails, and the resources are allocated according to that policy. The status
quo policy, thus, evolves endogenously. Our main experimental manipulation is allowing
players to negotiate with one another through unrestricted cheap-talk communication before
a proposal is made and brought to a vote. We compare committees with no communication,
committees where communication is public and all messages are observed by all committee
members, and committees where communication is private and any committee member can
send private messages to any other committee member.
Our main goal is to answer the following questions: Does communication affect the distribution of resources? More interestingly, does allowing committee members to communicate
increase the formation and duration of coalitions? How are resources allocated among the
members of a durable coalition? To what extent do these answers depend on whether communication is public or private?
We find that the opportunity to communicate has a significant impact on outcomes and
coalitions. In our experimental committees, the incidence of dictatorial outcomes—where one
committee member gets the lion’s share of resources—is negligible. In our no communication
treatment, we find 27% of majoritarian outcomes—where two committee members share
most of the resources—and 71% of universal outcomes—where everyone receives a significant
fraction of the resources. Private communication results in more majoritarian outcomes
(51%) relative to no communication and fewer universal outcomes (45%). In contrast, public
communication results in fewer majoritarian outcomes (4%) relative to no communication
and more universal outcomes (95%). Durable coalitions emerge more frequently and last
1
The literature on sequential legislative bargaining where a committee is disbanded once it reaches a
decision has considered communication. For instance, Austen-Smith (1990) and Chen and Eraslan (2014)
study theoretically the effects of cheap talk in the presence of asymmetric information between committee
members.

2

longer when communication is allowed.
We analyze the content of the messages to help understand the association of particular
words, such as those related to fairness or to forming a coalition, with coalition type, size,
and durability. We find that messages associated with fairness are positively correlated with
universal coalitions and negatively correlated with majoritarian coalitions; that the emergence of universal coalitions is positively correlated with fairness terms and suggestion of
20-20-20 allocations, while their dissolution is positively correlated to attempts to lobby for
oneself; that the emergence of majoritarian coalitions is positively correlated with messages
about forming a coalition and suggestions of 30-30-0 allocations (likely from the members
of the forming coalition), while their dissolution is positively correlated with suggestions of
30-30-0 allocations (likely from the member outside the dissolving coalition). Words associated with punishment, deviation, or retaliation are infrequently used and are uncorrelated
with outcomes (at least, not in the way suggested by theories), suggesting that punishment
strategies are not a principal explanation for universal coalitions.
This paper is related to two strands of literature. First, this paper contributes to the
literature on laboratory experiments evaluating models of legislative bargaining (McKelvey
1991, Diermeier and Morton 2005, Diermeier and Gailmard 2006, Frechette, Kagel and
Lehrer 2003, Frechette, Kagel and Morelli 2005a,b,c, 2012, Frechette 2009). These works
focus on static environments where a given amount of resources is allocated only once.2
The only exceptions are Battaglini and Palfrey (2012) and Nunnari (2016) who investigate
experimentally dynamic models of committee bargaining with an endogenous status quo in
the absence of communication. A subset of the experiments presented in Battaglini and
Palfrey (2012) is analogous to our treatment without communication. They find a similar
distribution of outcomes, but a lower incidence of universal allocations and a higher incidence
of dictatorial and majoritarian outcomes than we find.3 They do not study the effect of
communication. The experiments in Nunnari (2016) are less comparable to ours, as the
bargaining protocol includes players who can veto a proposal.
This paper also contributes to a growing experimental literature on the impact of unrestricted communication (Charness and Dufwenberg 2006, 2011, Brandts and Cooper 2007,
Goeree and Yariv 2011, Oprea, Charness and Friedman 2014). These studies show that
communication facilitates greater coordination on Pareto superior outcomes. Three recent
2

Roth (1995) surveys the earlier experimental literature in bargaining. These experiments are less related
as they are predominantly bilateral, static, and do not allow communication.
3

There are many small differences between the two experimental designs (in the discount factor, the
bargaining protocol, the sample size, and the subject pool) which may account for these differences in
outcomes.

3

experiments have allowed subjects to communicate in a multilateral bargaining setting (Agranov and Tergiman 2014a,b and Baranski and Kagel 2015).4 These papers study sequential
(one-period) games that end once the resources are allocated rather than dynamic games
with an endogenous status quo and thus cannot address coalition durability or the stability
of allocations. They find that, when communication is allowed, outcomes in these sequential
bargaining games are closer to the unique stationary subgame perfect equilibrium in which
the proposer captures a disproportionate share of the resources. In contrast to this finding
for sequential legislative bargaining, in our dynamic game the prediction is equal allocations
for the coalition partners, and, in our experiment, public, but not private, communication
strongly reduces the advantage for the proposer compared to no communication.
The reminder of the paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we describe the dynamic
divide-the-dollar game subjects play in the laboratory. In Section 3, we identify the equilibria in the existing theoretical literature for the game with no communication and state
testable hypotheses regarding the introduction of communication. In Section 4, we present
the experimental design. Section 5 discusses the results of the experiment, and Section 6
concludes.

2

The Dynamic Divide-The-Dollar Game

We consider a committee of 3 players who in each period bargain over how to divide a
dollar among its members. In each period of an infinite horizon,5 the committee chooses
P
an allocation xt = (xt1 , xt2 , xt3 ), where xti ∈ R+ for any i = {1, 2, 3}, and 3i=1 xti = 1; that
is, only efficient allocations that do not waste resources are allowed. Player i derives utility
u(xti ) from the allocation he receives in period t, where u is strictly increasing. Players are
assumed to maximize the expectation of their discounted, infinite stream of utilities, where
δ ∈ [0, 1) is the common discount factor.
The bargaining protocol with which an allocation xt of the current period dollar is chosen
is as follows. At the beginning of each period, a player is chosen at random to be the proposer
and proposes an allocation y t . The committee then votes between this allocation and the
status quo. If a simple majority votes in favor of the proposal, it is accepted and xt = y t is
the implemented allocation in period t and the status quo for period t + 1. If the proposal
4

The experiments in Murnighan and Roth (1977), Roth and Murnighan (1982), Rapoport and Kahan
(1984), Rapoport, Erev and Zwick (1995), Valley et al. (2002), Croson, Boles and Murnighan (2003), Andreoni and Rao (2011) also explore the effect of communication on bargaining outcomes but are less related
to ours, as they are bilateral and static.
5

We describe how we implement an infinite horizon game in the laboratory in Section 4.

4

is supported by less than a simple majority, it is rejected and the status quo allocation
xt = xt−1 is implemented and remains the status quo for the following period. The initial
status quo x0 is exogenously selected at random.

3

Predictions from the Theory

The theories developed for dynamic divide-the-dollar games characterize different classes of
Markov Perfect Equilibria (MPE) with various assumptions about committee size, payoffs,
discount factors, selection probabilities, rules for breaking indifference, and the space of
possible agreements. An MPE is a subgame perfect equilibrium in which strategies depend
only on the payoff-relevant history (Maskin and Tirole 2001), which in this game is the status
quo policy. Committees are composed of three players with equal agenda setting powers and
do not allow for waste—that is, the sum of allocations to the three players exhausts the
dollar. Given these parameters, the theories that can inform behavior in our experiment are
Kalandrakis (2004), Battaglini and Palfrey (2012), Anesi and Seidmann (2015), and Baron
and Bowen (2015).6
In the MPE characterized by Kalandrakis (2004), outcomes quickly converge to a rotating
dictatorship with an ergodic distribution where in each period the randomly selected proposer
extracts all the resources. Along the convergence path to this distribution, coalitions are
majoritarian and unstable, with the proposer giving a positive allocation only to one other
player, either to the cheaper or to a randomly chosen one. This MPE exists for any degree
of players’ patience.
In the Markov Logit Quantal Response Equilibria (MLE) numerically computed by
Battaglini and Palfrey (2012),7 outcomes converge to a rotating dictatorship if players’ utilities are linear. If players’ utilities are strictly concave, players are averse to sequences of
outcomes in which the status quo changes and the incentives for more symmetric allocations among players are stronger. Battaglini and Palfrey (2012) present numerical results
for highly risk averse players: starting from a dictatorial allocation, the committee moves to
a minimal-winning allocation where two players divide the dollar equally or, less frequently,
6

Diermeier and Fong (2011) assume a persistent agenda setter. The MPE in Richter (2014) crucially
depends on the possibility of waste. The MPEs in Kalandrakis (2009) and Bowen and Zahran (2012) exist
only for, respectively, five or more and seven or more players. Therefore, the predictions from these four
papers cannot inform behavior in our experiment.
7

In Battaglini and Palfrey (2012) equilibria are computed as the limit of MLEs by gradually reducing
noise in the players reaction functions. In the logit version of quantal response equilibrium, each player at
each information set uses a behavioral strategy where the log probability of choosing each available action
is proportional to its continuation payoff.

5

to a universal allocation. These minimal-winning allocations are highly persistent but not
absorbing, as the committees transition to a universal allocation around 20% of the time.
Once a universal allocation is reached, it is essentially an absorbing state (the probability of
leaving this state is approximately 2%). The risk aversion assumed by Battaglini and Palfrey (2012) to obtain convergence to a universal allocation is too extreme to be plausible in
the experiment, so their relevant predictions are rotating dictatorships or rotating minimal
winning coalitions.8
The equilibria in Anesi and Sedimann (2015) and Baron and Bowen (2015) are driven
by what Diermeier et al. (2008) refer to as the fear of exclusion: a player accepts a proposal
in the current period because of fear that if he rejects the proposal he may be excluded
from the coalition formed in the next period. Anesi and Seidmann (2015) show that, as
players become increasingly patient, almost any allocation—the exceptions being dictatorial
and universal allocations —is possible with stationary MPE proposals, what they call simple
solutions, that depend on the identity of players and include a punishment for each of the
other players. The result that almost all outcomes can be supported requires that the values
of the game differ among players and that allocations include waste. Baron and Bowen (2015)
characterize stationary MPEs that support allocations with an equal opportunity property
that implies that the values of the game are the same for all players. With three players,
no waste and for a sufficiently high δ, these MPEs support minimal-winning coalitions with

allocations of the form (c, c, 1 − 2c) for all c ∈ 31 , 12 . Allocations of this form are also the
only simple solutions in Anesi and Seidmann (2015) and in Anesi and Duggan (2015) with
equal values of the game and efficient allocations, as in the experiment. The equilibrium
outcomes in Anesi and Seidmann (2015) and Baron and Bowen (2015) are reached in one
bargaining period and are persistent.9
In the experiment we have 60 tokens to be allocated each period with δ = 0.8, so a
feasible allocation is a triplet of integers between 0 and 60 that sum to 60. With this
discount factor the outcomes predicted in Anesi and Seidmann and Baron and Bowen are
1
They specify a utility function u(xi ) = 1−γ
x1−γ
with γ = 0.95. The certainty equivalent for a 50-50
i
lottery with payoffs 0 and 3, the range of payoffs in our experiment, is 0.0000028.
8

9

The equilibria in these theories depend importantly on how indifference in voting is broken. Kalandrakis (2004) assumes that a player votes for a proposal when indifferent between it and the status quo,
and Battaglini and Palfrey (2012) assume that a player votes for the proposal with probability 0.5 when
indifferent. Anesi and Seidmann (2015) assume that when indifferent the players vote for the status quo
when it is in a simple solution, and for the proposal when the status quo is not in a simple solution. Baron
and Bowen (2015) assume that players vote for the status quo when indifferent. The indifference rules in the
latter two theories yield stability rather than rotation. For comparability the predictions here for the Baron
and Bowen model are based on the indifference rule in Anesi and Seidmann (2015).

6

.33#

Allocation to Legislator 1

Allocation to Legislator 1

.33#
.33#

.33#

.33#
.33#

.33#

.33#
.33#

Allocation to Legislator 2

Allocation to Legislator 2

(a)

(b)

Figure 1: Panel (a): Stationary distribution induced by MPE in Kalandrakis (2004) with δ = 0.8 and
Battaglini and Palfrey (2012) with γ = 0, δ = 0.8. Panel (b): Absorbing outcomes according to different
MPEs with δ = 0.8 in Anesi and Seidmann (2015) and Baron and Bowen (2015).

(30, 30, 0), (29, 29, 2), (28, 28, 4) and their permutations.10 Figure 1 shows the predicted
outcomes for each paper whose theory applies to our experimental setting.
Neither Anesi and Seidmann (2015) nor Baron and Bowen (2015) predict that the universal allocation (20, 20, 20) is supported in an efficient MPE because there is no exclusion
risk.11 This allocation can be supported in a subgame perfect equilibrium using playerspecific punishments in which a player who deviates from the universal allocation receives
0 thereafter and the other two players receive 30 each and hence have an incentive to punish. The universal allocation can also be supported in an MPE if players have sufficiently
altruistic preferences.12 Analysis of the communication among experimental subjects reveals
the frequent use of words related to fairness, which is consistent with altruism or a norm of
10

If the values of the game can differ among players, additional allocations can be supported in an MPE.
A simple solution, SS, is a triple of policies, and equilibrium allocations to individual players can be
 as
52 52
,
,
different as in SS = {(34, 26, 0), (8, 26, 26), (34, 0, 26)}, for which the values of the game are 78
3
3 32 for
the three players. There is little reason to believe that subjects in the experiment view themselves or others
as advantaged or disadvantaged in the game, which is needed if the values of the game implemented in the
experiment are different. Note that in the simple solution above player 3 accepts proposals (8, 26, 26) and
(34, 0, 26) but not proposals (0, 34, 26) or (26, 8, 26). There is also little reason to believe that a player views
the other anonymous and randomly selected players as different.
11

Richter (2014) shows that the universal allocation can be supported as an MPE if there is a threat
created by the possibility of waste off the equilibrium path.
Pn
12
If preferences of player i are Ui (x) = xi + θ j=1,j6=i xj , θ ≥ 1, the universal allocation is supported in
an MPE, as shown in Baron (2016).

7

fairness being present among them. The presence of universal allocations is not correlated
with discussions of the history of play, including punishment, deviation, or retaliation, which
is inconsistent with universal allocations supported by punishment strategies.
The dynamic bargaining games studied in the literature all assume complete information
with no role for communication. In the theories there is a set of subgame perfect equilibria,
including rotating dictatorships, universal, minimal winning, and surplus coalitions, and
symmetric and asymmetric allocations among coalition members. Moreover, players can have
differing utility functions, which allows for additional equilibria. This leaves the questions
of which, if any, of these equilibria would be played in a setting in which players may
not know the equilibrium strategies or which strategies the other players will use. The
experiment provides evidence on what players do as a function of communication that could
support coordination on particular equilibria. Our main experimental treatment is the ability
of players to negotiate with one another through unrestricted cheap-talk communication.
Our hypothesis is that communication serves as a coordination device and can make some
outcomes focal. For example, the MPE in Anesi and Seidmann (2015) with equal values
of the game and Baron and Bowen (2015) are particularly simple, are identity free, exhibit
outcome and coalition stability, provide equal allocations to coalition members, and could be
coordinated on through straightforward communication between the proposer of the coalition
and potential coalition partners.
If subjects have altruistic preferences or follow a norm, such as a norm of fairness, the effect of communication on outcomes could depend on whether that communication is private
or public. For example, suggesting a minimal winning coalition with public communication
could be viewed as an expression of selfish preferences or a violation of the norm of fairness,
resulting in rejection of the suggestion; when communication is private, only two subjects
know of the suggestion and, hence, whether preferences might be selfish or a norm of fairness violated. This reasoning suggests a hypothesis that private communication facilitates
coordination on minimal winning coalitions and public communication inhibits coordination
on minimal winning coalitions. The frequency of minimal winning coalitions then should increase with private communication and decrease with public communication, relative to no
communication. This is consistent with a hypothesis that public communication facilitates
coordination on universal coalitions. This hypothesis is consistent with the findings of Diermeier et al. (2008) that in face-to-face, one-shot, protocol-free negotiations, “proto-coalition
members appear to be embarrassed to “shut the door” on the third party permanently, as this
may be considered socially unacceptable behavior” (p. 498). Our experiment finds that this
may also be the case in anonymous, computer-mediated, dynamic, structured bargaining.13
13

Beyond these differences in the game and in the treatment implementation, the participants to the

8

4

Experimental Design

The experiments were conducted at the Columbia Experimental Laboratory for Social Sciences (CELSS) in March 2014 using students from Columbia University. Subjects were
recruited from a database of volunteer subjects. Six sessions were run with a total of 120
subjects, and no subject participated in more than one session. All the interactions between
subjects were performed through computers.14 The 60 tokens available to each committee
in each period correspond to US$3.
In all committees the discount factor was δ = 0.8. Discounting was induced by a random
termination rule: after each period of the same game, a random number between 0 and 100
was drawn by the computer with the outcome determining whether the game continued to
another period (with probability δ) or was terminated (with probability 1 − δ). This is a
standard technique used in the experimental literature to preserve the incentives of infinite
horizon games in the laboratory (Roth and Murnighan 1978, Palfrey and Rosenthal 1994,
Dal Bo 2005, Duffy and Ochs 2009).
We use a novel implementation of this methodology introduced by Frechette and Yuksel
(2013), the block random termination rule: subjects play as in the standard random termination rule but in blocks of four periods. Within a block subjects receive no feedback
about whether the game has continued to that period, and they make choices that will be
payoff-relevant contingent on the game actually having reached that point. After each block
of four periods, subjects are told whether the game ended within that block and, if so, in
what period; otherwise, they are told that the game has not ended yet, and they start a
new block. Subjects are paid for periods only up to the end of their game, and all decisions
for subsequent periods within that block are void with respect to payment. As shown by
Frechette and Yuksel (2013), this alternative implementation of an infinitely repeated game
results in the same theoretical properties and in similar laboratory behavior as the standard random termination rule. This implementation is appealing for studying the formation
and duration of coalitions, because it allows us to observe subjects’ behavior for a greater
number of periods. In the empirical analysis, we use all available data, including data from
periods that, ex post, were not used in determining payments to subjects. The methodology
ensures that every period played (including periods that, ex post, are not used to determine
payments) have the same incentives.
experiments presented by Diermeier et al. (2008) were confronted with a hypothetical-choice situation: they
“were not paid and did not receive special course credit contingent on negotiation success” (p. 490).
14
Sample instructions are provided in Appendix E. The computer program used in the experiment was an
extension to the open source software Multistage.

9

Sessions were conducted with a minimum of 15 subjects and a maximum of 24 subjects,
divided into committees of 3 members each. Committees stayed the same throughout the
periods of a given game, and subjects were randomly rematched into committees between
games. Each game corresponded to one play of the infinitely repeated game, using the block
termination rule.15
Our main experimental manipulation is the opportunity for subjects to negotiate with
one another through unrestricted cheap-talk communication before a proposal is made and
comes to a vote. We compare committees with no communication, committees where communication is public and messages are observed by all committee members, and committees
where communication is private and any committee member can send private messages to
any other committee member. We conduct two sessions where communication is not allowed,
two where only public communication is allowed, and two where only private communication
between two committee members is allowed.
At the beginning of each game, subjects are randomly divided into committees of three
members each. In each committee, subjects are assigned to be Committee Member 1, Committee Member 2, or Committee Member 3. This member assignment remains the same for
all periods of a game. For each committee, an initial status quo is randomly chosen by the
computer, using a uniform distribution on the set of feasible allocations. The drawing of an
initial status quo is independent across games and across committees.16 At the beginning
of each period, one of the three members is randomly selected to be the proposer, and his
committee member number is revealed to the entire committee. When communication is not
allowed, the proposer proposes an allocation that is observed by all members of the committee with the shares to each member clearly indicated. Then, all members of the committee
simultaneously vote to accept or reject the proposed allocation. If the allocation is supported
by a simple majority of members, it passes, determines the distribution of the 60 tokens in
that period, and becomes the new status quo allocation for the next period. If the allocation
is rejected, the shares in this period are determined by the status quo, which becomes the
status quo for the next period. After each period, subjects observe how each member in the
committee voted and how this determines committee members’ payoffs for this period and
the status quo allocation for the following period. After each game, subjects are randomly
re-matched to form new committees and assigned new committee member numbers. Each
15

The length of the games ranged from 4 to 24 periods in blocks of 4.

16

The initial status quo is given exogenously to preserve symmetry of the bargaining protocol with the
other periods of the game. Note that the theories discussed in the previous section do not depend on the
initial status quo. Moreover, in Appendix C, we show that the exogenous status quo at the beginning of
the game does not anchor outcomes beyond the first period, in particular, it does not affect the committee
allocation in the second period of the same game.

10

Session
Treatment
1
Public Communication
2
Public Communication
3
Private Communication
4
Private Communication
5
Baseline (No Communication)
6
Baseline (No Communication)

n
3
3
3
3
3
3

δ Games
0.8
4
0.8
4
0.8
4
0.8
4
0.8
4
0.8
4

Subjects
21
21
21
24
18
15

Committees
28
28
28
32
24
20

Table 1: Experimental design

subject plays four games.
In the Baseline treatment, no communication was allowed. The Public Communication
and Private Communication treatments are similar to the Baseline treatment except for
one feature. After the proposer was selected and his committee member number revealed
but before the proposer submits his proposal, members of the committee can communicate
with each other using a chat tool. In the Private Communication treatment, subjects can
send private messages that are delivered only to a particular member. When a committee
member sends a message to another, the third committee member does not know the content
of this communication nor the fact that a message was sent.17 In the Public Communication
treatment, subjects were only allowed to send messages that were received by all the other
members of their committee. The duration of the communication was in the hands of the
proposer, and the chat tool was disabled when the proposer submitted his proposal for a vote
or after 120 seconds had passed. The software recorded all the messages sent by subjects
during the communication stage. Table 1 summarizes the details of all the treatments.

5

Experiment Results

In this section we first compare the allocation of resources among committee members for the
three treatments. Second, we identify durable coalitions and study whether their emergence
and duration are affected by communication. Finally, we explore the content of conversations
to shed light on the mechanism behind the differences in allocations and coalitions. To allow
for learning in the initial repetition of our infinite horizon divide-the-dollar game, we present
and analyze the data from games 2 through 4 in each session. Unless stated explicitly, our
statements about statistical significance are robust to considering the whole sample (that is,
including data from the first game).
17

In the private communication treatment a committee member could send the same message to each
other committee member, but one other member would not know the other had received the message.

11

Allocation Type Baseline Private Public
DICTATORIAL
1%
5%†
1%
†
MAJORITARIAN
27%
51%
4%†
Even
11%
34%†
2%†
Uneven
16%
17%
2%†
UNIVERSAL
71%
45%†
95%†
Even
49%
31%†
90%†
Uneven
22%
14%†
5%†
Observations
328
472
252
Table 2: Frequency of allocation types by treatment. †: significant difference with baseline according to
Wilcoxon-Mann-Whitney tests (p < 0.05). An observation is a committees in a period.

5.1

Distribution of Resources

We begin the analysis of the experimental results by examining the bargaining outcomes,
that is, the allocation of resources (60 tokens) at the end of a period. We define as “Dictatorial” those allocations that give at least 50 tokens (that is, 83% of the 60 tokens) to a
single committee member and define as “Universal” allocations that give at least 10 tokens
(that is, 17% of the 60 tokens) to every member of the committee. All other allocations give
a significant fraction of the tokens to exactly two committee members (that is, to a minimal
winning coalition), which we label as “Majoritarian.”18 In the latter two categories, we highlight allocations that give members an even number of tokens. For the Universal allocations
this correspond to the allocation (20,20,20); for the Majoritarian allocations this includes all
allocations of the form (b, b, 60 − 2b), b ∈ {26, . . . , 30}. Table 2 presents the distribution of
allocation types for the three treatments.
FINDING 1: Private communication makes Majoritarian allocations—in particular, those with even sharing between two committee members—more likely
and Universal allocations less likely. Public communication makes Majoritarian
allocations less likely, and Universal allocations—in particular, those with even
sharing among all committee members—more likely.
Table 2 shows that the frequency of Majoritarian allocations is 27% when communication is not allowed, 51% when only private communication is allowed, and 4% when public
communication is allowed. The frequency of Universal allocations is 71% with no commu18

These are the definitions used by Battaglini and Palfrey (2012).

12

Dependent Variable: Share Allocated to Member i
Share to i in Status Quo
0.12*
0.13*
(0.07)
(0.07)
i Proposer
6.88***
6.75***
(1.49)
(1.46)
i Proposer * Private
-0.95
(1.93)
i Proposer * Public
-5.89***
(1.51)
Constant
15.04***
15.11***
(1.23)
(1.18)
Treatments
Base & Private Base & Public
Observations
2,400
1,740
Pseudo R-Squared
0.0504
0.0211
Table 3: Tobit regressions. Standard errors clustered by committees in parentheses. * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05,
*** p < 0.01. An observation is a committee member in a period. Other regressors: treatment dummies and
interaction with share in status quo.

nication, 45% with private communication, and 95% with public communication.19 These
differences are statistically significant.20 The difference in the incidence of Majoritarian allocations between the treatment with no communication and the treatment with private
communication is due to the difference in Majoritarian allocations with equal sharing between two committee members, which triples (from 11% to 34%). Strikingly, subjects who
communicate publicly divide resources evenly (that is, 20 tokens each) 90% of the time.
Private communication increases the frequency of allocations with even distribution
among the members of a Majoritarian coalition, which is consistent with the prediction
of Baron and Bowen (2015) and supportive of the even distribution allocations in Anesi and
Seidmann (2015). While Dictatorial allocations are more frequent when subjects can communicate privately, the findings for all treatments are inconsistent with a rotating dictator
equilibrium as in Kalandrakis (2004) and Battaglini and Palfrey (2012) (for a linear utility
function), where allocations belong to the Dictatorial region in almost every period.
The results from Table 2 suggest that the opportunity to communicate supports coordi19

In Appendix A we show that our results are robust to a different definition of Majoritarian and Universal
allocations: at least 15 tokens (that is, 25% of the tokens) to every member as Universal; at least 20 tokens
(that is, 33% of the tokens) to two members and less than 15 to the other as Majoritarian. The distribution
is similar: pooling together all treatments, Majoritarian and Universal allocations are, respectively, 32% and
65% with the original definition; 39% and 55% with this alternative definition.
20
When using the whole sample, the fraction of Dictatorial allocations is significantly higher in public
communication than in the baseline (3% vs. 1%); the fraction of Majoritarian Even in Public Communication
is indistinguishable from the Baseline (9% vs. 12%). All other comparisons are unchanged.

13

nation on coalitions in which members share the resources more evenly than in the baseline
treatment where no communication is allowed. What does this communication mean for the
allocation to the proposer relative to a non-proposer, or the proposer’s advantage?
FINDING 2: Public communication decreases the proposer’s advantage. Private
communication does not affect the proposer’s advantage.
Table 3 presents Tobit regressions where the dependent variable is the share allocated to
a committee member at the end of a period. This amount depends positively on the share
to a committee member in the status quo at the beginning of that period. It also depends
on the role a committee member has in that period, with proposers receiving more than
non-proposers. Interestingly, this proposer’s advantage is unchanged with private communication and sharply dampened by public communication.21 This result is in stark contrast
with experiments on the static bargaining game à la Baron and Ferejohn (1989) studied
by Agranov and Tergiman (2014a,b) and Baranski and Kagel (2015), where, under simple
majority, the proposer gains from the introduction of either type of communication due to
the reduction in uncertainty and to the competition among potential coalition partners for
inclusion in the coalition.22 This is consistent with a different mechanism that might be at
play in the dynamic game studied here. In the dynamic game we study, a proposer has an
incentive to propose an allocation that the coalition partner(s) will support in future periods,
which requires the proposer to allocate evenly among coalition members. In the static game
there are no future periods, and the proposer can capture 44 tokens, allocating 16 to one
other subject.
In both the static legislative bargaining game and our dynamic game, the introduction
of communication results in observed allocations being closer to the allocations predicted by
the theory. In the Baron and Ferejohn (1989) game there is a unique stationary SPE, and
the question is whether play is according to that equilibrium. In our dynamic legislative
bargaining game, multiple equilibria are supported by stationary MPEs. Among these are
equilibria in which proposers can sacrifice proposal power for durability of their coalition, as
predicted by Anesi and Seidmann (2015) and Baron and Bowen (2015). In the next section,
we explore the extent to which coalitions form, their duration, and how they are affected
by the two modes of communication. This analysis may help refine the theory for dynamic
21

One possible explanation is that subjects during the first game learn to coordinate on equal division, and
hence communication does not affect the shares in games 2-4. This explanation, however, leaves the question
of why there is no effect with private communication and a significant effect with public communication.
22

These experiments are with committees composed of five members. In the communication treatments
of Agranov and Tergiman (2014a,b), subjects can send a message to any subset of members in their committee (that is, they can send messages both privately and publicly). Baranski and Kagel (2015) use two
communication treatments, analogous to our private and public communication.

14

legislative bargaining games, and, specifically, help to understand which coalitions are focal
with communication.

5.2

Coalition Formation and Duration

In Table 2 we classified outcomes using categories based on the allocation and not by which
subjects received the tokens. For example, both (30, 30, 0) and (0, 30, 30) were classified as
majoritarian allocations, but a majoritarian coalition is not present unless the same subjects
receive the 30 tokens in two consecutive periods. We define a durable coalition as a committee
that continues from one period to the next with the same allocation.23 To investigate the
emergence and persistence of durable coalitions, we study the evolution of allocations over
time. Since the status quo in the first period of a game is exogenous, we exclude the first
period from the analysis in this subsection (that is, we only include periods whose status
quo is endogenous).24

Allocation Type(t−1)
DICTATORIAL
MAJORITARIAN
UNIVERSAL
Observations

Pr[Allocation(t) = Allocation(t−1) ]
Baseline
Private
Public
0.33 (3)
0.38 (21)
0.00 (1)
†
0.17 (83) 0.58 (218) 0.00 (7)
0.68 (209) 0.69 (188) 0.93† (202)
295
427
210

Table 4: Persistence of allocation by treatment and allocation type. Number of observations for each
allocation type and treatment in parentheses. †: significant difference with baseline according to WilcoxonMann-Whitney tests (p < 0.05). An observation is a committees in a period.

FINDING 3: Private communication increases the persistence of Majoritarian
allocations. Public communication increases the persistence of Universal allocations.
23

In Appendix B we show that the results are robust to a different, less stringent, definition of durable
coalitions. We define a weak durable coalition as a committee that channels resources to the same subset of
members as in the previous period. To identify weak durable coalitions, Dictatorial allocations are classified
as one of three types (those that give most of the resources, respectively, to member 1, 2, or 3), Majoritarian
allocations are classified as one of three types (those where the resources are divided between members 1
and 2; members 1 and 3; and members 2 and 3), and Universal allocations are classified as a single type. A
weak durable coalition then is a committee that continues from one period to the next with an allocation of
the same type.
24

The results presented in this subsection (and in the following subsection for durable coalitions) are
unchanged if we include the first period in the analysis of status quo persistence and if we allow a durable
coalition to start in the first period of a game.

15

For each of the three treatments, Table 4 presents the probability that an allocation persists from one period to the next, i.e., a durable coalition is present. The same Majoritarian
allocation persists 18% of the time without communication, 58% with private communication and 0% with public communication. The difference between private communication and
the baseline is statistically significant. The same Universal allocation persists 67% of the
time without communication, 69% with private communication and 93% with public communication. The difference between public communication and the baseline is statistically
significant.25
Private communication, thus, is associated with coordinating on Majoritarian allocations
and sustaining a two-subject coalition over time. Public communication is associated with coordinating on Universal allocations and sustaining a three-subjects coalition over time. This
finding suggests that subjects are less willing to participate in coalitions that disadvantage
one subject when communication is public and exposed to all subjects. This is consistent
with the hypothesis that private communication facilitates coordination on Majoritarian
coalitions and public communication facilitates coordination on Universal coalitions when a
norm of fairness is present among subjects. This interpretation is supported by the subjects’
use of words corresponding to fairness as discussed in Section 5.3.
Finally, we investigate how the duration of a coalition is affected by the opportunity
to communicate. Duration is defined as the number of periods that a coalition continues
with the same allocation, so a coalition that begins in period 2 and ends after period 4
has a duration of 2. In the baseline treatment there are 44 coalitions in 33 committees;
in the private communication treatment there are 78 coalitions in 45 committees; and with
public communication there are 41 coalitions in 42 committees. Note that in each of the
treatments there can be more than one coalition formed in a single committee. To investigate
duration, we focus on Majoritarian and Universal coalitions.26 In the 78 committees from
the baseline and private communication treatments, there are 56 Majoritarian coalitions and
66 Universal coalitions. In the 75 committees from the baseline and public communication
treatments, there are 72 Universal coalitions. Since with Public Communication there are
no Majoritarian coalitions, we do not estimate the effect of this treatment on the duration
of Majoritarian coalitions.
FINDING 4: Private communication increases the duration of Majoritarian
25

When using the whole sample, Majoritarian allocations are more likely to persist from one period to the
next in Public Communication than in the Baseline (44% vs. 22%). The other comparisons are unchanged.
26

We exclude persistent dictatorial allocations, which are approximately 1% of the data. A dictatorial
allocation can persist with probability one-third, because when the dictator is selected as the proposer he
can propose the status quo and the vote is then immaterial.

16

Private Communication
Public Communication
Game Length
Constant
Treatments
Coalition Type
Observations
R2

Dependent Variable: Coalition Duration
1.94***
-1.16
(0.45)
(1.02)
2.91***
(0.68)
-0.03
0.22*
0.65***
(0.06)
(0.13)
(0.14)
1.43*
2.32*
-2.31**
(0.74)
(1.38)
(1.13)
Base & Private Base & Private Base & Public
Majoritarian
Universal
Universal
56
66
72
0.0908
0.0983
0.3822

Table 5: OLS regressions. Standard errors clustered by committees are in parentheses. * p < 0.10, **
p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01. An observation is a coalition that lasts for at least one period.

coalitions; public communication increases the duration of Universal coalitions.
With the block random termination design a coalition exogenously ends when the block
during which the game ends is terminated. Since the length of a game is stochastic, it is important to control for the number of periods in a game when assessing whether the duration
of coalitions is statistically different across treatments. To do so, we run an OLS regression
on pairs of treatments where the dependent variable is the number of periods a durable
coalition persists. The independent variables are the treatment (public communication or
private communication) and the length of a game. The results in Table 5 indicate that introducing private communication increases the duration of a Majoritarian coalition by about 2
periods (with respect to the baseline with no communication at the average game length).27
Introducing private communication does not affect the duration of a Universal coalition, but
introducing public communication increases the duration of Universal coalitions by about 3
periods (with respect to the baseline with no communication at the average game length).28
27

The average game lengths (including the first period of the games) are 9 periods, 11 periods, and 8
periods for Baseline, Private Communication, and Public Communication, respectively.
28

With experienced subjects (games 2-4), there are no Majoritarian coalitions with public communication.
This can also be seen from Table 4: there are 9 Majoritarian status quo allocations and none of them persists.
When using the whole sample, public communication does not affect the duration of either Majoritarian or
Universal coalitions.

17

5.3

Analysis of Conversations

The analysis presented above shows marked differences in allocations and coalitions between
the baseline treatment with no communication and the treatments with private or public
communication. To shed light on the mechanism underlying these differences, we analyze the
messages exchanged in the communication treatments. We answer the following questions:
How does private communication differ from public communication? What aspects of communication (volume, participants, direction, content) matter for the allocation of resources
and the persistence of a durable coalition?
Subjects took advantage of the opportunity to communicate with other committee members. Communication preceded most proposals, especially at the beginning of a game: the
fraction of periods with some conversation is 62%, and 92% of committees communicated
in the first period of a game. Moreover, 99% of committees have conversations in at least
one period of the game. Table 6 gives the breakdown of communication by treatment and
presents the average number of messages (overall as well as by sender and by recipient) for
each treatment.

Any Message Sent (All Periods)
Any Message Sent (Period 1)
Mean Number of Messages (All Periods)
From Proposers
From Non-Proposers
Non-Proposer → Proposer
Non-Proposer → Non-Proposer
Mean Number of Messages (Period 1)

Private Comm.
66%†
91%
4.22†
1.51†
2.70†
1.67
1.03
6.00†

Public Comm.
55%
93%
3.36
1.20
2.15
—
—
3.86

Table 6: Use of communication. †: significant difference from public communication according to WilcoxonMann-Whitney tests (p < 0.05).

FINDING 5: Subjects communicate more frequently privately than publicly.
There is more communication with private than with public communication (66% versus
55%), and the average number of messages exchanged in a period is higher with private than
with public communication (4.22 versus 3.36 in all periods; 6.00 vs. 3.86 in the first period
of a game). These differences are statistically significant.29
Table 6 includes two other interesting results: a proposer does not send a different number
29
When including inexperienced subjects, the only statistically significant difference is for number of
messages exchanged in the first period of a game.

18

of messages than a non-proposer in either treatment.30 Also, when communication is private,
non-proposers are more likely to contact the proposer than the other non-proposer.31 One
interpretation is that non-proposers believe that communicating with the member who has
the power to set the agenda is more fruitful in terms of steering the decision of the committee
towards what they prefer. This is in line with the experimental literature on unrestricted
communication in bilateral bargaining, which has highlighted the positive effect of asking
for more resources (Andreoni and Rao 2011). We next investigate whether this is also true
in our dynamic multilateral bargaining setting.
FINDING 6: With private communication, receiving more messages is correlated with receiving more resources; sending more messages is correlated with
receiving less resources.
Table 7 reports the results of Tobit regressions where the dependent variable is the allocation to proposers and non-proposers at the end of a period and the independent variables
are the allocation to this member in the status quo at the beginning of that period and the
number of messages sent or received by this member in the period. For public communication
there is no effect of the initial status quo or the number of messages for either the proposer
or the non-proposers. One interpretation of this is that, in the first game, the subjects learn
to play the universal allocation, perhaps as guided by a norm of fairness, and, in games 2-4,
play according to what they have learned.
In the private communication treatment, the sender can choose the recipients of his/her
message, so in Table 7 we distinguish between the numbers of messages sent (received) by the
role of the recipient (sender). For all treatments and all roles, sending a message is negatively
correlated with the allocation received at the end of the period, whereas receiving a message
is positively correlated with the allocation. For proposers, sending a private message might
involve building a coalition by attracting the support of a non-proposer, whereas receiving a
message might involve non-proposers competing to be in a coalition. With the exception of
the number of messages sent from a non-proposer to a non-proposer, these correlations are
statistically significant in the private communication treatment.32 Receiving communication
30

There are two non-proposers and only one proposer in each period and in each committee, and Table 6
reports the average number of messages sent by the two non-proposing members in a period. The average
number of messages sent by a single non-proposing member in a period is 1.35 with private communication
and 1.08 with public communication. These averages are not statistically distinguishable from the average
number of messages sent by a proposer in the respective treatments.
31

The difference (0.64) between the average number of messages sent by a non-proposer to a proposer and
the average number of messages sent by a non-proposer to a non-proposer is statistically significant at the
1% confidence level.
32

When using the whole sample, the coefficient for Own Allocation in SQ in the last two columns is positive

19

Own Allocation in SQ
# Messages to Non-Prop
# Messages from Non-Prop
# Messages to Prop
# Messages from Prop
# Messages to All Others
# Messages from Any Other
Constant
Role
Treatment
Observations
R2

Dependent Variable: Own Allocation
0.70***
0.57***
-0.02
-0.03
(0.06)
(0.07)
(0.11)
(0.05)
-1.35***
-0.49
(0.42)
(0.51)
1.13***
1.04**
(0.29)
(0.47)
-0.68*
(0.39)
2.44***
(0.58)
-0.12
-0.06
(0.09)
(0.07)
0.07
0.02
(0.10)
(0.02)
9.36***
4.10***
20.94***
20.25***
(1.93)
(1.44)
(2.31)
(0.90)
Proposer Non-Proposer Proposer Non-Proposer
Private
Private
Public
Public
472
944
252
504
0.094
0.051
0.001
0.001

Table 7: Tobit regressions. Standard errors clustered by committees in parentheses. * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05,
*** p < 0.01. An observation is a committee member in a period.

might increase the resources to oneself because senders use private messages with the goal
of being included in a coalition. In what follows, we explore this possibility by investigating
the content of messages.
In analyzing the content of communication, we search for expressions or keywords and
assign messages containing them to one or more semantic domain. First, we identify all
messages that include a numerical suggestion on how to divide the 60 tokens among the three
committee members. In particular, we classify messages that contain ‘30-30’ as ‘Suggest 3030-0’; messages that contain ‘20-20-20’ as ‘Suggest 20-20-20’; and messages that contain
any other triplet of numbers summing to 60 as ‘Suggest Other Allocation’.33 Second, we
identify the messages that contain at least one word or expression about fairness (‘Lobby
for Fairness’), about obtaining resources for oneself (‘Lobby for Oneself’), about forming a
and significant at the 1% confidence level. The coefficient of # Messages to Non-Prop in the second column
is negative and significant at the 10% confidence level.
33

In identifying messages that belong to the domains ‘Suggest 30-30-0’ and ‘Suggest 20-20-20’, we consider
all possible variations of these numbers in a message, as ‘20-20-20’, ‘20/20/20’, ‘202020’, ‘20 20 20’, and so
on.

20

ALL
Lobby Oneself
0.02†
Lobby Fairness
0.06
Form Coalition
0.12†
History
0.02
Suggest 20-20-20 0.06
Suggest 30-30-0 0.04†
Suggest Other
0.03†

Private Comm.
P
NP NP → P
0.02 0.02
0.03
††
0.08
0.04
0.06
0.14†† 0.11
0.12
0.03 0.02
0.02
0.07 0.05
0.05
††
0.06
0.03
0.04
††
0.05
0.02
0.03

NP → NP
0.02
0.03
0.11
0.03
0.05
0.03
0.02

Public Comm.
ALL
P
NP
0.01 0.01 0.01
0.05 0.04 0.06
0.02 0.02 0.02
0.01 0.02 0.01
0.04 0.03 0.05
0.01 0.01 0.01
0.01 0.00 0.01

Table 8: Fraction of messages belonging to semantic domain. ALL is for all members; P is for proposers; NP is for non-proposers; NP → P is for non-proposers speaking to proposer; NP → NP is for
non-proposers speaking to non-proposer. †: significant difference with public communication treatment according to Wilcoxon-Mann-Whitney tests (p < 0.05). ††: significant difference with non-proposers in same
treatment according to Wilcoxon-Mann-Whitney tests (p < 0.05).

coalition (‘Form a Coalition’) and about the history of play (‘History’).34 Table 8 shows the
frequency of messages related to each of these semantic domains by treatment, by sender
and by receiver.35
FINDING 7: The content of messages differs across treatments and across types
of senders.
Private messages are more likely than public messages to be about lobbying for oneself,
forming a coalition, or proposing an allocation of resources other than 20-20-20. Messages
advocating fairness and proposing an even allocation of resources have similar frequencies in
both communication treatments. In both treatments, proposers are more likely than nonproposers to advocate for fairness (in private messages with words; in public messages, with
34

Examples of words or expressions that lead a message to be classified as ‘Lobby for Fairness’ are ‘equal’,
‘fair’, ‘give him’. Examples of words or expressions that lead a message to be classified as ‘Lobby for Oneself’
are ‘give me’, ‘help me’, ‘I want’. Examples of words or expressions that lead a message to be classified as
‘Form a Coalition’ are ‘alliance’, ‘trust’, ‘team’, ‘loyal’, ‘deal’. Examples of words or expressions that lead
a message to be classified as ‘History’ are ‘betrayal’, ‘deviation’, ‘punish’, ‘cheated’, ‘lied’. Some messages
were classified as belonging to multiple semantic domains, for example: ‘any chance you could make it a
little more fair? help me out!’. The messages that do not belong to any of these semantic domains have
mostly to do with timing, wanting the game to end, discussing the rules of the experiment, and interpreting
the incentives. The complete list of words and expressions for each of these semantic domains is provided
in Appendix D. We searched both algorithmically and manually. The full transcripts of the communication
and the classifications are available from the authors upon request.
35

When using the whole sample, we observe the fraction of messages
Suggest 20-20-20 (0.06 vs. 0.04) is significantly larger with private than
private communication, non-proposers are more likely to send messages
vs. 0.03), Suggest 30-30-0 (0.04 vs. 0.02) and Suggest Other (0.04 vs.
other non-proposer. The other comparisons are unchanged.

21

about History (0.03 vs. 0.02) and
with public communication. With
about Lobbying for Fairness (0.06
0.02) to the proposer than to the

a numerical suggestions to divide the tokens evenly) and to make a precise suggestion for
an allocation. The content of private messages sent by non-proposers is not statistically
different when directed to the proposer or to the other non-proposer.
Finally, we investigate whether we can relate the content of communication to actual allocations and coalitions. Tables 9, 10 and 11 show how the probability of observing Universal
allocations, the formation of a durable coalition, and the dissolution of a durable coalition
are correlated with the use of the communication channel and the presence of messages belonging to each semantic domain in a period. The corresponding tables in Appendices A
and B are consistent with Tables 9-11, indicating that the findings have a degree of robustness to the categorization of allocations and a weaker definition of durable coalitions.36 Our
experimental design does not allow us to exogenously manipulate the amount and content
of conversations. For this reason, these tables do not identify whether the messages help in
attaining a particular allocation or coalition or whether the messages are used to explain an
action taken on other grounds.
FINDING 8: The content of messages is correlated with allocation types, as well
as with the formation and the dissolution of durable coalitions.
Table 9 shows penalized maximum likelihood estimates for the probability a committee
chooses a Universal, rather than Majoritarian, allocation in a period.37 The variable ‘Any
Messages’ is a dummy variable which takes value 1 if at least one message is exchanged
in a period. It is included in the regressions to distinguish between periods in which no
message was sent and periods with messages. The other independent variables are dummies
which take value 1 if at least one message in each of the semantic domains is exchanged.
With private communication, the estimates for the whole sample (in column 1) and for
experienced subjects (in column 3) are quite similar: messages advocating fairness and
suggesting a 20-20-20 allocation are positively correlated with universal allocations, whereas
messages suggesting a 30-30-0 allocation are negatively correlated with universal allocations.
The latter is consistent with the messages supporting Majoritarian allocations. With private
36

In Table 9, the dependent variable, the independent variables and the subsamples analyzed in each
column do not depend on the definition of a durable coalition. For this reason, there is no counterpart of
Table 9 in Appendix B, that is, there is no robustness check considering weak rather than strong durable
coalitions.
37

Observations in Table 9 do not include periods with Dictatorial allocations. In Tables 9-11, we use
penalized maximum likelihood (Firth 1993) rather than logistic estimates in order to deal with the small
sample bias arising from the reduced number of periods with non-universal allocations when communication
is public and subjects are experienced (less than 5%). For Table 9, when computing logistic estimates,
‘Form a Coalition’ ‘Suggest 20-20-20’ and ‘Suggest 30-30-0’ are dropped for the last column because positive
values perfectly predict a universal allocation. Apart from this, the results are unchanged if we use logistic
regressions with standard errors clustered by committee.

22

Pr{Universal Allocation}
-0.75*** -0.84***
-0.39
-1.15*
(0.20)
(0.30)
(0.25)
(0.69)
Lobby for Oneself
-0.07
-0.48
0.34
-0.76
(0.34)
(0.59)
(0.40)
(1.01)
Lobby for Fairness 0.71*** 1.65***
0.80***
0.39
(0.27)
(0.60)
(0.31)
(0.93)
Form a Coalition
-0.32
0.24
-0.57**
0.50
(0.22)
(0.57)
(0.26)
(1.45)
History
-0.11
-1.13**
0.12
-1.02
(0.31)
(0.55)
(0.37)
(0.98)
Suggest 20-20-20
1.40***
1.40**
1.55***
1.54
(0.27)
(0.61)
(0.33)
(1.46)
Suggest 30-30-0
-0.98***
-0.90
-1.01***
-0.27
(0.30)
(0.84)
(0.34)
(1.61)
Constant
0.49*** 1.98***
0.04
3.45***
(0.14)
(0.23)
(0.16)
(0.54)
Treatment
Private
Public
Private
Public
Subjects
All
All
Experienced Experienced
Observations
638
433
450
251
2
Pseudo R
0.0950
0.0616
0.0978
0.0293
Any Messages

Table 9: Penalized maximum likelihood regressions. * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01. An observations
is a committee in a period. Observations do not include periods with Dictatorial allocations.

communication and experienced subjects the coefficient of ‘Form a Coalition’ is negatively
correlated with the presence of a Universal allocation, which is consistent with the word
‘coalition’ and the semantic domain interpreted as pertaining to a coalition of size two.
For public communication, the estimates for the whole sample (in column 2) and for
experienced subjects (in column 4) are somewhat different. With experienced subjects (that
is, in games 2-4), the content of public communication is uncorrelated with the probability of observing a Universal allocation, whereas, for the entire sample, the coefficients of
Lobby for Fairness and Suggest 20-20-20 are positive and statistically significant and the
coefficient of Suggest 30-30-0 is negative and statistically significant. This is consistent with
our interpretation of the results from the previous sections: subjects learn to coordinate on
and maintain Universal coalitions in the first game and, thereafter, do not need substantive
communication, as if following a norm, perhaps established in the first game. Words related
to history are uncorrelated or weakly negative correlated with the presence of a Universal
allocation, which is consistent with a norm based on altruism, rather than the threat of
punishment.
23

Dependent Variable: Pr{Durable Coalition Forms}
Any Message
-0.30
0.35
-0.29
(0.52)
(0.56)
(0.99)
Lobby for Oneself
-0.30
0.17
2.77**
(0.64)
(0.67)
(1.26)
Lobby for Fairness
0.74
0.86*
3.58***
(0.47)
(0.46)
(0.92)
Form a Coalition
0.95**
0.09
-0.82
(0.43)
(0.45)
(0.85)
History
0.20
0.15
-3.19**
(0.54)
(0.60)
(1.39)
Suggest 20-20-20
0.01
0.57
4.61***
(0.59)
(0.44)
(0.94)
Suggest 30-30-0
1.16***
0.68
-2.10
(0.44)
(0.54)
(1.63)
Constant
-2.03***
-2.37*** -3.42***
(0.36)
(0.41)
(0.54)
Coalition Type
Majoritarian Universal Universal
Treatment
Private
Private
Public
Observations
239
211
240
2
R
0.1201
0.0821
0.5002
Table 10: Penalized maximum likelihood regressions. * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01. One
observation is a committee in a period.

Table 10 relates the formation of durable coalitions to the content of messages. As shown
in Table 4, with Public Communication, Majoritarian allocations never persists, so we do
not present estimates for this combination of treatment and allocation type. With private
communication, lobbying for fairness is positively correlated with the formation of a Universal
coalition. Messages associated with the formation of a coalition and suggesting a 30-30-0
allocation are positively correlated with the formation of a Majoritarian coalition, which
is consistent with the correlations with experienced subjects in the third column of Table
9. With public communication, suggesting 20-20-20, lobbying for fairness, and lobbying for
oneself are positively correlated with the formation of a Universal coalition, while talking
about the history of the game is negatively correlated with the formation of such coalitions.38
38

When using logistic estimates, in the first column, Lobbying for Fairness is positive and significant at
the 10% level; Form a Coalition is positive and significant at the 1% level; in the last column, History is
negative and significant at the 10% level; Suggest 30-30-0 is dropped because positive values predict failure
perfectly. The other coefficients have the same sign and significance levels. When using the whole sample,
in the first column, Form a Coalition is positive and significant at the 1% level; Lobbying for Fairness and
Suggest 20-20-20 are positive and significant at the 5% level; in the second column, Lobbying for Fairness

24

Dependent Variable: Pr{Durable
Any Message
0.87
(0.59)
Lobby for Oneself
0.12
(0.66)
Lobby for Fairness
-0.02
(0.58)
Form a Coalition
-0.18
(0.47)
History
0.37
(0.60)
Suggest 20-20-20
-0.56
(0.76)
Suggest 30-30-0
0.87*
(0.48)
Constant
-2.72***
(0.49)
Coalition Type
Majoritarian
Treatment
Private
Observations
239
2
R
0.0350

Coalition Dissolves}
0.85
0.19
(0.71)
(1.24)
1.89***
2.64*
(0.66)
(1.40)
0.50
0.67
(0.56)
(1.26)
-0.66
-1.42
(0.58)
(1.98)
0.86
1.48
(0.66)
(1.30)
0.38
0.99
(0.53)
(1.19)
-1.05
0.84
(0.92)
(1.84)
-3.03*** -4.29***
(0.55)
(0.82)
Universal Universal
Private
Public
211
240
0.0913
0.0413

Table 11: Penalized maximum likelihood regressions. * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01. One
observation is a committee in a period.

Finally, Table 11 presents correlations between the content of messages and the dissolution of coalitions. As for the previous table, we do not report estimates for Majoritarian
coalitions and Public Communication, because we do not observe any Majoritarian coalition
in that treatment. With private communication, lobbying for oneself is positively correlated
with the dissolution of a Universal coalition and suggesting a 30-30-0 allocation is positively
correlated with the dissolution of a Majoritarian coalition.39
In Tables 9-11 with public communication, talking about past behavior is not significantly
is positive and significant at the 5% level; in the last column, Lobby for Oneself is not significant; History
is negative and significant at the 1% level; Suggest 30-30-0 is negative and significant at the 5% level. The
other coefficients have the same sign and significance levels.
39

When using logistic estimates, in the first column, Suggest 30-30-0 is positive and significant at the 5%
level; in the last column, Lobby for Oneself is positive and significant at the 5% level; Form a Coalition and
Suggest 30-30-0 are dropped because positive values predict dissolution perfectly. The other coefficients have
the same sign and significance levels. When using the whole sample, in the second column, Any Message is
positive and significant at the 10% level; Lobby for Oneself is positive and significant at the 5% level. In the
third column, Any Message is positive and significant at the 5% level; Lobby for Oneself is not significant.
The other coefficients have the same sign and significance levels.

25

correlated with universal allocations nor with the dissolution of coalitions in both treatments,
and it is negatively correlated with the formation of Universal coalitions. As detailed in
Appendix D, we included in the ‘History’ domain keywords and expressions that can be
related to history-dependent strategies: ‘betray’, ‘deviate’, ‘retaliate’, ‘cheat’, ‘lie’, ‘revenge’,
‘promise’, ‘punish’ (and words sharing the same root). The findings in Tables 9, 10 and 11
suggest that the emergence and duration of Universal allocations or coalitions are not due
to the threat of punishment using history-dependent strategies. The findings in these tables
are consistent with universal outcomes being supported by a norm of fairness. However, the
extent to which the effect of these terms is causal cannot be gauged by our experimental
design because the content of messages is endogenously chosen by the subjects.40

6

Conclusions

In this paper, we present a laboratory experiment to study durable coalitions in a dynamic
legislative bargaining setting. Our experimental treatment is the opportunity of subjects to
communicate with one another. The three treatments are: committees that cannot communicate, committees that can engage in private conversations before a proposal is made, and
committees that can engage in public conversations before a proposal is made. Communication is viewed as a mechanism for coordinating on particular allocations and coalitions.
With regard to the research questions posed in the Introduction, we find that the opportunity to communicate has a significant impact on the formation of coalitions and, consequently, on how resources are allocated. When communication is possible, durable coalitions
emerge more frequently and last longer. Compared to the treatment with no communication, private communication increases coordination on majoritarian coalitions and decreases
coordination on universal coalitions, whereas public communication has the opposite effect.
To shed light on the mechanism underlying these differences, we analyze the messages exchanged in the communication treatments. Subjects who can communicate privately engage
in more lobbying for themselves and are more likely to discuss the formation of a coalition or
to suggest a non-universal allocation of the resources than do subjects who can only commu40

In Appendices A and B, we show robustness checks for Table 10 and Table 11 considering an alternative
classification of allocations and an alternative definition of coalition. These correlations are consistent across
all three sets of analyses: the formation of a Majoritarian coalition with Private Communication is positively
correlated with Form a Coalition; the formation of a Universal coalition with Public Communication is
positively correlated with Lobby for Fairness and Suggest 20-20-20; the dissolution of a Universal coalition
with Private Communication is positively correlated with Lobby for Oneself. The positive correlation between
Suggest 30-30-0 and the formation of a Majoritarian coalition in Private Communication and the negative
correlation between History and the dissolution of a Universal coalition in Public Communication are robust
to the alternative definition of allocations but not to the alternative definition of coalitions.

26

nicate publicly. Messages related to fairness and suggesting a 20-20-20 division are positively
correlated with Universal allocations in both communication treatments.
The experimental evidence suggests a role for social interaction and communication in
theories of dynamic legislative bargaining and points theorists to a fruitful direction for
future research. This role may be in affecting a norm of fairness, in reducing strategic
uncertainty or the fear of exclusion from a less-than-universal coalition, and in coordinating
players’ strategies to attain particular types of equilibria. Our results suggest that not only
the existence of a communication channel but also the mode of communication matters in
coordinating on equilibria. Coordination could be reinforced by experience. With private
communication, a higher frequency of majoritarian coalitions results as subjects become
more experienced, whereas, with public communication, universal coalitions become more
frequent.
Because of the absence of theories encompassing communication, this experiment is not
a test of the existing theories for a dynamic divide-the-dollar game with communication.
Nonetheless, existing theories for the dynamic game with no communication help us understand the incentives present in the experiment. The gap in that understanding pertains to
universal coalitions. The modal allocation in the no-communication and public communication treatments is universal, and most of the universal allocations have even sharing among
the coalition members. Three explanations of this are consistent with theory.41 The first is
extreme risk aversion as in the Battaglini and Palfrey (2012) model, but the required risk
aversion is so extreme as to be unbelievable in the experimental setting. The second is playerspecific punishments that deter individual subjects from deviating from the equilibrium path
to take short-term gains. This takes fairly sophisticated strategies and implicit threats of
punishment. As discussed in Section 5.3, messages related to such punishment strategies
are uncorrelated with the presence and duration of universal coalitions The third possible
explanation is preferences that are not selfish but instead exhibit a degree of altruism that
could generate a norm of fairness that supports universal allocations. This explanation is
consistent with the overall experimental findings, but experiments designed to identify the
foundations of and measure the strength of a norm of fairness are needed before concluding
that such a norm explains bargaining outcomes. As Cooper and Kagel (Forthcoming) note
in their survey of the empirical finding in sequential (static) legislative bargaining, “more is
going on in games of this sort than we currently understand.”
41

The universal allocation is also not explained, for example, by the von Neuman-Morgenstern solution
concept in cooperative game theory, which selects minimal winning coalitions with allocations of the form
30-30-0.

27

References
Agranov, Marina and Chloe Tergiman. 2014a. “Communication in Multilateral Bargaining.”
Journal of Public Economics 118:75–85.
Agranov, Marina and Chloe Tergiman. 2014b. “Transparency versus Back-Room Deals in
Bargaining.” mimeo.
Andreoni, James and Justin M. Rao. 2011. “The Power of Asking: How Communication
Affects Selfishness, Empathy, and Altruism.” Journal of Public Economics 95(7):513–520.
Anesi, Vincent and Daniel J Seidmann. 2015. “Bargaining in Standing Committees with an
Endogenous Default.” Review of Economic Studies 82(4):1–43.
Anesi, Vincent and John Duggan. 2015. “Existence and Indeterminacy of Markovian Equilibria in Dynamic Bargaining Games.” mimeo.
Austen-Smith, David. 1990. “Information Transmission in Debate.” American Journal of
Political Science 34(1):124–152.
Baranski, Andrzej and John H. Kagel. 2015. “Communication in Legislative Bargaining.”
Journal of the Economic Science Association 1(1):59–71.
Baron, David P. 2016. “Simple Dynamics of Legislative Bargaining: Coalitions and Proposal
Power.” mimeo.
Baron, David P. and John A. Ferejohn. 1989. “Bargaining in Legislatures.” American Political Science Review 83(4):1181–1206.
Baron, David P. and T. Renee Bowen. 2015. “Dynamic Coalitions.” mimeo.
Battaglini, Marco and Thomas R. Palfrey. 2012. “The Dynamics of Distributive Politics.”
Economic Theory 49(3):739–777.
Binmore, Ken and Jon X. Eguia. 2016. “Bargaining with Outside Options.” mimeo.
Bowen, T. Renee and Zaki Zahran. 2012. “On Dynamic Compromise.” Games and Economic
Behavior 76(2):391–419.
Brandts, Jordi and David J. Cooper. 2007. “It’s What You Say, Not What You Pay: An Experimental Study of Manager-Employee Relationships in Overcoming Coordination Failure.” Journal of the European Economic Association 5(6):1223–1268.

28

Charness, Gary and Martin Dufwenberg. 2006. “Promises and Partnership.” Econometrica
74(6):1579–1601.
Charness, Gary and Martin Dufwenberg. 2011. “Participation.” The American Economic
Review 101(4):1211–1237.
Chen, Ying and Hülya Eraslan. 2014. “Rhetoric in legislative bargaining with asymmetric
information.” Theoretical Economics 9(2):483–513.
Cooper, David J. and John H. Kagel. Forthcoming. Bargaining Experiments. In The Handbook of Experimental Economics, Vol. 2, ed. John H. Kagel and Alvin E. Roth. Princeton
University Press.
Croson, Rachel, Terry Boles and J Keith Murnighan. 2003. “Cheap Talk in Bargaining
Experiments: Lying and Threats in Ultimatum Games.” Journal of Economic Behavior
& Organization 51(2):143–159.
Dal Bo, Pedro. 2005. “Cooperation under the Shadow of the Future: Experimental Evidence
from Infinitely Repeated Games.” American Economic Review 95(5):1591–1604.
Diermeier, Daniel and Pohan Fong. 2011. “Legislative Bargaining with Reconsideration.”
Quarterly Journal of Economics 126(2):947–985.
Diermeier, Daniel and Rebecca Morton. 2005. Experiments in Majoritarian Bargaining. In
Social Choice and Strategic Decisions: Essays in Honor of Jeffrey S. Banks, ed. David A.
Smith and John Duggan. Springer pp. 201–226.
Diermeier, Daniel, Roderick I. Swaab, Victoria H. Medvec and Mary C. Kern. 2008. “The
Micro-Dynamics of Coalition Formation.” Political Research Quarterly 61(3):484–501.
Diermeier, Daniel and Sean Gailmard. 2006. “Self-Interest, Inequality, and Entitlement in
Majoritarian Decision-Making.” Quarterly Journal of Political Science 1(4):327–350.
Duffy, John and Jack Ochs. 2009. “Cooperative Behavior and the Frequency of Social
Interaction.” Games and Economic Behavior 66(2):785–812.
Firth, David. 1993.
80(1):27–38.

“Bias Reduction of Maximum Likelihood Estimates.” Biometrika

Frechette, Guillaume R. 2009. “Learning in a Multilateral Bargaining Experiment.” Journal
of Econometrics 153(2):183–195.

29

Frechette, Guillaume R., John H. Kagel and Massimo Morelli. 2005a. “Behavioral Identification in Coalitional Bargaining: An Experimental Analysis of Demand Bargaining and
Alternating Offers.” Econometrica 73(6):1893–1937.
Frechette, Guillaume R., John H. Kagel and Massimo Morelli. 2005b. “Gamson’s Law versus
Non-cooperative Bargaining Theory.” Games and Economic Behavior 51(2):365–390.
Frechette, Guillaume R., John H. Kagel and Massimo Morelli. 2005c. “Nominal Bargaining
Power, Selection Protocol, and Discounting in Legislative Bargaining.” Journal of Public
Economics 89(8):1497–1517.
Frechette, Guillaume R., John H. Kagel and Massimo Morelli. 2012. “Pork versus Public
Goods: An Experimental Study of Public Good Provision within a Legislative Bargaining
Framework.” Economic Theory 49(3):779–800.
Frechette, Guillaume R., John H. Kagel and Steven F. Lehrer. 2003. “Bargaining in Legislatures: An Experimental Investigation of Open versus Closed Amendment Rules.” American Political Science Review 97(2):221–232.
Frechette, Guillaume R and Sevgi Yuksel. 2013. “Infinitely Repeated Games in the Laboratory: Four Perspectives on Discounting and Random Termination.” mimeo.
Goeree, Jacob K and Leeat Yariv. 2011. “An Experimental Study of Collective Deliberation.”
Econometrica 79(3):893–921.
Kalandrakis, Tasos. 2004. “A Three-Player Dynamic Majoritarian Bargaining Game.” Journal of Economic Theory 116(2):294–322.
Kalandrakis, Tasos. 2010. “Minimum Winning Coalitions and Endogenous Status Quo.”
International Journal of Game Theory 39:617–643.
Maskin, Eric and Jean Tirole. 2001. “Markov Perfect Equilibrium:: I. Observable Actions.”
Journal of Economic Theory 100(2):191–219.
McKelvey, Richard D. 1991. An Experimental Test of a Stochastic Game Model of Committee
Bargaining. In Contemporary Laboratory Research in Political Economy, ed. Thomas R.
Palfrey. Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press pp. 139–69.
Murnighan, J Keith and Alvin E Roth. 1977. “The Effects of Communication and Information Availability in an Experimental Study of a Three-Person Game.” Management
Science 23(12):1336–1348.
30

Nunnari, Salvatore. 2016. “Dynamic Legislative Bargaining with Veto Power: Theory and
Experiments.” mimeo.
Oprea, Ryan, Gary Charness and Daniel Friedman. 2014. “Continuous Time and Communication in a Public-Goods Experiment.” Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization
108:212–223.
Palfrey, Thomas R. and Howard Rosenthal. 1994. “Repeated Play, Cooperation and Coordination: An Experimental Study.” Review of Economic Studies 61(3):545–565.
Rapoport, Amnon, Ido Erev and Rami Zwick. 1995. “An Experimental Study of Buyer-Seller
Negotiation with One-Sided Incomplete Information and Time Discounting.” Management
Science 41(3):377–394.
Rapoport, Amnon and James P. Kahan. 1984. “Coalition Formation in a Five-Person Market
Game.” Management Science 30(3):326–343.
Richter, Michael. 2014. “Fully Absorbing Dynamic Compromise.” Journal of Economic
Theory 152:92–104.
Roth, Alvin E. 1995. Bargaining Experiments. In The Handbook of Experimental Economics,
Vol. 1, ed. John H. Kagel and Alvin E. Roth. Princeton University Press chapter 4,
pp. 253–348.
Roth, Alvin E. and J. Keith Murnighan. 1978. “Equilibrium Behavior and Repeated Play
of the Prisoner’s Dilemma.” Journal of Mathematical Psychology 17(2):189–198.
Roth, Alvin E and J Keith Murnighan. 1982. “The Role of Information in Bargaining: An
Experimental Study.” Econometrica: Journal of the Econometric Society pp. 1123–1142.
Valley, Kathleen, Leigh Thompson, Robert Gibbons and Max H Bazerman. 2002. “How
Communication Improves Efficiency in Bargaining Games.” Games and Economic Behavior 38(1):127–155.

31

Appendix A: Alternative Definition of Allocation Types
In the text we define as “Dictatorial” allocations that give at least 50 tokens (that is, 83%
of the tokens) to a single committee member; as “Universal” allocations that give at least 10
tokens (that is, 17% of the tokens) to every member of the committee; and as “Majoritarian”
all other allocations. Here, we show that the results are robust to a different definition of
Majoritarian and Universal allocations. In particular, we define as Dictatorial allocations
that give at least 50 tokens (that is, 83% of the tokens) to a single member; as Universal
allocations that give at least 15 tokens (that is, 25% of the tokens) to every member; and
as Majoritarian allocations that give at least 20 tokens (that is, 33% of the tokens) to two
members and less than 15 to the other. As we did for our original classification, in the latter
two categories, we highlight allocations that give members an even number of tokens. For
the Universal allocations, this correspond to the allocation (20, 20, 20); for the Majoritarian
allocations, this includes all allocations of the form [b, b, 60 − 2b] where b ∈ (22, 30].

Allocation Type Baseline Private Public
DICTATORIAL
1%
5%†
1%
†
MAJORITARIAN
36%
58%
7%†
Even
18%
40%†
4%†
Uneven
17%
18%
3%†
UNIVERSAL
56%
34%†
92%†
Even
49%
31%†
90%†
Uneven
7%
4%
2%†
OTHER
7%
3%†
1%†
Observations
328
472
252
Table 12: Frequency of allocation types by treatment using alternative definition of allocation types. †:
significant difference from baseline according to Wilcoxon-Mann-Whitney tests (p < 0.05). An observation
is a committee in a period.

32

Allocation Type(t−1)
DICTATORIAL
MAJORITARIAN
UNIVERSAL
OTHER
Observations

Pr[Allocation(t) = Allocation(t−1) ]
Baseline
Private
Public
0.33 (3)
0.38 (21) 0.00 (1)
0.19 (108) 0.56† (250) 0.17 (12)
0.83 (163) 0.79 (144) 0.94† (196)
0.10 (21) 0.17 (12)
0.00 (1)
295
427
210

Table 13: Persistence of allocation by treatment and allocation type using alternative definition of allocation
types. Number of observations for each allocation type and treatment in parentheses. †: significant difference
with baseline according to Wilcoxon-Mann-Whitney tests (p < 0.05). An observation is a committees in a
period.

Private Communication
Public Communication
Game Length
Constant
Treatments
Coalition Type
Observations
R2

Dependent Variable: Coalition Duration
1.68***
-0.99
(0.48)
(1.20)
-0.82**
2.31***
(0.34)
(0.66)
-0.05
0.50**
-0.06*
0.84***
(0.06)
(0.21)
(0.03)
(0.11)
1.95***
0.71
2.05***
-2.74***
(0.67)
(2.11)
(0.43)
(0.93)
Baseline
Baseline
Baseline
Baseline
& Private
& Private
& Public
& Public
Majoritarian Universal Majoritarian Universal
52
43
10
62
0.0562
0.3224
0.1486
0.6383

Table 14: OLS regressions using alternative definition of allocation types. Standard errors clustered by
committees in parentheses. * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01. An observation is a coalition that lasts
for at least one period.

33

Pr{Universal Allocation}
-0.98*** -0.78***
-0.57**
-0.69
(0.21)
(0.27)
(0.25)
(0.55)
Lobby for Oneself
-0.78*
-0.50
-0.80
-1.10
(0.43)
(0.55)
(0.53)
(0.85)
Lobby for Fairness
0.34
0.93**
0.50
0.02
(0.28)
(0.42)
(0.33)
(0.69)
Form a Coalition
-0.59**
-0.29
-0.86***
-0.65
(0.24)
(0.46)
(0.29)
(0.82)
History
-0.07
-0.84*
0.05
-0.87
(0.34)
(0.51)
(0.41)
(0.81)
Suggest 20-20-20
1.34*** 1.52***
1.49***
1.32
(0.26)
(0.53)
(0.32)
(0.98)
Suggest 30-30-0
-1.25***
-0.28
-1.25***
0.41
(0.35)
(0.82)
(0.41)
(1.52)
Constant
0.35*** 1.61***
-0.12
2.81***
(0.13)
(0.20)
(0.16)
(0.40)
Treatment
Private
Public
Private
Public
Subjects
All
All
Experienced Experienced
Observations
638
433
450
251
2
Pseudo R
0.1324
0.0581
0.1165
0.0335
Any Messages

Table 15: Penalized maximum likelihood regressions with alternative definition of allocation types. *
p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01. An observations is a committee in a period. Observations do not
include periods with Dictatorial allocations.

34

Dependent Variable: Pr{Durable Coalition
Any Message
-0.21
0.31
(0.49)
(0.66)
Lobby for Oneself
-0.38
0.42
(0.54)
(1.02)
Lobby for Fairness
0.69*
1.08*
(0.41)
(0.57)
Form a Coalition
0.92**
-0.29
(0.39)
(0.62)
History
0.18
0.11
(0.48)
(0.75)
Suggest 20-20-20
-0.15
0.90*
(0.50)
(0.53)
Suggest 30-30-0
1.20***
0.58
(0.39)
(0.76)
Constant
-2.06***
-2.46***
(0.36)
(0.44)
Coalition Type
Majoritarian Universal
Treatment
Private
Private
Observations
275
162
2
R
0.1195
0.0982

Forms}
-1.03
(1.56)
3.71**
(1.71)
4.79***
(1.48)
-0.04
(0.87)
-5.19***
(1.82)
5.79***
(1.50)
-2.23
(1.63)
-3.74***
(0.64)
Universal
Public
232
0.5200

Table 16: Penalized maximum likelihood regressions with alternative definition of allocation types. *
p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01. An observation is a committee in a period.

35

Dependent Variable: Pr{Durable
Any Message
1.30**
(0.62)
Lobby for Oneself
-0.11
(0.58)
Lobby for Fairness
0.12
(0.48)
Form a Coalition
-0.04
(0.41)
History
0.53
(0.51)
Suggest 20-20-20
-0.60
(0.64)
Suggest 30-30-0
0.38
(0.45)
Constant
-3.02***
(0.55)
Coalition Type
Majoritarian
Treatment
Private
Observations
275
2
R
0.0334

Coalition Dissolves}
0.14
0.17
(0.85)
(1.26)
3.47***
1.80
(1.08)
(1.78)
0.63
1.00
(0.77)
(1.16)
-0.97
0.01
(0.97)
(1.85)
1.00
-0.35
(0.90)
(2.05)
0.76
0.94
(0.72)
(1.14)
0.65
1.48
(1.03)
(1.55)
-2.94*** -4.26***
(0.55)
(0.82)
Universal Universal
Private
Public
162
232
0.1975
0.0030

Table 17: Penalized maximum likelihood regressions with alternative definition of allocation types. *
p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01. An observation is a committee in a period.

36

Appendix B: Weaker Definition of Durable Coalition

Allocation Type(t−1)
DICTATORIAL
MAJORITARIAN
UNIVERSAL
Observations

Pr[Allocation Type(t) = Allocation Type(t−1) ]
Baseline
Private
Public
0.33 (3)
0.57 (21)
†
0.22 (79) 0.71 (219)
0.22 (9)
0.88 (213) 0.86 (187)
0.98† (201)
295
427
210

Table 18: Persistence of allocation by treatment and allocation type using weaker definition of persistence.
Number of observations for each allocation type and treatment in parentheses. †: significant difference with
baseline according to Wilcoxon-Mann-Whitney tests (p < 0.05). An observation is a committees in a period.

Private Communication
Public Communication
Game Length
Constant
Treatments
Coalition Type
Observations
R2

Dependent Variable: Coalition Duration
2.73***
-1.15
(0.45)
(1.00)
2.10***
(0.68)
0.01
0.15
0.57***
(0.07)
(0.11)
(0.15)
1.00
3.81***
-0.74
(0.78)
(1.28)
(1.20)
Base & Private Base & Private Base & Public
Majoritarian
Universal
Universal
57
69
75
0.1951
0.0589
0.3055

Table 19: OLS regressions using weaker definition of coalition. Standard errors clustered by committees in
parentheses. * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01. An observation is a coalition that lasts for at least one
period.

37

Dependent Variable: Pr{Durable Coalition Forms}
Any Message
-0.20
0.45
1.37*
(0.54)
(0.66)
(0.77)
Lobby for Oneself
-0.44
1.83***
0.12
(0.67)
(0.64)
(1.54)
Lobby for Fairness
0.58
0.07
1.51***
(0.49)
(0.52)
(0.55)
Form a Coalition
1.19***
-0.55
-1.04
(0.46)
(0.53)
(0.86)
History
-0.19
0.70
-0.91
(0.59)
(0.66)
(1.01)
Suggest 20-20-20
0.01
1.32***
1.99***
(0.60)
(0.49)
(0.53)
Suggest 30-30-0
0.74
0.29
-1.06
(0.46)
(0.58)
(1.54)
Constant
-2.17***
-2.77*** -3.77***
(0.39)
(0.49)
(0.64)
Coalition Type
Majoritarian Universal Universal
Treatment
Private
Private
Public
Observations
239
211
240
2
R
0.1088
0.0357
0.4260
Table 20: Penalized maximum likelihood regressions using weaker definition of coalition. * p < 0.10, **
p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01. An observation is a committee in a period.

38

Dependent Variable: Pr{Durable
Any Message
0.50
(0.53)
Lobby for Oneself
-0.11
(0.74)
Lobby for Fairness
-0.56
(0.73)
Form a Coalition
-0.01
(0.49)
History
0.84
(0.61)
Suggest 20-20-20
-0.55
(0.92)
Suggest 30-30-0
-0.07
(0.59)
Constant
-2.33***
(0.41)
Coalition Type
Majoritarian
Treatment
Private
Observations
239
2
R
0.0101

Coalition Dissolves}
0.18
-0.52
(0.79)
(2.50)
1.98***
3.71
(0.72)
(2.56)
0.17
2.17
(0.66)
(1.68)
-0.24
-0.49
(0.65)
(2.14)
0.62
-0.40
(0.83)
(1.97)
0.90
2.14
(0.61)
(1.67)
-0.65
2.29
(0.92)
(1.84)
-3.03*** -5.40***
(0.55)
(1.42)
Universal Universal
Private
Public
211
240
0.0821
0.0133

Table 21: Penalized maximum likelihood regressions using weaker definition of coalition. * p < 0.10, **
p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01. An observation is a committee in a period.

39

Appendix C: Irrelevance of Exogenous Status Quo
Dependent Variable: Share Allocated to Member i
Share to i in Current SQ (Endogenous)
-0.08
0.51**
-0.05
(0.23)
(0.20)
(0.09)
Share to i in Initial SQ (Exogenous)
-0.14
-0.11
0.01
(0.13)
(0.09)
(0.02)
Constant
24.05*** 11.24** 21.00***
(3.56)
(4.82)
(1.96)
Observations
99
135
126
Period
2
2
2
Treatment
Baseline Private
Public
Pseudo R-Squared
0.006
0.025
0.002
Table 22: Tobit regressions. Standard errors clustered by committees in parentheses. * p < 0.10, **
p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01. When using the whole sample, the coefficients of Share to i in Current SQ in the
last two columns are positive and significant at the 1% confidence level.

40

Appendix D: List of Keywords for Semantic Domains
A message belongs to a class if it contains the following words or expressions:
1. Lobby for Oneself: ‘help me’, ‘help a friend out’, ‘give(s) me’, ‘gimme’, ‘leave me’, ‘X
would be enough for my vote’, ‘X is enough for my vote’, ‘I’ll vote for with X’, ‘as long
as I get X’, ‘can I have more’, ‘let me earn’, ‘move me up’, ‘I really need’, ‘I need’, ‘I
(would) want’, ‘bump me up’, ‘I’d be happy if you’.
2. Lobby for Fairness: equal, equally, equality, equitably, equitable, egalitarian, fair,
fairly, fairer, fairness, unfair, greedy, greed, justice, ‘feel bad’, ‘felt bad’, ‘feel kinda
bad’, ‘felt a little bad’, ‘give him’, ‘leave him’, selfish, even, evenly, evens, balance, balances, balancing, unbalanced, generous, parity, ‘let him have’, ‘for everyone’, socialism,
distribute, redistribution, distribution, ‘move him up’.
3. Form a Coalition: alliance, allied, ally, allying, trust, (un)trustworthy, trusted, team(s),
teamwork, teammate, loyal, loyalty, together, deal(s), ‘give you’, ‘gives you’, ‘giving you’, ‘help(ing) you’, ‘each other’, unite, promise, commit, collude, colluding,
stick(ing), cooperating, cooperation, reciprocate, ‘I will/’ll do the same’, ‘I do the
same’, ‘can I count on your vote?’, ‘support my proposal’, ‘bump you up’, ‘bring you
up’, ‘between us’, pact, ‘both of us’, collaborate, accept.
4. History: threat, betrayal, betray, betrayed, betraying, deviate(s), deviation(s), defect(s), defector, revenge, retaliation, retaliate, cheated, cheater, cooperated, punishment, punishing, punished, penalize, lie(s), lied, gave (excluded ‘if I/you/he gave’),
accepted, ‘helped you’, promised, ‘stuck to the alliance’, ‘stuck with the status quo’,
cooperated, voted, proposed, supported.

41

Appendix E: Instructions (Private Communication)
This is an experiment in committee decision making. The instructions are simple, and if
you follow them carefully and make good decisions, you can earn a considerable amount of
money which will be paid to you in cash at the end of the experiment. The currency in this
experiment is called tokens. The total amount of tokens you earn in the experiment will be
converted into US dollars using the rate of 20 Tokens = $1. In addition, you will get a $5
participation fee.
This experiment consists of 4 Matches. In every Match you will each be randomly and
anonymously matched with two other participants in the room to form committees of three.
Each member of the committee will be assigned a committee member number (from 1 to 3).
Your committee as well as your committee member number will remain the same within a
Match but will change between Matches. Each Match consists of a number of Rounds.
The number of Rounds in a Match is not fixed. Instead, it depends on chance. After
each Round in a Match, there is an 80% chance that another Round will take place. In
other words, after each Round there is an 80% chance that the Match continues, and a 20%
chance that the Match ends.
After each round, there is an 80% probability that the match will continue for at least
another round. Specifically, after each round, whether the match continues for another round
will be determined by a random number between 1 and 100 generated by the computer. If
the number is lower than or equal to 80 the match will continue for at least another round,
otherwise it will end. For example, if you are in round 2, the probability that there will be
a third round is 80% and if you are in round 9, the probability that there will be a tenth
round is also 80%. That is, at any point in a match, the probability that the match will
continue is 80%. However, you will play every match in blocks of 4 rounds. At the end of
each block you will learn if the match ended in the previous block of 4 rounds or not. If it
has not, you will play another block of 4 rounds. If the match has ended in this block, you
will see in which round it had actually ended.
In each Round, your committee has 60 tokens to allocate among the three members.
At the beginning of the first Round of a Match, the computer randomly selects an initial
allocation and displays it on your computer as what we call the Status Quo. One of the
members of your committee then is selected at random by the computer to be the Proposer
for this Round. The Proposer makes a Proposal for an alternative allocation he would like
the committee to choose. This proposal can be any three numbers (including 0s) that add
to exactly 60. Once the Proposer in a Round has submitted his Proposal, all members
of his committee will vote for the Status Quo or the Proposal. If the Proposal receives a

42

simple majority of votes (that is, two or more members in your committee vote in favor of
the Proposal), then the Proposal passes and each of you in the committee will receive the
number of tokens indicated in the Proposal. If the Proposal is rejected instead, each of you
receives the number of tokens given in the Status Quo.
Each round, the match continues for another round with probability 80%. When you
move to another round of the same match, your committee’s allocation decision in the
previous Round becomes the Status Quo in the new Round. Therefore, if the original Status
Quo received a majority of the votes in the previous round, it continues as the Status Quo in
this new round. But if the Proposal in the previous round received a majority of the votes,
it becomes the Status Quo in this new round. The proposal and voting process then follows
the same rules as before. A committee member will be selected at random to submit an
allocation proposal and a vote is taken between the Status Quo and the Proposal.
Once a match ends, a new Match will begin in which you will be randomly assigned to a
new committee. If your committee finishes early, you may have to wait for other committees
to finish. Remember that in each Match you are randomly matched into committees and
committee member numbers are randomly assigned. Thus, your committee member number
is likely to vary from Match to Match, while it remains the same within a Match from
Round to Round. Once five matches have been completed, the experiment is over. Your
total earnings for the experiment are the sum of your earnings over all rounds before each
match ends. You will NOT receive any payoff from rounds you’ve played within a block after
the match had ended.
Now please, have a look at the screen in front of the room.
[SHOW SLIDE 1]
This is the first screen you will see in each round of a match if you are not the proposer
for this round. You have been assigned by the computer to a committee of 3 members, and
assigned a committee member number 1, 2, or 3. This committee number stays the same for
all rounds of this match, but will change with each match. The initial Status Quo, which
was determined randomly by the computer, is displayed in blue. Information specific to you
is highlighted in red. One of the committee members (1, 2, or 3) has been randomly selected
to be the Proposer for this round in your committee.
In each Round, before the Proposer submits his proposal, members of your committee
will have the opportunity to communicate with each other using the chat box. The communication is structured as follows. On the left of the screen, you will see a box that displays
all messages sent to you. You will not see whether the other members have communicated
among themselves. In the box below that one, you can type your own message and send it to
43

a particular member of the committee. To select the member to receive your message, simply
click on the button that corresponds to the member to whom you want to send the message.
The chat box will be available until the Proposer submits his proposal or 120 seconds have
passed, whatever comes first. At that moment the chat box will be disabled.
[SHOW SLIDE 2]
This is the first screen you will see in each round of a match if you are the proposer for this
round. A proposal consists of three numbers, A1, A2, and A3, where A1 is the allocation to
committee member 1, A2 is the allocation to committee member 2, and A3 is the allocation
to committee member 3. The three allocations must add to exactly 60. To make a proposal,
enter the 3 numbers using your keyboard and then click on the confirm button. If you enter
three numbers that do not add to 60 or if you enter a negative allocation, the computer will
ask you to try again. As everyone else, you have the opportunity to communicate with any
other committee member before you submit your proposal, using the same chat interface we
described before.
[SHOW SLIDE 3]
Once the Proposer has submitted his allocation proposal, you will see a similar screen
where a vote is taken between this Proposal and the Status Quo. Your payoffs for the Status
Quo and the Proposal are displayed in red in the table on your screen. You will now have
an opportunity to vote for the Status Quo or the Proposal by clicking on the corresponding
button.
[SHOW SLIDE 4]
Finally, a screen similar to this will summarize the voting results. Each committee
member’s vote is displayed in the table along with the outcome and your payoff. This marks
the end of the round.
[SHOW SLIDE 5]
You will automatically continue on to the next round if you’re within a block of 4 rounds.
If you’re at the end of a block, you will see a screen similar to this one. The computer
generated random numbers for all rounds. If all the random numbers are less than 80, this
means that the match continues, and you will start another block of 4 rounds. Otherwise,
the match will be considered to have ended in the first round where the random number

44

was greater than 80. You will only receive payoffs for rounds before the match ended. Once
you’re informed that a match had ended, you will be randomly assigned to a new committee.
In the second round of a match, you will see a screen similar to this: you have the same
committee member number as in the first round, and the members of your committee all
stay the same. The round 2 Status Quo is whatever alternative received a majority of the
votes in the first round. The proposal and voting process then follows the same rules as
before. A committee member will be selected at random to submit an allocation proposal
and a vote is taken between the Status Quo and the Proposal.

45

