NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE THEORY OF CREDIT AND MACRO-ECONOMIC STABILITY
Joseph E. Stiglitz
Working Paper 22837
http://www.nber.org/papers/w22837

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 2016

The author is indebted to the Institute for New Economic Thinking for financial support, and to
Martin Guzman and Andrew Kosenko, for comments and suggestions. This paper represents a
summary of my research in this area and hence the disproportionate number of references to my
earlier work. The views expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2016 by Joseph E. Stiglitz. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.

The Theory of Credit and Macro-economic Stability
Joseph E. Stiglitz
NBER Working Paper No. 22837
November 2016
JEL No. E42,E44,E51,G01,G20
ABSTRACT
In the aftermath of the Great Recession, there is a growing consensus, even among central bank
officials, concerning the limitations of monetary policy. This paper provides an explanation for
the ineffectiveness of monetary policy, and in doing so provides a new framework for thinking
about monetary policy and macro-economic activity. What matters is not so much the money
supply or the T-bill interest rate, but the availability of credit, and the terms at which credit is
made available. The latter variables may not move in tandem with the former. In particular, the
spread between the T bill rate and the lending rate may increase, so even as the T bill rate
decreases, the lending rate increases. An increase in credit availability may not lead to more
spending on produced goods, but increased prices for land or other fixed assets; it can go to
increased margins associated with increases in speculative activity; or it may go to spending
abroad rather than at home. The paper explains the inadequacy of theories based on the zero low
bound, and argues that the ineffectiveness of monetary policy is more related to the multiple
alternative uses—beyond the purchase of domestically produced goods—of additional liquidity
and to its adverse distributional consequences. The paper shows that while monetary policy is
less effective than has been widely presumed, it is also more distortionary, identifying several
distinct distortions.

Joseph E. Stiglitz
Uris Hall, Columbia University
3022 Broadway, Room 212
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
jes322@columbia.edu

A data appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w22837

The Theory of Credit and Macro-economic Stability
Joseph Stiglitz1

The post 2008 world has been one dominated by monetary policy, as politics
and ideology—and sometimes financial markets—constrain the use of fiscal
policy. But in spite of massive increases in the balance sheets of key central
banks –the Federal Reserve’s reaching 25% (2016) percent of GDP, Japan,
82% (2016) percent, the Bank of England 21% (2016) per cent, and the
ECB, late to embark on quantitative easing, but as of 2016 already over 31%
percent of GDP----the best that can be said is that the monetary policy
prevented matters from becoming worse: growth in GDP in the advanced
countries was an anemic 2% percent.
The growth in base money has become disjoint with the growth in the
economies. Figure 1 shows the growth in central bank assets and the growth
in real GDP for each of the four countries. Rather than GDP growing
proportionate to the growth of the central bank balance sheet, the figure
shows significant variability in the ratio of central bank assets to GDP, and
especially large changes in the money supply being associated with small
changes in nominal GDP in recent years in the US.
A simple regression shows a very low correlation in recent years, weaker
than in the period immediately after World War II. This weak relationship
appears robust to a variety of specifications, including variable lags and
1

University Professor, Columbia University. The author is indebted to the Institute for New
Economic Thinking for financial support, and to Martin Guzman and Andrew Kosenko, for
comments and suggestions. This paper represents a summary of my research in this area and
hence the disproportionate number of references to my earlier work.

1

different measures of money (e.g. the Fed’s balance sheet or more standard
measures of M2—see figure 2.) These results naturally raise the question:
where is the extra liquidity provided by the Fed going? What’s happening?
Standard theory suggests putting more money into people’s pockets should
lead to more spending, leading either to higher prices or greater output. If
this isn’t happening, it suggests a fundamental flaw with standard
formulations of monetary theory.
The absence of a clear link between money (however measured) and output
(nominal or real) has led naturally to a shift of attention of monetary
authorities away from quantitative measures (base money, M2, etc.) to a
focus on interest rates. But even here, without further massaging of the data,
the relationship is weak. The Appendix discusses the weak relationship
between output (nominal and real) and money supply and interest rates
(nominal and real). Our empirical investigation suggests, moreover, that the
relationship has not been stable over time. In particular, the relationship
between money and output has become weaker in the last quarter of a
century. As the analysis below makes clear, this should not come as a
complete surprise: there have been large changes in institutional
arrangements, and one might have expected such institutional changes to be
reflected in the relationships discussed in the appendices.

2

Figure 1
Ratio of central bank assets to GDP has varied markedly 2

In the aftermath of the Great Recession, there is a growing consensus, even
among central bank officials, concerning the limitations of monetary policy.
Central banks may have prevented another Great Depression, but they have
not restored the economy to robust growth. Our analysis is suggestive that
this experience sheds broader light on the limitations of monetary policy.
2

All data in this paper was obtained from the Federal Reserve Economic Data base (FRED),
available at https://fred.stlouisfed.org/.

3

This paper provides an explanation for this extra-ordinary ineffectiveness of
monetary policy, and in doing so provides a new framework for thinking
about money and finance.

Figure 2.
Figure 2. M2 to GDP ratio. It is obvious that this too has exhibited
enormous variability

The second part of the paper builds on the insights of part I and shows how
advances in technology allow for the creation of an electronic monetary
4

system which enables better macro-economic management and a greater
share of the rents associated with “money,” that is, with the payments
system, to be captured for the public treasury.
Part I. Towards a New Theory of Money and Credit3

Standard modern monetary theory is based on the hypothesis that the T-bill
rate is the central variable in controlling the economy and that the money
supply, which the government controls, enables the government to regulate
the T-bill rate.
Prevailing economic doctrines earlier argued that there was a simple link
between the supply of money (say M2), which the government could control,
and the value of nominal GDP, p (the price level) x Q (real output),
described by the equation
(1)

MV ≡ pQ

where V is the velocity of circulation. (1) is essentially a definition of the
velocity of circulation. Monetarism translated (1) from a definition into an
empirical hypothesis, arguing that V was constant. This meant that nominal
income and the money supply moved in proportion.
Monetarists like Milton Friedman claimed further that (at least over the long
run) Q was fixed at full employment, so that an increase in M would lead to
a proportionate increase in Q. Shortly after these monetarism doctrines
became fashionable, especially in central banks, the links between money
3

This section represents a development of ideas earlier presented in Greenwald and Stiglitz
(2003)
5

supply (in virtually any measure), and the variables describing the economy
(income, or even (real) interest rates) seemed to become tenuous. The
velocity of circulation was evidently not a constant. Of course, there never
had been a theory explaining why it should be.
Even before this, Keynesians had argued that V was a function of the
interest rate. An increase in M is split in three ways, an increase in p, an
increase in Q, and a decrease in velocity, with the exact division depending
on the relevant elasticities (e.g. the interest elasticity of the demand for
money, of investment, and of consumption.)
But beginning in the 1980’s velocity was not only not constant, it did not
appear to be even a stable function of the interest rate—not a surprise, given
as we have noted the large institutional changes going on in the financial
sector (such as the creation of money market funds and the abolition of
many regulations.) The natural response was a switch from a focus on the
quantity of money to the interest rate. But while this experience should have
led to a deeper rethinking of the premises of monetary theory, it did not.
Prevailing theories also held that monetary policy provided the best (most
effective, least distortionary) regulator of the economy, and that the way it
did this was through adjusting the interest rate. A lowering of the interest
rate led to more consumption and investment. In an open economy, it led to
a lower exchange rate, which led to more exports. The extra-ordinary
ineffectiveness of monetary policy to restore the economy to full economy in
the aftermath of the Great Recession has led to a modification of the
standard theory: monetary policy is the instrument of choice so long as the
economy is above the zero lower bound; and to the extent that the zero lower
bound can be breached, it should be.
6

This paper questions the primacy given to monetary policy, suggesting that
the problem is not the zero lower bound, but a host of other limitations—
effects of monetary policy which were given short shrift. Most
fundamentally, we argue that standard theory has given too much attention
to the interest rate and too little attention to the primary mechanism through
which monetary policy affects the economy, the quantity and terms
(including the non-price terms) at which credit is available. In normal times,
money and credit represent two sides of a bank’s balance sheet, so they may
be highly correlated. But more generally, and especially in crises, credit
may be only weakly related either to the supply of money, or even the T-bill
interest rate. This weak link—and not the zero lower bound-- helps explain
the ineffectiveness of monetary policy at certain times such as the post-2008
world. We argue further that the expansion of credit itself is weakly linked
to GDP, with increases in credit going towards multiple uses other than an
increase in the demand for produced goods—most notably, towards the
acquisition of assets such as land.
After setting out the basic argument for the focus on credit in section 1.1.,
we turn to the determinants of the supply of credit—primarily through the
banking system (section 1.2), observing that changes in monetary policy
may be limited in overcoming other changes in the determinants of credit
availability. Section 1.3 focuses on the demand for credit, noting that there
are many other uses to which credit can be put other than an increased
demand for produced goods. Section 1.4. then turns to a more expansive
explanation of the ineffectiveness of monetary policy. Section 1.5. explains
that the distortionary effects of monetary policy may be far greater than
earlier analyses have assumed; for instance, the conventional use of an
7

aggregative model hides intersectoral distortions. Section 1.6. argues, by the
same token, that there may be serious adverse distributional effects which
cannot be ignored, and which contribute to the ineffectiveness of monetary
policy. Section 1.7 re-examines these issues from the perspective of an open
economy, explaining why monetary policy may be more or less effective,
and more or less distortionary, with a different set of distributive effects.
The analysis of the relative ineffectiveness of monetary policy provides the
background for part 2, where we show how a move to an electronic banking
system, combined with a direct focus on credit availability, and the use of
new monetary instruments described there, can increase the effectiveness of
macro-economic management, even in an open economy.

1.1. The importance of credit—not money
In earlier work, Greenwald and Stiglitz (1991, 2003) argued that what
matters for the level of macro-economic activity was neither the supply of
money (the quantity variable upon which monetarism was focused) or the Tbill rate (the rate of interest which the government had to pay on its short
term bonds, and the focus of recent monetary policy) but the availability of
credit and the terms at which credit is available. They thus criticized
standard monetary theory in terms of its theory of the determination of the
lending rate, the relevance of the T bill rate, and the assumption that credit
markets always clear.
In the standard model, the interest rate is determined by the intersection of
the demand and supply for money. Government controls the supply of
money. In that model, the demand for money is related to income and the
8

interest rate (with the interest rate being the opportunity cost of holding
money). But G-S point out that in a modern economy, most money is
interest bearing (e.g. money market funds), with the cost of holding money a
matter just of transactions costs, unrelated to either monetary policy or the
level of economic activity4. (See Figure 3). Moreover, money is not required
for engaging in transactions, but credit. Even if money were required for
transactions, most transactions are exchanges of assets, and not directly
related to the production of goods and services; hence the demand for money
is related not just to the level of macro-economic activity (“Y”, GDP), but to
other kinds of transactions, and there is no fixed relationship between these
and GDP. There is, in short, no theoretical foundation underlying the usual
theory of interest determination.

4

In the 2008 financial crisis this relationship broke down temporarily. Apart from that, there
appears to be no significant cyclical movement in the difference between the T-bill rate and the
money market rate.

9

Figure 3.
Figure 3. The relationship between T bill rate and Money Market Rate. The
two track each other almost perfectly, the difference being largely
transactions cost, with no significant cyclical component.
Robertson 5 had earlier proposed an alternative theory of interest
determination, based on the demand and supply of savings. Some farmers
decide not to consume or plant all their seeds, and some wish to use more
than the seeds they have available, and the interest rate equilibrates the
supply and demand of “loanable” seeds. (See Greenwald and Stiglitz,
2003.) While such a theory may have made sense in a primitive agriculture
economy, his theory does not describe a modern credit economy, where
banks are central, and can create credit, within constraints imposed by
5

See Robertson (1934) and Ohlin (1937).

10

government. In particular, there is no need for a bank to have seeds on
deposit for it to create credit.
While there is thus a lacuna in the theory of interest rate determination, even
were we to have a well-developed theory, with a clear link between the
interest rate and monetary policy, there is a further problem: it is not clear
that the T-bill rate (so determined) plays the critical role assumed in modern
macro and monetary theory. First, as G-S show, the T-bill rate is only
loosely related to the lending rate.6 Moreover, the lending rate is not the
only variable affecting macro-economic activity. With credit rationing
(Stiglitz-Weiss, 1981), the availability of credit matters too, as do other nonprice terms of credit contracts (like collateral requirements, (Stiglitz-Weiss,
1986))7. These are endogenous, and while they may be affected by the T bill
rate, they are affected by other policy and environmental variables. In short,
modern macro-economics has focused on certain substitution effects (e.g.
the interest elasticity of consumption), and these may be (and we would
suggest typically are) overwhelmed by income, wealth, risk, and other nonprice effects8, or price effects operating in other ways, for instance through
their impact on collateral, self-selection, or incentive compatibility
constraints.
The correlation between money and credit

6

That is, the spread between the two is endogenous, and can vary with economic conditions
and policy.

7

More broadly, with imperfect information, behavior is constrained by collateral, self-selection
and incentive compatibility constraints.
8

Effects which may arise from the change in policy (interest rates) itself—some of which we
describe in greater detail below—or which may arise simultaneously from other sources.

11

Our analysis emphasizes the role of credit in determining the level of
economic activity. For a variety of reasons, data on the money supply
(measured somehow) seems more widely available than data on credit, either
its “availability” or even the actual level of lending. But these variables are
closely related: typically, when a bank lends more, its deposits (or more
broadly, the deposits of the banking system) increase (a liability) and so do
the bank’s assets—the loan. Thus, money (demand deposits) and credit
increase in tandem. So too, if a foreigner were to make a deposit in a
country’s bank, the bank would normally have an incentive and ability to
increase lending.
But as we explain below, there are times when this normal relationship
breaks down, and policies predicated on the normal relationships may be
very misguided. If a bank faces a great deal of uncertainty, it may not lend
out as much as it could; it has excess reserves. In the East Asia crisis, the
IMF became worried when, say, there were large excess reserves in
Indonesia. It meant that, suddenly, the banks could start lending, and that
would be inflationary. As a precautionary measure, it thought it was wise to
“mop up” the excess reserves or to take other actions to eliminate the excess
reserves, e.g. tighten reserve requirements. The problem was that with the
blunt instruments available, even banks that had no excess reserves were
typically affected by the tightening. Their customers lost access to credit—
deepening the on-going recession. The cost of tightening was palpable; the
risk of inflation that the tightening was supposed to reduce was imaginary—
there was virtually no realistic scenario in which the banks with excess
reserves would turn around and lend so much that inflation would be
excessive.
12

Economies in deep downturns—recessions and depressions—behave
differently than those in more normal times, and policies, including and
especially monetary policies, suitable for one situation may not be suitable
for the other. (See Stiglitz, 2016d). Even if the correlation between money
and credit were close in normal times, it is not in deep downturns, as banks
are willing to hold on to excess reserves. As we explain below, it is this
which gives rise to the modern liquidity trap.

1.2 The Supply of credit
In standard monetary theory, banks play no role—this is true even for the
models used by central banks, ironic since if there were no banks, there
would be no central banks. In institution free neoclassical economics one
sees underneath the institutions, to the underlying economic forces. Thus, as
we have noted, in standard models, the (real) interest rate is set at the rate
that equilibrates the demand and supply of funds (in Robertsonian monetary
theory; in Keynesian theory, the demand and supply of money 9). Though

9

As we have already noted, as influential as Keynes’ work has been, it provides a poor
description of a modern credit-based economy. (In the Appendix, for instance, we provide
convincing evidence against the hypothesis that individuals are on a stable demand function of
the kind hypothesized by Keynes.) But while Robertson’ focus on the demand and supply of
funds is more convincing, his analysis is flawed, partly because he failed to recognize the central
role of asymmetric information in the provision of credit, partly because he failed to take
adequately into account the role of banks in the provision of credit (the subject of the discussion
here.) In the standard loanable funds theory (without banks), the role of government was
limited: It was individual farmers who decide how much seed to supply and demand. Our
theory, by contrast, says even here there can be a role, through the rules government sets for
the functioning of the critical intermediary institutions.
13

that model may provide a reasonable if incomplete10 description of the
capital markets on which large enterprises raise funds, small and medium
sized enterprises have to rely on banks, and much of the variability in
economic activity is related to investment by such enterprises; and much of
that variability is related to credit availability. 11 Interest rates are not set at
the intersection of demand and supply curves—there may be credit
rationing; but even when there is not credit rationing, the supply curve of
funds needs to be derived from the behavior of banks, and when one does
that, one gets a very different picture.
Greenwald and Stiglitz (1991, 1993b, 2003) provide a simple model
describing bank behavior, showing how lending is related not just to the T
bill rate, but to their net worth, their risk perceptions, their existing portfolio
of existing assets, and the constraints provided by regulators. They describe
too how banks adjust not only their lending rate, but the other terms of the
contract in response to changes in these variables. Thus, credit (money)
supply is determined not just by conventional monetary instruments (open
market operations, reserve requirements), but also by macro- and microprudential requirements. Indeed, the two aspects of central bank policy
(regulatory and “macro-control) cannot and should not be separated.

10

It leaves out, for instance, the role of rating agencies, investment analysts, etc. That these
markets often do not work well is an understatement, evidenced by the problems in the
financial crisis of 2008 and the scandals of the early 2000s. See Stiglitz (2003, 2010)

11

Moreover, ultimately, the supply of funds to large enterprises depends on the funds made
available to a variety of intermediaries, which in turn depends on the credit creation
mechanisms described here.
14

Their model of banks (combined with their earlier model of the risk averse
firm12 facing equity rationing (Greenwald-Stiglitz, 1993), Greenwald,
Stiglitz, and Weiss, 1984)13 thus shows how changes in economic
circumstances today (a shock which affects their net worth or even the value
or risk of particular assets 14) can have large long lasting effects—the effects
of an economic shock can be persistent; and at the same time, they explain
why an increase in liquidity—a conventional open market operation,
lowering the T-bill or the lending rate—may have little effect on credit
availability. 15
Banks typically respond to a lower cost of funds by lending more, and
lending at lower interest rates (whether they choose to ration credit or not.)
But there are some circumstances in which they do not, or do not do so to
any significant extent. In particular, G-S explain why, if risk perceptions
have increased and if the risk of the banks’ existing portfolio has
increased—that is the risk of both new and past loans has increased-- then
the bank may be at a corner solution, where it will not undertake further
loans, even when the interest rate is lowered. And this is especially so if
because of asymmetric information, the bank can only divest itself of the
12

There are other reasons that firms (including banks) may act in a risk averse manner:
Imperfect information means that there is a separation of ownership and control (Berle and
Means (1932), Stiglitz (1985)) and firms typically construct incentive arrangements that lead
managers to act in a risk averse manner. (Greenwald and Stiglitz, 1990))
13

Their analysis also assumes that the risks confronting banks (and other firms in the economy)
can neither be insured nor distributed across the economy, e.g. because of information
asymmetries.
14

In their model, bank assets are not fully tradable, because of information asymmetries.
Accordingly, if the perceived risk associated with certain assets the bank holds increases, its
willingness to undertake more risks may be adversely affected.
15

Their models also explain amplification, why a seemingly small shock can have large effects.

15

risk associated with past loans by taking large capital losses on its loan
portfolio. 16
This problem is exacerbated by the fact in severe economic downturns, the
value of highly leveraged banks’ net worth is severely decreased, so risk
averse banks are even more overly exposed to risk, unless they cut back
severely on lending. (The inability to divest oneself of risk generates an
important hysteresis effect. There are, in addition, effects on banks’ optimal
portfolio, e.g. shifting away from more risky lending).
Changes in government (central bank) policy, as desirable as they may be,
typically give rise to new risks, which have their own adverse effects even
when the intent of the policy change is to stimulate the economy. Thus a
decrease in the interest rate changes asset values of different firms in
different ways, depending on their assets. A firm which has outstanding
short term liabilities and long term assets (with returns fixed at a higher rate)
may be much better off, but a firm with a different maturity structure of
assets and liabilities could actually be worse off. Lenders may have to have
detailed information about all the assets and liabilities of a firm to know
precisely how each firm is affected; and in the absence of that information,
uncertainty will have increased. Thus, an increase in the interest rate will
16

The inability to divest oneself of risk generates an important hysteresis effect. Government
regulatory policy may exacerbate these problems: when there are, for instance, capital
adequacy requirements and banks’ net worth is not evaluated on a mark-to-market basis, then a
sale results in the recognition of a loss which is otherwise “hidden.” On the other hand, marking
to market forces banks to contract lending (or raise new equity) when there is a (what the
bankers believe is a) temporary change in market sentiment against the assets which they hold.
Of course, the irony is that in other contexts, bankers, as a group, have been the strongest
advocates of the “market” and its rationality. But as the 2008 crisis demonstrated, they have
demonstrated an impressive level of cognitive dissonance—arguing against subsidies for others
(such subsidies would distort markets) but for themselves (without state aid, the whole
economy was at risk.) See Stiglitz, 2010.
16

have a more adverse effect than anticipated, but a lowering of the interest
rate will have a smaller effect—or even an effect that is adverse. This is
especially so once one takes into account all the general equilibrium effects.
A lowering of the interest rate will lower the exchange rate, thus hurting
importers and domestic firms that use imported inputs.
With risk aversion, the benefits of the winners from such changes in relative
prices do not offset the losses of the losers. The aggregate effect can be
negative. (Greenwald and Stiglitz, 1993)
The ability and willingness of banks to lend depends not just on what may
be called the environmental variables (risk perceptions 17 and net worth)
described in earlier paragraphs, but on all the constraints facing banks
today—and the expectations of future constraints. For instance, banks face
capital adequacy constraints, specifying say net worth relative to outstanding
loans. If that constraint is tightened, then the bank either has to raise new
capital or reduce outstanding loans. But because of capital market
imperfections, in fact firms typically face constraints in raising new equity;
17

As we have noted, risk perceptions relate now just to macro-economic risks, but to risks of
particular individuals, firms, and institutions, which in turn have macro-economic consequences.
Thus, it does not suffice to know that the value of say equity has decreased somewhere in the
economic system. A bank contemplating making a loan to a particular firm wants to know the
economic situation of that particular firm. Uncertainties surrounding that are affected both by
rules governing transparency and the structure of the economy—the nature of the interlinkages
among firms.
We need to distinguish too between structural breaks—the move from agriculture to
industry or from industry to services—with shocks to the system that, though large, do not
fundamentally alter the structure of the economy. Thus, while Greenwald and Stiglitz (1993,
2003, as well as the large number of papers leading up to those two studies and cited there)
provided the intellectual foundations for what has since come to be called balance sheet
recessions, they have argued that the current economic downturn is not fully described as a
balance sheet recession, but rather is best seen as part of a deep structural transformation. See
Delli Gatti et al 2012, 2016.
17

at the very least, doing so may be very costly to existing shareholders.18
Hence, an increase in the capital adequacy ratio—or an increase in defaults
on loans which reduces capital—reduces lending. But because a quick
reduction in lending may be costly, firms need to anticipate that they might
face such a situation, and hence well before the constraints bind, banks may
curtail lending and firms may curtail borrowing.
This simply emphasizes that all of the constraints facing a bank—whether
binding today or possibly binding in the future—can affect lending and
borrowing today. And it is not just the standard instruments (e.g. open
market operations or the discount rate) by which central banks affect lending
activity.
Banks who focus on lending to SME’s (small and medium sized enterprises)
face an additional problem: this lending is typically collateral based, and the
collateral is typically real estate. In a crisis such as that of 2008, the value of
this collateral decreases enormously, and thus given existing rules and
constraints, the amount of exposure to SME risk should be significantly
reduced. The focus of the bank is thus on reducing SME exposure, not
making new loans.19
By the same token, severe economic downturns are often associated with
increased disparities in judgments (probabilities associated with different
contingencies). This increased disparity in judgments may give rise to an
increase in trading in existing assets, rather than for newly produced assets,
18

For a review of the arguments, see Greenwald and Stiglitz, 2003

19

I should emphasize that the significant bank contraction in lending to SME’s is not just a
response to conventions, rules, and regulations. In 2008 there was a significant increase in risk
perceptions, and such changes have a particularly large adverse effect on undercapitalized firms,
among which SME’s are heavily represented.
18

and an increase in the demand for credit to support such trades. To see this,
consider the 2008 crisis. Some believed that the market had overshot—real
estate prices had fallen excessively. The banks argued that that was the case,
not wanting to believe that they had made massive misjudgments about the
real estate market. The more optimistic market participants believed that,
and were willing to pay a risk premium to get access to funds to buy these
depressed assets. The banks agreed with their judgments (for reasons given
in the previous sentence.) These new borrowers could offer the real estate
(at the new low price) as collateral. Thus, from the perspective of the bank,
these new real estate loans offered a low risk (in their calculus)- high return
loan —far better than the high risk loans to real firms. From the perspective
of the banks as a group, this lending has a further benefit: it raises real estate
prices, improving the value of their existing portfolio. 20
In short, in a deep downturn changes in the balance sheet of the bank and in
its risk perceptions typically lead to a significant contraction in the supply of
funds and an increase in the interest rate which it charges and corresponding
changes to its non-price terms; the magnitude of these effects overwhelms
any ability of the central bank to stimulate lending by lowering interest rates
and other actions designed to ease credit availability.
Of course, when we observe a net contraction in lending in a recession it
does not necessarily mean that monetary policy has been totally ineffective:
it simply means that it was unable to counteract fully the other effects. 21
20

This discussion illustrates a more general principle: in markets with asymmetric information,
there are marked discrepancies between private and social returns. This can be especially so in
the presence of rationing. See Greenwald-Stiglitz (1986)
21

This has been a long standing criticism of Friedman’s criticism of monetary policy in the Great
Depression. The fall in the money supply does not necessarily mean that the Fed caused the
19

And even when we see an expansion of credit, it does not mean that
monetary policy has been effective: the expansion of credit may not have
facilitated the purchase of newly produced goods, and thus may not have
contributed to an increase in GDP.
Moreover, a lowering of interest rates on T bills does not translate into a
lowering of the lending rate, and it is that rate which matters for firm and
consumer behavior; and even that rate may not provide an adequate
description of the financial market: there may be credit rationing and
collateral and other non-price terms.
We have even identified some circumstances in which lowering T-bill
interest rates may be counterproductive (we’ll identify some further
circumstances below), because of the increased risk associated with the
change in interest rates which (in association with the other relative prices
effects generated) increases risk perceptions. By the same token, negative
interest rates may adversely affect banks’ balance sheets, if not carefully
designed, and in doing so, lead to a contraction in lending.22

1.3 The Demand for and Uses of Credit
depression through its contractionary policy. The fall in money holding could be the result of
the reduction in (anticipated) economic activity. And the Fed may have been powerless to
overcome the exogenous perturbations giving rise to the decline in GDP. Indeed, while it may
not have been able to fully offset the underlying forces, it may still have had an unambiguously
positive effect: the decline in GDP could have been smaller than it otherwise would have been.
See, e.g. Tobin (1970).
22

Not surprisingly, there has been enormous controversy over whether the negative interest
rates have had a positive or negative effect. Japan’s central bank governor Kuroda tried to
design the negative interest rate program in ways which limited the balance sheet effect, while
retaining the intertemporal substitution effect. Whether he fully succeeded is part of the
debate.
20

The previous section focused on the determinants of the supply or credit,
explaining in particular why an “easing” of monetary policy might not result
in a lower lending rate and a greater availability of credit. Here, we explain
why the same thing is also true on the demand side: In a severe downturn,
risk averse firms will face an adverse shock to their balance sheet and an
adverse increase in their risk perceptions, both of which will lead to a
contraction in production and investment. Lowering interest rates at which
they can borrow (which is not the same as lowering the T bill rate, as we
explained in the previous section) may lead them to borrow more than they
otherwise would have borrowed; but this increase may be small compared to
the contraction in investment from the increase in risk and worsening of the
balance sheet. Moreover, even when interest rates for those who can get
loans are lowered, credit may be rationed.
In addition, for reasons explained earlier, changes in interest rates by
themselves can give rise to an increase in uncertainty, with adverse effects
on the demand for credit. (Each firm is embedded in a complex general
equilibrium system, in which it has an array of assets and liabilities, some
explicit, some implicit, in part related to it economic relations with other
entities. A marked lowering of interest rates can increase uncertainty and
the perception of risk, and firm risk management may entail a corresponding
adjustment in its activities, including decreases in production and
investment. Later in this paper, we shall identify some distributional effects
of lowering interest rates which too may result in a reduction in the demand
for credit as interest rates fall.
While a change in interest rates thus may not be effective in increasing the
demand for and use of credit, even when it does, the increases in credit
21

(money) do not necessarily translate into increases in economic activity—
greater consumption or increased investment in newly produced capital
goods: there is many a slip between the cup and the lip. Increases in credit
(money) can go into several uses:
(a)

Increased purchases of existing assets, and especially land. Indeed,
much of increased wealth is an increase in land values—so much so
that the ratio of the value of produced capital to GDP is actually
declining. 23 Of course, when more money goes to the purchases of
land, it does not lead to more land, but rather, to an increase in the
price of land. This wealth effect can lead to more real spending, but
this effect is normally likely to be small, far smaller than that which
would have been predicted by any model where it is simply assumed
that the increase in money leads to more spending on produced goods.

(b)

Increased margin to facilitate taking larger speculative positions, e.g.
in zero sum bets, such as futures markets.

(c)

Increased lending abroad (either for “productive” or non productive
purposes). If the foreign country to which the money goes has an
increase in income, it may (slightly) enhance exports, and exports may
be further strengthened from the effect on foreign exchange.
(Monetary policy in an open economy is discussed briefly further in
section 1.7.)

It is, accordingly, not surprising that the link between money and economic
activity may be much weaker than standard monetary theory assumed.
23

See Stiglitz (2016b, 2016c, 2015d). and Turner (2015). Stiglitz (2015b) provides a theoretical
model linking monetary policy to land values.
22

1.4. Limitations on the effectiveness of monetary policy
Liquidity trap and the zero lower bound
The Greenwald-Stiglitz analysis provides an alternative explanation of the
“liquidity trap” to that of Keynes. Keynes’ explanation of the inefficacy of
monetary policy was that because the demand curve for short term
government bonds become horizontal at low interest rates, monetary policy
could not push interest rates down below a certain level. Empirically, recent
experiences have shown that the interest rate on government bonds can even
become negative. Our argument focuses on banks, and their unwillingness
to lend more under certain circumstances, no matter how low the T-bill rate
is pushed.
So too, our analysis provides a counter to the recent fixation with the
constraint on monetary policy imposed by the zero lower bound. It takes the
view that even if the interest rate were lowered below zero, the response
would be limited, largely because banks would still not increase their
lending, partly that banks would not (fully) pass on the lower cost of funds
to their customers, but partly too because the interest elasticity of investment
and consumption is low. Of course, if the interest rate became negative
enough, to the point where individuals could borrow and effectively never
repay, then there would be an increase in economic activity. But that is not
what advocates of the ZLB mean.
Elsewhere, I have provided other arguments for why the ZLB argument is
questionable: if it were true, there are other ways of achieving the desired
change in intertemporal prices, through investment tax credits and
23

consumption tax rates that change over time. Yet no one is proposing such a
scheme. Doing so would provide a test of the hypothesis, and I believe the
ZLB theory would be shown to be wanting.

Diversion of credit creation and the creation of instability
Our analysis also provides an additional explanation for the ineffectiveness
of monetary policy even short of the ZLB: Standard monetary theory
assumes that any additional liquidity created goes towards the purchase of
produced goods. But, as we have noted above, much of the additional
liquidity not go to the purchase of newly produced assets, but rather into
existing fixed assets (such as land), helping create credit bubbles, and into
institutionally constrained “gambling,” transactions in futures markets in
which some form of margin has to be put up. This diversion helps explain
the regression findings noted in the beginning of this paper, showing a low
correlation between (the change in) money and the (change in the) value of
output.
The observation that increases in credit go into increased speculation and an
increased value of fixed assets helps explain why a low interest rate
environment is often associated with financial instability. (Other reasons are
associated with the distortionary effects of monetary policy discussed in the
next subsection.) Guzman and Stiglitz 24) have shown, for instance, that
increased gambling in futures markets leads to an increase in what they call
pseudo-wealth: each of the market participants believes their wealth goes up
as they make more of these bets, simply because they expect to win. But the
24

See Martin M. Guzman and Joseph E. Stiglitz (2015, 2016).

24

bets are zero sum: the gains of one person occur at the expense of others.
But the extent of such gambles can change suddenly, as happened in the lead
up to and the aftermath of the Great Recession—and thus the amount of
pseudo-wealth can change quickly, and so too the level of aggregate
demand. If monetary or regulatory policy tightens, then the extent of such
gambles may decrease, and so too the value of the pseudo-wealth. So too if
there are changes in perceptions and/or the willingness to engage in such
bets.
Similarly, if credit is used to finance the purchase of fixed assets, like land
(and/or there is borrowing on the basis of land as collateral), an increase in
credit can give rise to an increase in the price of land, which, if monetary
policy is sufficiently accommodating, can lead to more lending, fueling
further increases in prices. This credit-collateral spiral can suddenly break,
e.g. when market participants no longer believe that the price of land will
continue to rise—and in fact, it can be shown that it is impossible for prices
to continue to rise forever at the rate necessary to satisfy the capital arbitrage
equation (giving the same rate of return across all assets. See Shell-Stiglitz
1967, Hahn 1966, Stiglitz 2015b).
The problem is not just that additionally provided liquidity goes to these
purposes which directly do not lead to an increase in GDP, but also that the
proportion of any additional money that actually goes to support GDP is
highly variable.

25

Hence, without further constraints, monetary authorities

cannot be sure about the link between GDP and money (credit).

25

As the regressions reported in the Appendix amply illustrate.

25

Of course, if there were a stable relationship between the nominal or real
interest rate and GDP, then it could expand or contract the money supply
until it reached the targeted interest rate. But the discussions of preceding
sections made clear that the relationship between the T bill rate and either
the supply or demand for money/credit on the one hand and the T bill rate
and the level of economic activity on the other was also highly variable.26

Distributive effects
In section 1.6 we explain how monetary policy may have adverse
distributive effects. There are winners and losers—but if the reduction in
spending by the losers is greater than the increase in spending by the
winners, then the net effect on aggregate demand may be negative, and
these distributive effects may again overwhelm the direct interest rate effect
leading each to spend more than they otherwise would have. Moreover, the
adverse distributive effects may be compounded by the rationing effects
described earlier: the losers may be forced to contract their spending, while
the gainers may choose to increase their spending only a little; and the
lower interest rates may then have no effect on the former.
The argument is parallel to that which has become standard in international
economics. There has long been a concern about persistent global
imbalances—China and Germany’s surplus, and the US deficit. The worry
is that there will be a “disorderly unwinding” of these imbalances—that if
global financial markets suddenly stopped being willing to finance the
deficits of the deficit countries (Calvo, 1998), the contraction of their
26

Again, as evidenced in the regressions described in the Appendix.

26

spending would not be offset by the expansion of the spending of the surplus
countries. (See Stiglitz, 2010.)

1.5 Distortionary effects of monetary policy
Advocates of the use of monetary policy often argue that it is preferable to
fiscal policy not only because it can be implemented more quickly, but also
because it is less distortionary. That is one of the reasons that so many of
those economists supporting the view that monetary policy policy should
bear the brunt of macro-economic adjustment have been so disturbed by the
inefficacy of monetary policy in recent years, and why the ZLB argument
has become so popular. For it says their prior view was correct; but there is
a special “regime” where interest rates hit zero, where the results are no
longer applicable.
But those conclusions are made in the context of highly special models. In
this section, we note several reasons why the conclusion that monetary
policy should be at the center of macro-stability may be wrong.

(a) Mispricing of risk
Market participants talk about how the recent low-interest environment leads
to a distorted price of risk. The reason that they argue that the low interest
environment leads to a distorted price of risk is the “search for yield,” that in
this low interest rate environment, in order to get “yield” there is excessive
demand for risky assets yielding a slight risk premium. That drives up the
27

price of these assets, driving down risk premia to irrational levels, which
eventually get corrected.
The consequences of this mispricing have been severe: funds flow into uses
where with more rational pricing they would not go. And the later readjustment of prices can itself have severe consequences.
But there is a kind of intellectual inconsistency in this perspective. Financial
market participants typically believe in the efficiency of markets. That
traditionally has been part of their argument against government regulation.
But the entire argument for why there is mispricing is based on behavioral
finance: market participants fail to take into account the fact that the
irrationally low levels of risk premia will not be sustained.
There are risks associated with such market irrationality—but market
irrationality does not suddenly just appear as interest rates get near zero.
Market irrationality is pervasive. And because of this, and because of the
macro-economic externalities that are associated with the consequences,
both of the excessively low risk premia and of the corrections that follow,
there is a need for much greater market regulation than advocates of
unregulated markets claim. They cannot have it both ways: to claim that
markets are efficient, but that we need to be wary of low interest rates
because it creates distortions in the price of risk.
They are, however, perhaps correct in their warning against low interest
rates, providing a quite different argument for the limitations of monetary
policy than provided by Keynes: it is not that interest rates cannot be
lowered (indeed, some central banks have lowered interest rates below zero);
nor is it that lowering interest rates will not have much effect on real
28

economic activity (true, and even, as we argue below, worse than that); but
that the consequences of low interest rates mean that central banks should
eschew such policies, especially over an extended period of time.
(b) Intersectoral misallocations27
The aggregate models so beloved by macro-economists hide a key problem
with the excessive reliance on monetary policy: it gives rise to intersectoral
distortions. It makes interest sensitive sectors bear the brunt of adjustment.
It may be desirable to make such sectors bear more of the costs of
adjustment than others; but there may be (and typically is) a cost to the
reliance on monetary policy.
Optimal macro-economic policy would distribute the costs of adjustment,
and to do that requires both monetary and fiscal policies.28
The Ricardo-Barro argument that fiscal policy is ineffective (since it will
simply be undone by actions in the private sector) rests on simplistic
models. Government spending can be complementary to private spending
(either to private consumption or investment) today, and thus affect changes
in intertemporal allocations, just as changes in intertemporal prices brought
on by monetary authorities can. Even government spending which is
complementary to future private spending can elicit more private spending
27

This effect has been stressed by Jonathan Kreamer in his Ph. D. thesis (Kreamer 2014)

28

There may be a loss of intertemporal welfare from the variability in fiscal expenditures. But if
the variability takes the form of infrastructure investments, and if the investment authority (say
an investment bank, like the EIB) were to keep an inventory of good, high return projects, then
the flow of “services” from the aggregate stock of public capital would not be highly variable. If
the inputs used in public infrastructure investment were highly substitutable with those used in
say private construction, and if one of the main sources of variability in aggregate output is
private construction, then the social costs of putting the burden of adjustment on public
infrastructure investment may be relatively low.
29

today, e.g. because consumers rationally take the future impact on their
budget constraints into their current spending. (Neary-Stiglitz, 1983).29
So too, the reliance on using the short term interest rate for macro-economic
adjustment may lead (even with full rationality) to distortions in
intertemporal and risk prices (as we noted), and optimal macro-economic
adjustment may seek to optimize by minimizing the resulting distortions
through the use of appropriately designed fiscal policies.30
(c) Choice of technique/creating a jobless recovery
Here, we discuss one piece of evidence that reliance on changing
intertemporal prices for equilibrating the economy may not be optimal.
There are many alternative theories attempting to explain why the economy
fails to attain full employment, including those related to wage and price
rigidities (with those rigidities in fact being endogenous in some variants of
these theories.) Monetary policy attempts to correct for these distortions by
controlling the interest rate (usually the short term interest rate), setting it at
a level different from what it otherwise would be. But intuitively, if the
source of the distortion is in the labor or product market, it might make far
more sense to attempt to correct at least some of the distortion more directly.

29

Of course, debt financed government spending may lead to an offsetting effect through the
expectation of future taxes, but the conditions under which the adverse consequences of this is
fully offsetting are highly restrictive. See Stiglitz (1988)
30

That is, Ramsey showed that optimal taxation entailed distorting all prices a little from their
marginal costs, rather than a single price a lot. Modern monetary practice is based on the
hypothesis that government intervention should be limited to interventions only in the short
term interest rate. There is, to my knowledge, no general proof that it is optimal to limit
interventions in this way.
30

The standard argument for monetary policy is that it increases investment
(and possibly consumption) leading to higher GDP and thus employment
today. But there is another effect: lower interest rates induce firms to
invest in more capital intensive technologies, lowering future demand for
labor. It affects the choice of technique. Even if real wages go down in a
recession, the decline in the cost of capital is every larger. The original
distortion is an excessively high price of labor relative to capital because of
wage rigidities; the interest rate policy exacerbates that distortion. We see
the consequences: firms replacing unskilled checkout clerks and tellers with
machines.
Thus, as the economy recovers, there will be a lower demand for labor than
there would otherwise have been—it will take a higher level of GDP to
achieve a restoration of full employment.
The problem is that we are asking too much from a single instrument, and in
principle, there are more instruments in the government’s tool kit. The
government could, for instance, provide a larger investment tax credit for
more labor intensive technologies. But most governments have eschewed
using this broader set of instruments. With a more constrained set of
instruments, monetary policy may not only have these adverse distributional
effects, but also may be less effective, as we shall explain shortly.

1.6 Distributive effects of monetary policy 31

31

For a more extensive discussion of the issues raised here, see Stiglitz, 2015a. Even the Fed has
begun to recognize the potential importance of these effects. See Yellen 2014.

31

The economist’s focus on aggregative models with a representative agent
has shifted attention away from another important set of effects of monetary
policy: their implications for the distribution of income. The presumption
has been (a) the focus of monetary policy should be macro-economic
management, and if there are distributive effects, they are likely to be minor
and correctable through fiscal/tax and transfer policies. (b) Ensuring that
the economy is at full employment is the most important thing that
government can do to ensure that well-being of workers. Higher
employment helps workers directly and indirectly: lower unemployment
will lead to higher wages and higher GDP will lead to higher tax revenues
and greater benefits for ordinary citizens. Recent failures of monetary
policy have highlighted, however, that there can be significant adverse
distributional effects, and the politics in US and Europe have shown that the
likelihood of any adverse effects on distribution being offset by government
are nil. (More generally, research over the past three decades has shown that
there are significant costs of such redistributions, and unless the growth
benefits are significant, the distributional effects may thus outweigh them. 32)
Among the distributional effects two stand out: the first, its role in creating
a jobless recovery, was discussed in the previous subsection. The second
arises from the fact that better off individuals disproportionately hold
equities, worse off individuals hold debt, including government bonds.
Lowering the interest rate on government bonds to stimulate the economy
hurts bondholders, at the expense of those who own equity, thus leading to

32

These are associated with the “repeal” of the second fundamental theorem of welfare
economics, implying that issues of distribution and efficiency cannot be separated, as suggested
by earlier analyses. See, e.g. Stiglitz (1994, 2002a).
32

more wealth inequality. 33 Indeed, elderly retirees who have acted prudently,
in a risk averse manner, holding onto government bonds, have been
devastated by quantity easing.
The distributive effects may undermine the effectiveness of monetary policy.
Since the marginal propensity to consume (out of income or wealth) of those
at the top is much lower than at the bottom, any adverse distributive effect
lowers aggregate demand. 34Moreover, target savers (those saving for
retirement, to obtain a down payment on a home, or to finance the education
of their children) have to save more to meet their targets.35 If the distributive
effect is large, and the stimulative effect on investment is small (which has
been the case since the 2008 crisis, with investment as a share of GDP
actually lower in 2015 than it was in 2007 in spite of QE (in 2007 gross
domestic investment for the US was 22% of GDP, and fell to 20% by
2015)), then the net effect on the economy of lowering interest rates or more
accommodative monetary policies (QE) may have been negative. 36

1.7 Open Economy
33

See Stiglitz 2015a, c. We should expect such differentials in wealth holdings: life cycle savers
have to be more prudent in their wealth management than wealthy “capitalists.” Giovannoni
2014, 2015 provides evidence.

34

See Stiglitz (2015d) and the references cited there.

35

This may be especially so if individuals are saving to purchase a home, since the lower interest
rate may itself give rise to higher house prices, meaning that the down payment required is also
larger.
36

Of course, these numbers do not answer the relevant hypothetical, what investment would
have been but for the lowering of interest rates. Still, the fact that lowering interest rates from
5% to 0 has had such small an effect suggests that lowering the interest rate from 0 to minus 2%
is unlikely to have a large effect.
33

The previous discussion focusing on a closed economy emphasized that the
government, having delegated the allocation of credit to the private sector,
with limited restrictions, had relatively little control over the use to which
money/credit would be put, and therefore there was at best a loose
connection between monetary policy and macro-economic activity. Matters
are even worse in an open economy, for two reasons. Now, there is a further
use to which the credit created can be put—purchasing assets abroad. This
was evidenced in the aftermath of the 2008 crisis, where much of the
liquidity created in the US went to purchase assets and make loans in
emerging markets—not a surprise given the boom in these economies and
the lackluster performance of the US. In short, the money went where it was
not wanted and needed; and didn’t go where it was wanted and needed. The
stimulative effect of this loose monetary policy in the US for the US
economy was thus limited.
There is a second effect: now there is an alternative supply of credit, from
lenders outside the country. Thus, even if monetary authorities tighten
credit, there can be an offsetting effect from a flow of money into the
country. Indeed, there has been a regular pattern of exactly this happening:
when countries tighten credit, raising interest rates, out of concern about
overheating, the higher interest rates attract an inflow of capital partially or
fully offsetting the domestic contraction.37 Only by controlling the sources
and uses of funds carefully can some semblance of control over the macroeconomy be achieved.

37

See Stiglitz (2002b, 2015c) and Guzman and Stiglitz (2013) for a discussion of these issues and
the consequent importance of monetary policy coordination.
34

1.8 Concluding comments
Standard monetary theory has sought a neat set of instruments and targets by
which the macro-economy could be well-regulated. There was perhaps as
much a political drive for such parsimony as an intellectual one: if one
could find a simple variable that could lead to macro-stability, the nature of
government intervention would be very limited; there would be little need
for discretion. It was as if, when it was realized that Adam Smith’s beautiful
economic machine didn’t work quite as perfectly as his latter day
descendants believed (though Smith himself was far more aware of these
limitations), a slight modification to that machine would ensure its smooth
running. Monetarism held that the government should simply expand the
money supply at a fixed rate. New theories focused on controlling the
interest rate (and indeed, some proposed a simple rule by which that might
be done, reflecting inflation, a rule which would work regardless of the
source of the disturbance to the economy giving rise to the inflation.)
Today, these theories are largely discredited (see the various papers in
Blanchard et al, 2012, Akerlof et al 2014). The discussion here has
provided the underlying analytics explaining why we should not be surprised
at the failures of these simple theories, and of the broader institutional theory
attributed to Tinbergen of assigning to the central bank a single target,
inflation, and a single instrument, the short term interest rate. 38
Government only controls the supply of credit very indirectly through the
instruments under its control, and it does even a poorer job at controlling
that part of credit that goes to purchase newly produced goods—say machine
goods, buildings, or consumption, within the country. As a result, monetary
38

See, e.g. Stiglitz 1998b, 2014

35

policy is a weak instrument for controlling the economy, in the sense that the
link between the actions taken and the desired effects are uncertain. In
certain circumstances, we have explained why it is an ineffective
instrument—it simply may not be able to restore the economy to full
employment. Its ineffectiveness goes well beyond the usual “zero lower
bound” argument, a generalization of the Keynesian’ liquidity trap. Indeed,
seemingly more accommodative monetary policies may, under certain
circumstances, even have perversely contractionary effects, especially when
they are not well designed to take into account likely effects on the banking
system and broader distributive consequeences. Some evidence of this has
been seen in recent forays into negative interest rates.
Earlier IS-LM analysis was largely predicated on a stable demand curve for
money. What was variable was the “real” economy, the interest rate at
which full employment could be attained. Hence, with an unstable IS curve
and a stable LM curve, monetary policy sought to increase M, the money
supply, to the point where the rate of interest fell, to level which induced full
employment.
It became clear, however, that the LM curve itself was unstable, and this
naturally led government to target the interest rate. In effect, M increased
until the desired interest rate was achieved. It was assumed that lowering
the (real) interest rate would lead to higher output. Hence, all that needed to
be done was to lower the interest rate enough. But then, in the Great
Recession, monetary authorities hit the zero lower bound. Clever
economists responded that it was only the nominal interest rate that was
constrained. If somehow we could raise inflationary expectations, credibly
committing to a higher inflation rate, then the real interest rate would fall,
36

and the faith that one could rely on monetary policy to restore the economy
to full employment would itself be restored. Putting aside the fact that no
one has figured out how to make such a credible commitment 39, we have
argued that this framework is badly flawed.
We have explained that the links between the instruments under the control
of monetary authorities and the variables that affect aggregate activity are
weak, unstable and uncertain, and even of ambiguous sign. For instance,
lowering the T-bill rate may or may not lead to a lowering of the lending
rate. Because of distributive effects, we have explained that lowering
interest rates may lower aggregate demand. Even when there is a positive
elasticity of aggregate demand to changes in interest rates, the interest
elasticity may be small, so that the magnitude of the changes in interest rate
required will be very large, larger than would be politically acceptable,
because such large changes will inevitably have large distributive
consequences. 40 We have explained too that changes in interest rates,
especially large changes, increase uncertainty; and such increases in
uncertainty themselves can have adverse aggregate effects. And this is even
more so as monetary authorities stretch themselves, seeing that traditional
instruments are failing: there is uncertainty associated with these innovative
instruments, both even if the policy makers were confident about the effects,
39

Much of the argument for an independent central bank is based enhancing the ability to make
such a commitment. If bankers control the central bank, because they benefit from a low
inflation rate, it is more credible that the central bank will act in ways which limit inflation. But
the crisis of 2008 showed the flip side risks: a central bank captured by the financial sector will
do an inadequate job at financial regulation, exposing the economy to the far greater risks
associated with financial instability.
40

Moreover, such large changes give rise to high levels of uncertainty, with strong adverse
effects.
37

if market participants are not, there are adverse effects on the real economy
of these risk perceptions.
We have also explained why, though monetary policy has long been held out
as the instrument of choice, it is an instrument with some adverse side
effects, both on efficiency and distribution.
Indeed, it seems peculiar—and inadvisable—to attempt to correct a
deficiency of aggregate demand arising from “shocks” to the economy
arising, say, from an increase in uncertainty or an adverse change in the
distribution of income of wealth (because of a deflationary shock which
increases the real indebtedness of firms and households 41) by changing the
interest rate (intertemporal prices.) Even if one could do that, it seems
preferable to address the underlying problem. If there is an increase in
uncertainty, then government can take a more active role in risks mitigation,
e.g. issuing income or state contingent loans.42 If there has been a
redistribution of wealth as a result of a large deflationary shock, the
government might consider a better system of debt restructuring (e.g.
through a homeowners’ chapter 11 (Stiglitz (2010)).
To reflect the central refrain of my criticism of the Washington Consensus 43,
there are broader goals (not just price stability, but employment, growth,
financial stability, and even distribution); and more instruments (including a
41

The shock does not actually have to be deflationary: all that is required is that the rate of
inflation be less than was expected.

42

Australia has provided income contingent loans for a long time. The US has begun doing so in
the case of certain student loans. Stiglitz (2014) and Stiglitz and Yun (2013, 20145, 2016) have
proposed doing so for unemployment loans, and Chapman et al (2015) present a range of other
examples of such loans.
43

See Stiglitz (1998a, 2016d)

38

broad set of regulatory tools called macro-prudential instruments) than
those seeking to employ monetary policy should use. Managing a complex
economic system in the face of uncertainty requires as many tools as one can
manage; the single minded focus on short term interest rates narrowly
confined what central banks could do, just as the single minded focus on
inflation narrowly confined what central banks should do.
We have attempted to dethrone monetary policy from the pedestal on which
it has been placed by some economists seeking to put it at the center of
macro-economic management. But at the same time we have shown how we
can make monetary policy more effective than those who have focused on
the narrow set of instruments which have traditional been assigned to
monetary authorities.
The simple empirical results in the Appendix show that on average the link
between monetary policy and variables and the real economy is very weak—
results which are consistent with the numerous schools of thought (such as
real business cycle theory) that have argued that the real economy is affected
by real variables, and that monetary variables have, at most second order
effects. The results of the appendix are especially powerful in discrediting
standard formulations, e.g. where there is a simple Keynesian demand curve
for money which plays a central role in interest rate determination, and this
itself is at the center of the transmission mechanism for monetary policy.
But even if monetary policy on average has little impact, that is not what
monetary authorities care about: they want to know whether under the
particular circumstances being confronted at this particular moment,
monetary policy can be used to stabilize the economy, to stimulate the
economy when there is excess capacity and to constrain aggregate demand
39

when there are inflationary pressure. It should be clear that there have been
particular moments in history when monetary policy has mattered.
Hopefully, the analysis of this paper helps us understand better when
monetary policy matters, and when it does not.

In the next section of the paper, we argue that there are more fundamental
reforms to the monetary architecture of the economy—to the system of
credit and transactions—making use of 21st century technology, which will
enable monetary authorities in the future to do a far better job of macroeconomic management.

Part II. Creating a New Electronic Credit/Financial System44
The 2008 global financial crisis and the subsequent discussion of financial
sector reforms highlighted the failures of financial markets and the
enormous consequences of these failures for the economic system. These
included excessive volatility in credit creation, with a misallocation of
capital and a mismanagement of risk; more credit going to the purchase of
fixed assets rather than to the creation of productive assets; excessive and
volatile cross-border flows of short-term capital, leading to volatility in
exchange rates and trade flows; excessive charges for the running of the
payments mechanisms; and an array of socially unproductive practices, from

44

This section is adapted from Stiglitz (2016)

40

market manipulation to insider trading to predatory lending. 45 Around the
world, these financial market dysfunctions have had serious macroeconomic
consequences. In the case of Europe, misguided credit flows to the
periphery countries created the imbalances from which Europe is suffering
still. In the case of the US, predatory lending, securitization (often based on
fraudulent practices), and derivatives led to the deepest downturn since the
Great Depression.
Modern technology provides the basis of a new and more efficient financial
system, one which would simultaneously lead to better macro-economic
regulation of the economy. The following sections describe briefly the key
elements of such a system—a low-cost “medium of exchange” for
facilitating transactions and a system of credit creation focused on the real
economy, managed in a way far more conducive to macroeconomic stability
than the current system.

2.1. Creating a 21st-Century Financial Transactions System
The banking and monetary system serves multiple purposes. One of them is
as a medium of exchange. The world has several times made a change in the
prevailing medium of exchange. Gold was once used as a medium of
exchange; then, at least in the United States, there was a move to the
bimetallic standard, where gold and silver were used, and finally we moved
to paper (or “fiat”) money. For years, it is has been recognized that it would
45

Regulators, legislatures, and courts in antitrust actions have finally begun intervening to
curtail the high fees and abusive practices, but the fees remain far higher than what they should
be.

41

be far more efficient to move to e-money, away from currency. Our
payments mechanism has already changed dramatically. We have gone a
long way towards an electronic payments mechanism, and in most of the
world we could go far further, with an even more efficient one, if it were
taken out of the hands of the monopolistic financial system. Electronic
transfers are extraordinarily cheap, but banks and credit card companies
charge exorbitantly for the service, reaping monopoly profits as a result. 46
Electronic money is more convenient for people on both sides of the
transaction, which is why it has become the dominant form of payment. It
saves the costs of printing money, which has increased as the sophistication
of counterfeiters has increased. It has a further advantage, especially in
countries where small businesses predominate—it significantly curtails the
extent of tax avoidance.47
With electronic money, the money inside a country’s banking system can, in
effect, be easily “locked in” simply by not allowing the transfer of money
out of the country’s banking system. But anybody could transfer the money
in his bank account to that of anyone else. Thus everybody has, in effect,
almost full use of his money. 48 Money inside the country’s banking system
(which for convenience, we will call the G-euro) would be just like any
other currency, with a well-defined value relative to any other currency.
46

Regulators, legislatures, and courts in antitrust actions have finally begun intervening to
curtail the high fees and abusive practices, but the fees remain far higher than what they should
be.

47

Cyber security is one of the key problems faced in modern electronic payments mechanisms.
The advantages of electronic transactions are, nonetheless, overwhelming, which is why even
with monopoly pricing, there has been a shift toward this system.
48

The major exception, for the purchase of goods and services from abroad, is discussed later.

42

Most individuals today have accounts; only the very poor are “unbanked,”
and in recent years governments and NGOs, like the Gates Foundation, have
been making great efforts to bank the unbanked. In most countries,
government pension payments are now transferred through bank accounts,
partly to reduce the risk of stolen checks, partly to reduce the outrageous
charges that are sometimes charged by check-cashing services. Thus, the
task of implementing an electronic banking system today is clearly
manageable.

2.2. Credit: Creating a Banking System That Serves Society
A big advantage of the use of fiat money was that one could regulate the
supply. When gold was used as the medium of exchange, when there was a
large discovery of gold—or when the gold supply increased as Spain
conquered the new world—there would be inflation, as the price of gold
would rise relative to other goods; if there were few gold discoveries, then
there would be deflation. Both caused problems. Deflation, for instance,
would redistribute income from debtors to creditors, increasing inequality
and imposing hardship. America’s election of 1896 was fought on the issue
of the money supply. The debtors wanted to increase the money supply by
moving from gold to gold and silver, a bimetallic standard.
While the modern financial system based on fiat money doesn’t suffer from
the vagaries of gold discoveries, it has sometimes suffered from something
else: volatility in the creation of money and credit by the banking system,
giving rise to the booms and busts that have characterized the capitalist
system.
43

Banks effectively increase the supply of money by increasing the supply of
credit. In a modern economy, central banks regulate, typically indirectly,
banks’ creation of money and credit. They are supposed to do it in just the
right amount, so there is a Goldilocks economy, neither under- or overheated
but “just right.” It is apparent that they have often failed to do so. This has
partly to do with the often noted “long and variable lags” associated with
monetary policy, with monetary authorities having to base their actions on
predictions concerning the future course of the economy. But more
importantly, for our purpose, is “instrument uncertainty,” the weak link
between what monetary authorities do and the impacts on GDP, since the
increased liquidity may go for many uses other than stimulating the
economy, as our earlier discussion emphasized.
The traditional view of banking was based on a primitive agriculture
economy. Farmers with excess seed—with harvests greater than they wanted
to consume or plant the next season—could bring the seed to the bank,
which would lend, at interest, the seed to some farmer who wanted more
seed than he had, either for consumption (say, because he had a bad harvest
that year) or planting. The bank had to have seed deposits in order to lend.49
49

The evolution of the banking system from the primitive corn economy toward its modern form
is interesting and informative. Early banks were really based more on gold deposits than on corn
deposits. Those with more gold than they wanted to spend put it in the bank, and the bank lent
it out to others. Soon, banks discovered that they could create pieces of paper, claims on gold,
that others would accept, and that they could produce more of such pieces of paper than they
had gold, in the knowledge that not all holders of these pieces of paper would ask for their
money simultaneously. As it gave gold to some who asked for it, it would receive gold from
others.
Occasionally, there would be a panic when holders of these pieces of paper worried
whether the bank could fulfill its promises, and, of course, when they panicked and all went to
the bank to demand their gold, there was not enough to satisfy their demands. The banks would
go bankrupt, and the economy could be thrown into a depression.
44

Markets on their own equilibrate the demand and supply of seeds, so there
was really little need for government intervention 50. But if, for some reason,
there was, the interest rate provided the natural mechanism: if for some
reason, savings (at full employment)—the supply of seeds—exceeded
investment (the demand for seed), by lowering interest rates, the supply of
seeds would fall and the demand for seeds would increase, until the two
were equilibrated.
But this reasoning again totally misses the nature of credit in the 21st
century. In a modern economy, banks effectively create credit out of thin air,
backed by general confidence in government, including its ability and

Deposit insurance was invented to prevent these panics: the government explicitly
stood behind the banks’ promises. This gave greater faith that the promises would be honored
(so long as there was faith in the government), and this in turn reduced the likelihood of a panic.
But if the government was to provide these guarantees, this insurance, it had to make sure that
the bank was acting responsibly—for example, lending out money to people who could actually
pay it back, and not lending to the owners of the bank and his friends. Gerry Caprio, with whom
I worked at the World Bank and who studied government rescues around the world, was fond of
saying that there are two kinds of countries—those who have deposit insurance and know it,
and those who have deposit insurance and don’t know it. Sweden, before its financial crisis in
the 1990s, had no deposit insurance, but it rescued its banks nonetheless. In the 2008 crisis,
suddenly deposit insurance was extended to accounts that had not been fully insured before.
One can understand government taking on this new role, partially as a result of the
magnitude and frequency of the panics and downturns in the market economy in the 19th and
early 20th centuries. Moreover, as advanced countries, like the United States, transformed
themselves from agricultural economies to industrial economies, with an increasing fraction of
the population dependent on manufacturing and other nonagricultural jobs, these economic
fluctuations took a toll. So long as ordinary citizens had little voice in what government did, so
what if so many suffered so much? But with the extension of the franchise and increasing
democratic engagement, it became increasingly difficult for government to ignore these megafailures of the market.
50

The theory of credit rationing based on information asymmetries provided an explanation for
why markets on their own might fail.
45

willingness to bail out the banks, which is based in part on its power to tax
and borrow. 51

Targeted regulation of credit creation
There is a problem in our current system: because the central banks’ control
mechanisms are typically very indirect, the economy is often over- or under
heated. Sometimes there is too much credit creation, leading to an excess of
aggregate demand, and prices rise; there is inflation. Sometimes there is a
lack of demand, and prices fall; there is deflation.
The first part of this paper has explained some of the key reasons for this
failure: while central banks can regulate the supply of credit reasonably
well, they can’t (or more accurately don’t) regulate the use to which the
credit is put. Much of the credit goes to buying preexisting assets, like land.
Some of the credit goes to providing margin for bets (e.g. in futures
markets.) What determines whether the economy is over- or under heated is
the purchase of new goods and services (whether for consumption or
investment). Thus, after the 2008 crisis, there was a massive increase in
liquidity, as the Fed pumped money into the economy. But relatively little of
this went to buy goods and services in the United States, so in spite of the
huge expansion of the money supply as conventionally measured, the
economy remained weak.52

51

See J. E. Stiglitz (2015c), Greenwald and Stiglitz (2003).

52

There are several other “slips between the cup and the lips” discussed more fully in Part I of
this paper.
46

In short, even with fiat money, there may still be a deficiency of domestic
aggregate demand—a deficiency that could be easily corrected: there are
individuals and firms who would like to spend but cannot get access to
credit. A near-zero interest rate does not mean businesses can get access to
credit at such a rate—or at any rate.

Restoring domestic control over credit creation
The electronic payments mechanism allows a country to assert control over
the supply of credit and the uses to which it can be put in a way which is far
better than the current system. Think of this most directly as occurring
through a government bank. It can add “money” to the payments mechanism
by lending money to a small enterprise with a proven reputation that wants
to make an investment. The government simply puts more “money” into the
bank account of the enterprise, which the enterprise can then use to pay
contractors. Of course, in providing credit there is always a risk of
nonrepayment, and standards have to be established for evaluating the
likelihood of repayment.
In recent decades, faith in government’s ability to make such evaluations has
diminished, and confidence has been placed in the private financial system.
The 2008 crisis, as well as other frequent crises that have marked the last
third of a century, have shown that that confidence has been misplaced. Not
only didn’t the banks make good judgments—as evidenced by the massive,
repeated bailouts—but they systematically failed to fulfill what they should
have seen as their major responsibility, providing credit to businesses to
create new jobs. By some accounts, their “real” lending amounts to just 3
47

percent of their activities; by others, to some 15 percent. But by any account,
bank finance has been absorbed in other directions. 53
There were always obvious problems in delegating the power of credit
creation, backed by government, to private institutions: they could use their
power to benefit their owners, through connected lending. Regulations
circumscribed this, motivated by the experience of bad lending, perhaps
more than by the implicit corruption and inequality to which such lending
gives rise.
Circumscribing connected lending didn’t address one of the key underlying
problems: credit is scarce; giving private banks the right to create credit with
government backing gave them enormous “economic rents.” Even with
connected lending circumscribed, bankers use their economic power to
enrich themselves and their friends. Russia provides the quintessential
example: those with banking licenses could use that power to buy
enormously valuable state assets, especially in natural resources. It was
through the banking system that the Russian oligarchs were largely created.
In Western countries, matters are done more subtly—but the net result in
creating enormous inequality remains (though not of the magnitude of
Russia). In many cases, the banks lend money to those whom they “trust”
and judge creditworthy, with collateral that they value: in short, the bankers
lend money to those who are similar to themselves. Even if banker A can’t
lend to himself or his relatives, banker A can lend to the relatives of banker
B, and banker B can lend to the relatives of banker A. The fallibility of their
judgments has been demonstrated repeatedly: over-lending to fiber optics at
one moment, to fracking at another, to housing in a third.
53

See, for example, Kay (2015); and Turner, (2015).

48

There is a second danger to the delegation of the power of credit creation to
private banks. Throughout history, moneylenders have had a bad reputation,
because of the ruthlessness with which they exploit the poor, especially at
moments of extreme need, where without money they, their children, or their
parents might die. As such times, there is an enormous asymmetry in
bargaining power, which the moneylenders sweep in to exploit. Virtually
every religion has tried to proscribe such exploitation, prohibiting usury, and
in some cases, even interest. Somehow, in the magic of neoliberalism, this
long history was forgotten: bankers not only didn’t suffer from the stigma of
being called moneylenders, they were elevated to being the paragons of
capitalism. In the enthusiasm over their new virtues, as linchpins in the
workings of the capitalist system itself, it was simply assumed that such
exploitation would not occur, perhaps in the belief that competition would
ensure it couldn’t happen, perhaps in the belief that with the new prosperity
of workers, ordinary citizens wouldn’t let it happen.
All of this was wishful thinking. Freed of constraints, 21st-century
moneylenders have shown themselves every bit as ruthless as the
moneylenders of the past; in fact, they are in some ways worse, because they
have discovered new ways of exploiting both the poor and investors.54 The
financial sector has enriched itself on the back of the government’s
credibility, without performing the societal functions that banks were
54

More broadly, it has been shown that much of the increase in inequality in the advanced
countries in recent decades is related to finance. See, in particular, Galbraith (2012), and Stiglitz
(2012).

49

supposed to perform. In doing so, the financial sector has become one of the
major sources of the increased inequality around the world.
Even given this history, the government may want to delegate responsibility
for making credit decisions to private enterprises, but if so, it should develop
strong systems of incentives and accountability, such that the financial
system actually focuses on lending for job and enterprise creation and so that
it does not make excessive profits as it performs these functions 55 and so the
government should be adequately compensated for its backing. In effect, in
the current system all the “value” of the underlying government credit
guarantee is captured by the private sector. 56

Credit auctions
Here is one possibility for addressing this issue and providing for greater
economic stability First, the central bank (government) auctions off the
rights to issue new credit. The amounts would be added to the “money” that
is within the financial system. The magnitude of net credit that it allows to
be added each month will be determined by the country’s central bank on the
basis of its assessment of the macroeconomic situation—that is, if the
economy is weaker, it will provide more credit to stimulate the economy.
The winners of the credit auction then allocate this “money” to borrowers,

55

See Akerlof and Shiller (2016).

56

This is especially so, through the privatization of gains and the socialization of losses that has
become a regular feature in economies with too-big-to-fail banks. (See Stiglitz (2010).)
50

on the basis of their judgments about repayment capacity, within the
constraints that the central bank may impose (described below).57
Note that in this system, banks cannot create credit out of thin air, and the
amount of money being created each month is known with considerable
precision. The winners of the credit auction can only transfer money from
their account to the borrowers’ accounts.
Conditions would attach to selling the “rights to lend” to the banks.
Minimum percentages of the loans would go to small and medium-size
enterprises and to new enterprises or to underserved communities; a
maximum would go to real estate lending (perhaps apportioned by location,
on the basis of local changes in prices), to purchases of other existing assets,
or to those engaged in speculative activities, like hedge funds. None would
be allocated to socially proscribed activities, like those contributing to global
warming or associated with the promotion of death, such as cigarettes. In
short, there would be minimum standards for social responsibility. There
would be limits on the interest rates charged. Discriminatory lending
practices and other abusive practices by credit card companies would be
proscribed. So, too, would connected lending. There would be further
restrictions to ensure that the loan portfolio of the bank is safe and sound,
and there would be strict supervision by government regulators to ensure
compliance with the regulations governing any such program.

57

The system is symmetric. The central bank may decide that there is too much money in the
economic system—that is, the banks are lending too much, using “money” that they receive in
repayment. In that case, the government can buy back rights to issue credit: they buy back the
money that they have allowed the banks to effectively manage on their behalf. Again, there can
be an open auction for those most willing to give up rights to issue credit. This would literally
drain money out of the banking system.
51

If it wished, the monetary authority could target credit even more narrowly,
to be used to purchase goods which are in excess supply, or which use labor
of types which confront high levels of unemployment. There is always a
trade-off: such targeted lending may be subject to political pressure, in ways
that more broad based measures may not be.

In a 21st-century banking system, a bank’s ability to lend is, in a sense,
given only temporarily. It is conditional on compliance with the rules and
standards established. The government would allow for entry into the
banking system; indeed, separating the depository and lending functions and
the open auction of rights to issue credit should make entry easier, and thus
competition more vigorous than under current arrangements.
Still, since lending is an information-based activity, and the gathering of
information is a fixed cost, one would like stability in the new banking
system, and this will require that banks not live on the edge—that is, they be
sufficiently well capitalized and sufficiently profitable. By saying
“sufficiently profitable,” I do not mean the 25 percent return on equity that
one of the European banks, Deutsche Bank, famously came to expect as
normal. Hence, entry of enterprises with sufficient capital and who also
satisfy other conditions that enhance the presumption that they would be
responsible lenders, would be encouraged. 58 The system of auctioning of
credit would ensure that banks not earn excessive returns; most of the value
of the public’s backing to the creation of money/credit would be captured by
58

Entry would presumably occur to the point where the before-tax return to capital (measured
over the business cycle) would be slightly in excess of the normal return to capital. Some excess
return may be necessary to induce more responsible social behavior on the part of bankers.
52

the public, rather than as now by the bankers. At the same time, the new
system of credit creation ensures that the social functions of finance are
more likely fulfilled, at least better than under current arrangements.
This is an example of how to create a 21st-century banking system,
responding to the advantages of electronic technology, doing things that
would have been far harder to accomplish in earlier decades—a banking
system more likely to ensure responsible lending and macroeconomic
stability than the current system, and without the huge rents and exploitation
that have contributed so much to the inequality that has stalked advanced
countries around the world.
But this reform is about more than curbing bankers’ exploitation. It is about
enhancing macroeconomic stability. One of the major contributors to
macroeconomic instability is the instability in credit supply, and, in
particular, to the supply of credit for the purchase of produced goods and
services. The 2008 crisis demonstrated that all the advances in markets and
our understanding of markets has not lead to greater stability in this crucial
variable—in fact, quite the opposite. The electronic banking system
described here not only enhances stability in this critical variable, it provides
the basis of a virtuous circle leading to an increase in overall stability of the
economy. One of the most important reasons that small businesses don’t
repay loans is macroeconomic fluctuation: loans simply can’t be repaid
when an economy is in depression. Ensuring greater macro-stability (than
under the current regime) would do more than anything else to ensure the
viability of the banking system and to encourage a more competitive
economy.

53

Whence bank capital?
The beauty of the modern credit system is it doesn’t really require the same
kind of capital as required by banking systems of the past. Recapitalizing a
destroyed banking system would not require gold or borrowing to buy seeds
as it did in the old days. As we have seen, the government itself can simply
create credit. 59
The fact that the money created by the government can be used to pay the
taxes that are owed to the government, and that the government has the
power to levy taxes, ensures the value of the credit it has created. Indeed,
because the credit that has been created is electronic money, the movement
of which can easily be monitored, the government has not only the ability to
levy taxes; it also enhances the ability to collect taxes.
The only reason for bank capital in this world is as a partial guarantee that
the bank has the capacity to repay the credit—the bank’s “purchases” from
the government of the right to issue credit are only temporary, and the credit
thus created has to be repaid to the government. (The fact that the bank will
lose its own capital has, in addition, strong incentive effects, incentivizing
the bank to make good decisions about to whom to give the credit and to
monitor the loan well.) But if the government is doing an adequate job of
bank supervision and has imposed appropriate regulations (for example, on
connected and excessively risky lending), the amount of capital required will
be limited. And that fact alone should lead to more competition in the
market for the provision of credit—reducing the excessive returns currently
received.
59

Either through a government bank) or through the auction mechanism just described.

54

Macro-stability and income (state) contingent loans
To achieve full employment may entail an auction of credit at which the
price is negative, i.e. the only terms at which potential lenders are willing to
“accept” the temporary use of funds, to be repaid later, entail a negative
interest rate. The auction may entail a provision (unlike the current system)
where a negative “bank rate” has to be passed on (at least partially) to
borrowers, in the form of a negative lending rate. Presumably there is some
negative rate at which the desired credit creation –that viewed as necessary
to ensure full employment--related to new spending (investment or
consumption) is achieved. But it may be a very negative rate, and the
distributive and even allocative consequences of that negative rate may be
adverse. Accordingly, it makes sense to look for more effective ways of
stimulating the economy. One such way—ensuring a trade surplus--is
discussed in the next section. Here we consider another way—state
contingent loans, whereby the amount the borrower has to repay depends on
the state of the economy.
There is a widespread consensus that one of the reasons that consumption
and investment are depressed in a deep economic downturn is “lack of
confidence,” or slightly more precisely, uncertainty about the future.
Consumers are not sure of their future wages; retirees of the future return on
their savings; and producers of the returns on their investment. They worry
that if the downturn persists, unemployment may be high, wages low,
interest rates low, and sales poor. Traditional monetary policy has tried to
compensate for the absence of insurance markets by which individuals might
mitigate these risks by changing the intertemporal price. It is, to say the
least, a peculiar response: it makes far more sense to try to address the
55

market failure directly, than to increase one distortion in response to
another.60 As we noted in Part I, it is not even clear that lowering the interest
rate is even an effective response, not just because of the distributive and
distortionary effects, but because as the interest rate is lowered, risk
perceptions may increase, and the adverse risk effects could overwhelm the
intertemporal price effects.
2.3. Managing the Current Account Deficit
The analysis so far has been for a closed economy. Extending the analysis
to an open economy is at least conceptually easy. When a firm exports some
good, say a widget, it receives dollars. The dollars could be kept out of the
country, say in a dollar account in New York. But the exporter may want to
bring the dollars into the country, depositing them into the country’s
electronic banking system. The number of, say, G-euro’s that the exporter
would receive in return for the dollars would be market determined; that is,
importers may want dollars to buy goods from the US. They thus transfer
money in their bank account to the exporter. By the same token, an
individual in the country wanting to make an investment abroad, say in the
US, might want dollars, and be willing to transfer G- euros in his electronic
banking system to someone who is willing to sell him dollars.
These capital flows may, however, be very destabilizing—leading to
large fluctuations in exports and imports as the exchange rate changes,
60

It should be clear that the generalized Ricardian equivalence theorem (which holds that
government financial risk has no effect (Stiglitz, (1988)) does not hold and that there are real
benefits to this socialization of risk. In particular, the firms and consumers who are effectively
“buying” this state insurance are engaging in bets which increases their expected wealth, so that
there is a pseudo-wealth effect; there is also a “substitution” effect. Both increase investment,
consumption, and production.
56

leading in turn to macro-economic instability. The central bank can attempt
to offset these effects through the system of credit creation (auctions)
described earlier. But there is another way of regulating trade flows that
may be more effective.
Managing the Current Account Deficit through Trade Chits
In this proposal government would provide to any exporter a chit, a “token”
(in this case, electronically recorded) (alternatively called trade chits or
Buffett chits61), the number in proportion to the value of what was exported;
to import a G-euro worth of goods, there would be a requirement to pay, in
addition, a G-euro’s worth of chits or “trade tokens.” There would be a free
market in chits, so the demand and supply of chits would be equal; and by
equating the demand and supply of chits, one would automatically balance
the current account.
In practice, the value of the chit might normally be very small, at least for a
country with a small trade deficit.
This system would be a way of managing the high level of volatility in
market economies associated with short term capital flows. With the free
flow of capital, the exchange rate is determined by the vagaries of the
market. And those capricious changes in exchange rate then drive exports,
imports, the trade deficit, and borrowing, and in doing so, give rise to
macroeconomic instability. With the system of trading chits, the trade deficit
can be controlled, enhancing overall stability. 62

61

See Buffet (2003).

62

To prevent the buildup of chits—speculators might buy them on the bet that a chit is more
valuable some years into the future—the chits should be date-stamped; they would have to be
57

In the analysis above, where every import needs a chit, there is neither a
trade surplus or trade balance. The government could use this system to limit
the size of the deficit or surplus as well. For instance, if it wants to limit
imports to be no more than 20 percent greater than exports, it can issue 1.2
import chits for every G- euro of exports. When there would be an excessive
surplus, every import would be granted an “export” chit. Then every export
would require a chit. This would automatically bring exports down to the
level of imports. By issuing both import and export chits, the trade balance
can be kept within any pre-specified bounds.
The fact that the country could thus stabilize the size of the trade deficit or
surplus has an enormous macroeconomic advantage: it facilitates
macroeconomic stabilization itself. It means, for instance, that a small
country doesn’t have to suffer from the vagaries of its “external balance,” its
net export position. These fluctuations impose enormous costs on society, of
which the market, in generating them, takes no account. 63
But ensuring stability in the trade deficit also engenders longer-term
stability, for national indebtedness, built up over many years, can suddenly
become unsustainable. The market sees the world through very myopic
lenses. It is willing to lend year after year—until it suddenly changes its

used, for example, within a period of one year. (It’s possible that some international rules, such
as those currently stipulated by the WTO, would need to be changed to accommodate the
system of chits, which could be viewed as a system of multiple exchange rates.
63

These are an example of macro-economic externalities, such as discussed by Anton Korinek,
themselves a generalization of the pervasive pecuniary externalities to which Greenwald and
Stiglitz (1986) called attention.
58

mind. 64 By limiting the trade deficit, a country is in effect limiting national
borrowing; this framework thus reduces a key source of instability. 65
Moreover, we can see how this system would help strengthen the G-euro. In
the absence of the chit system, an increase in the demand by Greeks for
imports (that is, for, say, dollars to buy American cars) would lead to a fall
in the price of the Greek-euro. But now, with imports discouraged by the
necessity of also paying to purchase a chit, the increased demand for imports
would be reflected in an increased price of a chit, rather than a decrease in
the value of the Greek-euro. The Greek-euro will be stronger than it
otherwise would be.

2.4. Economic Theory and Macro-stability
Some might complain: Aren’t we interfering with the market? Of course, all
monetary policy represents an interference with the market: Few believe
that interest rate determination should simply be left to the market.
This proposal entails minimal intervention in the market, and even in doing
so, uses market mechanisms. It corrects for a well-recognized externality,
the market externality associated with external imbalances. Markets exhibit
enormous volatility in both prices and quantities: interest rates demanded of
64

See Calvo (1998) for a discussion of sudden stops.

65

The experience of Europe and elsewhere has shown that it is not so much government
borrowing that gives rise to crises, but national borrowing. In some cases, the national
borrowing was government borrowing (Greece), but in many other cases (Ireland and Spain) it
was private borrowing. When a crisis hits, the debt quickly moves from the private balance
sheet to the public’s.

59

borrowers from different countries have moved violently in different
directions, and capital and credit flows have fluctuated in ways that are
virtually uncontrollable under current arrangements.
Workers are told that they should simply accept being buffeted by these
maelstroms that are not acts of nature but the creations of irrational and
inefficient markets. Workers should accept wage cuts and the undercutting
of social protections, in order for the capital markets to enjoy their
“freedom.” The electronic payment system, with credit auctions and trade
chits, is intended to bring a modicum of order to this chaos, which has not
even produced the higher growth in GDP that was promised—let alone the
social benefits that were supposed to accompany this higher GDP.
In the Arrow Debreu world with perfect markets, prices play a critical role in
ensuring economic efficiency. But in the real world in which we live, as
Marty Weitzman (1974) explained long ago, it is often better not to just rely
on prices—to try, as our proposed framework does, to control the quantity of
credit and net exports, and to regulate the uses to which credit is put. There
is a large literature showing under a variety of conditions when there is a
departure from the first best world that such quantity controls are a better
way of regulating the economy. 66 The management of the economy in our
proposed framework relies, however, heavily on the use of prices, but not
fully so; there is no micro-management, but more macro-management than
exists today.
Decades ago, we learned that one could not let a market economy manage
itself. That is why, for instance, every country has a central bank
66

See also Dasgupta and Stiglitz (1977).

60

determining interest rates and regulatory authorities overseeing banking.
Some would like to roll back the clock, to a world without central banks and
with free banking, with no restraints. Anyone who has read his economic
history knows what a disaster that would likely be.
But anyone observing macroeconomic performance in recent years will see
that things have not gone well in many countries around the world, even in
advanced countries, in Europe and the United States, with supposedly wellfunctioning markets and institutions and well-educated individuals to
manage the economy. The framework provided here provides a way of
improving matters. These are modest reforms that would not upend the
system. But they systematically address some of the major weaknesses of
current economic arrangements, some of the major instabilities that have
proven so costly to our economies and our societies.
There are, of course, a large number of details to be worked out. The system
is surely not perfect. It is not intended to eliminate all speculative activity,
and it will not do so: but by restraining the uses of newly issued credit it
will curb such activities. But almost as surely, it is better than the current
system. This framework could lead to greater economic stability and growth.

61

References

Akerlof, George A., & Shiller, Robert J. (2015). Phishing for Phools: The
Economics of Manipulation and Deception. Princeton, NJ: Princeton
University Press.
Akerlof, George A., Blanchard, Olivier, Romer, David, & Stiglitz, Joseph E.
(eds.). (2014). What Have We Learned? Macroeconomic Policy after the
Crisis, Cambridge, Mass. and London: MIT Press.
Berle, A. A. & Means, G.C. (1932). The Modern Corporation and Private
Property. New York, NY: Harcourt, Brace and World, 2nd ed. 1967
Blanchard, Olivier, Romer, J.D., Spence, M. & Stiglitz, Joseph E. (eds.).
(2012). In the Wake of the Crisis, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Buffet, Warren. (2003, November 10). “America’s Growing Trade Deficit Is
Selling the Nation out from Under Us. Here’s a Way to Fix the Problem—
And We Need to Do It Now,” Fortune.
Calvo, Guillermo A. (1998). "Capital Flows and Capital-Market Crises: The
Simple Economics of Sudden Stops". Journal of Applied Economics. 1 (1):
35–54
Chapman B., Higgins, T., & Stiglitz, Joseph E. (eds.). (2014). Income
Contingent Loans: Theory, Practice and Prospects, Houndmills, UK and
New York: Palgrave Macmillan.
Dasgupta, Partha, & Joseph E. Stiglitz, Joseph E. (1977, December). “Tariffs
vs. Quotas as Revenue Raising Devices Under Uncertainty,” American
Economic Review, 67(5), pp. 975-98.
Delli Gatti, D., Gallegati, M., Greenwald, B., Russo, A. & Stigglitiz, Joseph
E. (2012) “Mobility Constraints, Productivity Trends, and Extended Crises,”
with, Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization, 83(3): 375– 393.
Delli Gatti, D., Gallegati, M., Greenwald, B., Russo, A., and Stiglitz, Joseph
E. (2016), "Sectoral Imbalances and Long Run Crises," in The Global
Macro Economy and Finance, F. Allen, M. Aoki, J.-P. Fitoussi, N.
Kiyotaki, R. Gordon, and J.E. Stiglitz, eds., IEA Conference Volume No.
150-III, Houndmills, UK and New York: Palgrave, pp. 61-97 Originally
presented at World Congress of IEA, Jordan, June 2014.
62

Galbraith, James K. (2012). Inequality and Instability: A Study of the World
Economy Just before the Great Crisis. New York: Oxford University Press.
Giovannoni, Olivier G. (2014). " What do we know about the labor share
and the profit share? - Part III: Measures and Structural Factors," Bard
College, March 3.
Giovannoni, Olivier G. (2015, January 3). "Inequality: Challenge of the
Century?" Presentation to the ASSA meetings, Boston.
Greenwald, Bruce, & Stiglitz, Joseph E. & Weiss, Andrew. (1984, May).
“Informational Imperfections in the Capital Market and Macroeconomic
Fluctuations” American Economic Review, American Economic
Association, vol. 74(2), pp. 194-99.
Greenwald, Bruce, & Stiglitz, Joseph E. (1986). “Externalities in Economies
with Imperfect Information and Incomplete Markets,” with B. Greenwald,
Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 101, No. 2, May, pp. 229-264.
Greenwald, Bruce, & Stiglitz, Joseph E. (1989, May). “Toward a Theory of
Rigidities,” American Economic Review, 79(2). pp. 364-69
Greenwald, Bruce, & Stiglitz, Joseph E. (1990). Asymmetric Information
and the New Theory of the Firm: Financial Constraints and Risk Behavior.
The American Economic Review, 80(2), 160-165.
Greenwald, Bruce, & Stiglitz, Joseph E. (1991, October). “ Toward a
Reformulation of Monetary Theory: Competitive Banking”, Economic and
Social Review 23(1), pp. 1-34. Also NBER Working Paper 4117.
Greenwald, Bruce, & Stiglitz, Joseph E. (1993a). Financial Market
Imperfections and Business Cycles. The Quarterly Journal of Economics,
108(1), 77-114.
Greenwald, Bruce, & Stiglitz, Joseph E. (1993b). Monetary policy and the
theory of the risk-averse bank. Working Papers in Applied Economic Theory
93-04, Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco.
Greenwald, Bruce, & Stiglitz, Joseph E. (2003). Towards a New Paradigm
in Monetary Economics. Cambridge University Press.
Guzman Martin, & Stiglitz, Joseph E. (2016). “A Theory of PseudoWealth,” in Contemporary Issues in Macroeconomics: Lessons from The
Crisis and Beyond, Joseph E. Stiglitz and Martin Guzman (eds.), IEA
63

Conference Volume, No.155-II, Houndmills, UK and New York: Palgrave
Macmillan. (Paper presented at a special session of the International
Economic Association World Congress, Dead Sea, Jordan, June 2014,
sponsored by the OECD.)
Guzman, Martin, & Stiglitz, Joseph E. (2013, December). "Monetary Policy
and Capital Controls: Coordination in a World with Spillovers". Presented at
the RIDGE Workshop at Central Bank of Uruguay.
Guzman, Martin, & Stiglitz, Joseph E. (2015). “Pseudo-wealth and
consumption fluctuations,” Discussion paper, Columbia University.
Hahn, F. (1966). "Equilibrium Dynamics with Heterogeneous Capital
Goods," The Quarterly Journal of Economics, Oxford University Press, vol.
80(4), pp. 633-646.
Kay, John. (2015). Other People’s Money: The Real Business of Finance.
PublicAffairs.
Kreamer, Jonathan. (2015). Credit and Liquidity in the Macroeconomy. PhD
Dissertation, University of Maryland, College Park.
Neary, Peter, & Stiglitz, Joseph E. (1983). “Towards a reconstruction of
Keynesian economics: Expectations and constrained equilibria," Quarterly
Journal of Economics (Supplement), 98, pp. 199-228.
Ohlin, B. (1937). Some Notes on the Stockholm Theory of Savings and
Investment II. The Economic Journal, vol. 47, pp. 221-240.
Robertson, D. H. (1934). Industrial Fluctuation and the Natural Rate of
Interest. The Economic Journal, vol. 44, pp. 650-656.
Shell, Karl, & Stiglitz, Joseph E. (1967, November). "Allocation of
Investment in a Dynamic Economy," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 81,
pp. 592-609.
Stiglitz, Joseph E. (1985, May). “Credit Markets and the Control of Capital,”
Journal of Money, Banking, and Credit, 17(2), pp. 133-152.
Stiglitz, Joseph E. (1988). “On the Relevance or Irrelevance of Public
Financial Policy,” in The Economics of Public Debt, Proceedings of the
1986 International Economics Association Meeting, London: Macmillan
Press, pp. 4-76.
64

Stiglitz, Joseph E. (1994). Whither Socialism? Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
(Expanded from a paper presented at the Wicksell Lectures, May 1990).
Stiglitz, Joseph E. (1998a). “More Instruments and Broader Goals: Moving
Toward the Post-Washington Consensus,” 1998 WIDER Annual Lecture,
Helsinki, January; subsequently published in Development Issues in the 21st
Century, G. Kochendorfer Lucius and B. Pleskovic (eds.), Berlin: German
Foundation for International Development, pp. 11-39; and Chapter 1 in The
Rebel Within, Ha-Joon Chang (ed.), London: Wimbledon Publishing
Company, 2001, pp. 17-56.
Stiglitz, Joseph E. (1998b). “Central Banking in a Democratic Society,” De
Economist (Netherlands), 146(2), 1998, pp. 199-226. (Originally presented
as 1997 Tinbergen Lecture, Amsterdam, October).
Stiglitz, Joseph E. (2002a, June). “Information and the Change in the
Paradigm in Economics,” abbreviated version of Nobel lecture, American
Economic Review, 92(3), pp. 460-501.
Stiglitz, Joseph E. (2002b). Globalization and Its Discontents, New York:
W.W. Norton Company
Stiglitz, Joseph E. (2003). The Roaring Nineties: A New History of the
World's Most Prosperous Decade. W. W. Norton & Company.
Stiglitz, Joseph E. (2010). Freefall: America, Free Markets, and the Sinking
of the World Economy. W. W. Norton & Company.
Stiglitz, Joseph E. (2012). The Price of Inequality: How Today's Divided
Society Endangers Our Future. W. W. Norton & Company.
Stiglitz, Joseph E. (2014) "The Lessons of the North Atlantic Crisis for
Economic Theory and Policy," in What Have We Learned? Macroeconomic
Policy after the Crisis, George Akerlof, Olivier Blanchard, David Romer,
and Joseph E. Stiglitz (eds.) Cambridge, Mass. and London: MIT Press, pp.
335-347.
Stiglitz, Joseph E. (2015a, April). “Fed policy, Inequality, and Equality of
Opportunity”. paper presented to the Ninth Biennial Federal Reserve System
Community Development Research Conference, April 2015, and to be
published in proceedings; available online at http://rooseveltinstitute.org/fedpolicy-inequality-and-equality-opportunity/.
65

Stiglitz, Joseph E. (2015b, May). “New Theoretical Perspectives on the
Distribution of Income and Wealth Among Individuals: Part IV” NBER
Working Papers 21192.
Stiglitz, Joseph E. (2015c). “Monetary Policy in a Multipolar World,”. In
Stiglitz, Joseph E. and Error! Hyperlink reference not valid. (eds.), Taming Capital
Flows: Capital Account Management in an Era of Globalization, IEA
Conference Volume No. 154, UK and New York: Palgrave Macmillan.
Stiglitz, Joseph E. (2015d). “New Theoretical Perspectives on the
Distribution of Income and Wealth Among Individuals: Parts I, NBER
Working Papers 21189, May.
Stiglitz, Joseph E. (2016a). The Euro: How a Common Currency Threatens
the Future of Europe. W. W. Norton & Company.
Stiglitz, Joseph E. (2016b). “The Measurement of Wealth: Recessions,
Sustainability and Inequality,” Contemporary Issues in Macroeconomics:
Lessons from The Crisis and Beyond, Joseph E. Stiglitz and Martin Guzman
(eds.), IEA Conference Volume, No.155-II, Houndmills, UK and New York:
Palgrave Macmillan (also NBER Working Paper 21327, July 2015. Paper
presented at a special session of the International Economic Association
World Congress, Dead Sea, Jordan, June 2014 sponsored by the OECD.)
Stiglitz, Joseph E. (2016c). “New Theoretical Perspectives on the
Distribution of Income and Wealth among Individuals,” in Inequality and
Growth: Patterns and Policy, Volume I: Concepts and Analysis, Kaushik
Basu and Joseph E. Stiglitz (eds.), IEA Conference Volume No. 156-I,
Houndmills, UK and New York: Palgrave Macmillan.
Stiglitz, Joseph E. (2016d). Towards a General Theory of Deep Downturns,
IEA Conference Volume, 155-VI, Houndmills, UK and New York: Palgrave
Macmillan, 2016; previously NBER Working Paper 21444, August 2015
and Presidential Address to the 17th World Congress of the International
Economic Congress, Dead Sea, Jordan, June, 2014.
Stiglitz, Joseph E. (2016e). “The State, the Market, and Development," to be
published in Mapping Development Economics: the Past, Present and
Future, Tony Addison and Finn Tarp (eds.) and WIDER Working Paper
2016/1, January 2016, originally presented at UNU-WIDER 30th
Anniversary Conference held September 2015 in Helsinki, Finland,
available online at https://www.wider.unu.edu/sites/default/files/wp201666

1.pdf.
Stiglitz, Joseph E., & Weiss, Andrew. (1981). Credit Rationing in Markets
with Imperfect Information, American Economic Review, American
Economic Association, vol. 71(3), pp. 393-410, June.
Stiglitz, Joseph E., & Weiss, Andrew. (1986). “Credit Rationing and
Collateral”, in Recent Developments in Corporate Finance, Jeremy
Edwards, et al. (eds.), New York: Cambridge University Press, 1986 pp.
101-135.
Stiglitz, Joseph E., & Yun, Jungyoll. (2013, May). “Optimal Provision of
Loans and Insurance against Unemployment from a Lifetime Perspective.”,
National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 19064.
Stiglitz, Joseph E., & Yun, Jungyoll. (2014). “Income Contingent Loans for
the Unemployed: A Prelude to a General Theory of the Efficient Provision
of Social Insurance,” in Income Contingent Loans: Theory, Practice and
Prospects, Joseph E. Stiglitz, Bruce Chapman, and Timothy Higgins (eds.),
Houndmills, UK and New York: Palgrave Macmillan, pp.180-204.
Stiglitz, Joseph E., & Yun, Jungyoll. (2016). “Income-Contingent Loan As
an Unemployment Benefit”, Columbia University working paper
Tobin, J. (1970). “Money and Income: Post Hoc Ergo Propter Hoc?” The
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 84(2), 301-317
Turner, Adair. (2015). Between Debt and the Devil: Money, Credit, and
Fixing Global Finance, Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ.
Weitzman, Martin. (1974). “Prices vs. Quantities”, Review of Economic
Studies, 41, issue 4, p. 477-491.
Yellen, Janet. (2014, October 17). “Perspectives on Inequality and
Opportunity from the Survey of Consumer Finances”. Remarks by Janet L.
Yellen Chair Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System at the
Conference on Economic Opportunity and Inequality Federal Reserve Bank
of Boston. Boston, Massachusetts.

67

68

