                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                    MONETARY POLICY AND THE STOCK MARKET:
                            TIME-SERIES EVIDENCE

                                      Andreas Neuhierl
                                       Michael Weber

                                     Working Paper 22831
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w22831


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                        November 2016, Revised September 2019




We thank Christiane Baumeister, Brent Bundick, Dan Cooper, John Campbell, George
Constantinides, Thorsten Drautzburg, Jack Favilukis, Jean-Sebastien Fontaine, Yuriy
Gorodnichenko, Lars Hansen, Sam Hanson, Jens Hilscher, Zhiguo He, Oleksiy Kryvtsov, David
Lucca, Emanuel Moench, Stefan Nagel, Stijn Van Nieuwerburgh, Ali Ozdagli, Ľuboš Pástor,
Monika Piazzesi, Josh Pollet, Alberto Rossi, Bernd Schlusche, Martin Schneider, Frank Smets,
Amir Sufi, Harald Uhlig, Pietro Veronesi, Greg Vilkov, Jonathan Wright, Luigi Zingales, Eric
Zwick, and seminar and conference participants at the 2018 AFA, 2017 AEA, Bank of Ukraine
Annual Research Conference, 2017 CITE conference, 2016 Commodities Markets Conference,
2017 ESAM, 2017 European Winter Finance Summit, 2017 FIRS, 2017 HEC-McGill Winter
Finance Workshop, 2016 Ifo Conference on Macro and Survey Data, 2018 MFA, 2017 SED,
2017 SFS Cavalcade, the University of Chicago, the 2016 Wabash River Conference, and the
European Finance Association Annual Meeting 2016 for valuable comments. Weber gratefully
acknowledges financial support from the University of Chicago, the Neubauer Family
Foundation, and the Fama–Miller Center. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and
do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2016 by Andreas Neuhierl and Michael Weber. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Monetary Policy and the Stock Market: Time-Series Evidence
Andreas Neuhierl and Michael Weber
NBER Working Paper No. 22831
November 2016, Revised September 2019
JEL No. E31,E43,E44,E52,E58,G12

                                          ABSTRACT

The slope factor is constructed from changes in federal funds futures of different horizons and
predicts stock returns at the weekly frequency: faster policy easing positively predicts returns. It
contains information about the speed of future monetary policy tightening and loosening, and
predicts changes in interest rates and forecast revisions of professional forecasters. The tone of
speeches by FOMC members correlates with the slope factor. The predictive power concentrates
in times of high uncertainty in line with the pre-FOMC announcement drift. Our findings show
the path of interest rates matters for asset prices, and monetary policy affects asset prices
continuously.


Andreas Neuhierl
University of Notre Dame
College of Business
221 Mendoza
Notre Dame, IN 46556
aneuhier@nd.edu

Michael Weber
Booth School of Business
University of Chicago
5807 South Woodlawn Avenue
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
michael.weber@chicagobooth.edu




A data appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w22831
                                    I     Introduction

The main objectives of the Federal Reserve (Fed) under its dual mandate are price stability
and maximum employment. The fed funds rate is the Fed’s main conventional policy tool
to achieve those goals. But whereas real consumption, investment, and GDP only respond
with a lag to changes in the target rate, a large literature documents that asset prices
respond directly and immediately to monetary policy in narrow event windows around
FOMC rate changes (see Bernanke and Kuttner (2005)). Yet asset prices might react not
only to changes in short-term interest rates, but also to changes in expectations about the
speed of monetary policy loosening and tightening, in the words of former Chairwomen
Yellen: “The FOMC will, of course, carefully deliberate about when to begin the process
of removing policy accommodation. But the significance of this decision should not be
overemphasized, because what matters for financial conditions and the broader economy
is the entire expected path of short-term interest rates and not the precise timing of the
first rate increase.” Moreover, monetary policy decisions happen throughout the year
rather than only on eight scheduled Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) meetings
that are the focus of a large event-study literature as stressed by former governor Warsh:
“policy deliberations happen on a rather continuous basis.” Finally, former Chairman
Bernanke emphasizes “monetary policy is 98 percent talk and only two percent action.”
       We use weekly changes in the one-month and three-month federal funds futures-
implied rates to test for the effect of changes in the future path of monetary policy
on asset prices throughout the year.1 Specifically, we argue that changes in one-month
futures, f ft,1 , affect all future target rates, and we can interpret it as a level factor.
Changes in the three-month futures, f ft,3 , instead also contain information about the
future path of monetary policy. We regress changes in the three-month futures-implied
rate on the changes in the one-month futures-implied rate to get a purified measure of
   1
    We focus on the one- and three-month futures because longer-term futures either did not exist at
the beginning of our sample (1994) or were not heavily traded (see discussion in Gürkaynak, Sack, and
Swanson (2005b)). In robustness checks, we also replicate our results with longer-dates futures. In
addition, Gertler and Karadi (2015) instrument for monetary policy shocks using different proxies and
find that the change in the three-month federal fund futures has the strongest explanatory power.


                                                  2
changes in expectations of the path of future monetary policy. We refer to the residual of
this regression as the slope factor or simply slope. Slope robustly predicts excess returns of
the Center for Research in Security Prices (CRSP) value-weighted index over the following
week and explains around 2% of the weekly variation in stock returns. The predictive
power is especially strong in times of heightened market uncertainty as proxied by the
VIX which is also the time during which the pre-FOMC announcement drift of Lucca and
Moench (2015) is most significant.
    A positive slope, that is, expectations of faster future monetary policy tightening,
predict negative stock returns. Excluding weeks with FOMC meetings does not change the
predictability which is stable throughout the year. In fact, we find speeches of the chair
or vice chair – which only occur outside of the blackout periods before FOMC meetings
– systematically predict the slope factor consistent with the Bernanke hypothesis.
    Our findings suggest that the whole future path of monetary policy is important
for the real economy and that the FOMC releases most of the news about monetary
policy outside of scheduled FOMC meetings throughout the year. This interpretation
is consistent with evidence in Gorodnichenko and Weber (2016) who document most
monetary policy shocks within narrow event windows around FOMC decisions are tiny.
Our findings open up exciting new avenues for future research. Through which channels
do future changes in target rates matter for financial markets, such as a risk-free rate,
inflation, or risk-premium channel? How does the FOMC communicate and transmit
news about monetary policy to the public outside of FOMC meetings? How do financial
markets interpret these news?
    When we regress the change in the three-month futures on the change in the
one-month futures, we find a coefficient estimate of close to 1; therefore, at a basic
level, we can think of slope as a difference in differences: slope = [Et+1 (r3 ) − Et+1 (r1 )] −
[Et (r3 ) − Et (r1 )]. A positive slope factor reflects market expectations of a faster monetary
policy tightening, or markets assume that interest rates three months from now, Et+1 (r3 ),
will be higher relative to what the market expected last week and relative to the change


                                               3
in expectations for the federal funds rate in one month. In Section II, we motivate the
regression and our choice of terminology in a simple factor model.
       Empirically, we create the slope factor using end-of-day data from Wednesday of
week t to Wednesday of week t + 1 following Lo and MacKinlay (1988). The Wednesday
to Wednesday convention is standard in the literature, because it minimizes the number
of missing observations. We use slope to predict returns over the following week starting
with Wednesday of week t + 1.2 The predictability we uncover is economically large and
is robust to the inclusion of lagged weekly returns.3 The predictability is contained in the
following week and is a robust finding across subsamples from 1988 (the beginning of the
federal fund futures market) to 2007.4 The weekly predictability is of similar magnitude
and is orthogonal to the predictive power of other standard return predictors such as the
dividend-price ratio, the VIX, the variance risk premium, or the term spread. We follow
Welch and Goyal (2007) and find the predictability holds out-of-sample and beats a naive
forecast throughout the sample period contrary to the predictability by the dividend-price
ratio which is one of the most successful return predictors in the literature.
       The FOMC has eight scheduled meetings per year, and a large literature studies the
effects of monetary policy shocks on financial markets in narrow event windows bracketing
those eight meetings. Since the first meeting in 1994, the FOMC has released a press
statement after meetings and policy decision explaining the decision and discussing the
future stance of monetary policy. Our findings are similar in magnitude when we exclude
weeks with FOMC meetings and decisions, and does not vary with turning points in
monetary policy or policy decisions during unscheduled meetings.
       During the same time period, the FOMC changed the conduct of monetary policy
and shifted to a more granular, inertial approach.              This increased transparency has
decreased the size of monetary policy shocks around FOMC meetings over time (see,
   2
     Equity markets close after the close of futures markets and market participants could trade on the
predictions of the slope factor.
   3
     Weekly stock returns are autocorrelated; see Lo and MacKinlay (1988).
   4
     The zero lower bounds on nominal interest rates determine the end of our sample period. We use
longer-dated futures contracts to construct a slope factor during the zero-lower-bound period and find
results consistent with our baseline analysis (see discussion below and in the Online Appendix).


                                                  4
e.g., Gorodnichenko and Weber (2016)). We find that small values of the slope factor do
not drive our findings.
       But policymakers also attempt to guide financial markets throughout the year and
not only during scheduled meetings. We use linguistic analysis and find that a more
hawkish tone in speeches by the chair or vice chair predicts a faster monetary policy
tightening. Our findings are consistent with the idea that monetary policy became more
transparent in the 1990s. In fact, repeating the introductory quote, Ben Bernanke states
in his blog that “monetary policy is 98 percent talk and only two percent action.”5
       Ozdagli and Weber (2016) find a larger effect of surprise monetary easing on financial
markets than of surprise tightening. We also find a larger forecasting power of slope
in periods with negative slope values, that is, when market participants expect faster
monetary policy easing.
       One channel through which our slope factor might affect stock returns is through
changing expectations about changes in future short-term interest rates. The slope factor
predicts changes in future federal funds rates over the following two months and forecast
revisions of professional forecasters over the next quarter. Macro news explains 9% of
the variation in the slope factor but does not drive our return predictability. Hence,
news about the economy is unlikely to drive the predictability of weekly stock returns by
the slope factor; rather, news about the stance on monetary policy is likely to drive the
predictability.
       The predictability we uncover is economically large. Using insights from Campbell
and Thompson (2008) and Cochrane (1999), we show that an investor conditioning on
the slope factor can increase the weekly Sharpe ratio by more than 20% compared to a
buy-and-hold investor. We argue below that trading based on the predictions of the slope
factor is feasible and transaction costs are small.
       Our results are consistent with a delayed market reaction to monetary policy news and
short-run monetary policy momentum (Neuhierl and Weber (2018)). Greenwood, Hanson,
  5
      See: http://www.brookings.edu/blogs/ben-bernanke/posts/2015/03/30-inaugurating-new-blog



                                                 5
and Liao (2018) develop a model of market segmentation with slow-moving capital across
markets in which investors might react with a delay to news in markets others than the
one they trade in.


A.    Related Literature

A large literature at the intersection of macroeconomics and finance investigates the effect
of monetary policy shocks on asset prices in an event-study framework. In a seminal study,
Cook and Hahn (1989) examine the effects of changes in the federal funds rate on bond
rates using a daily event window. They show that changes in the federal funds target
rate are associated with changes in interest rates in the same direction, with larger effects
at the short end of the yield curve. Bernanke and Kuttner (2005)—also using a daily
event window—focus on unexpected changes in the federal funds target rate. They find
that an unexpected interest rate cut of 25 basis points leads to an increase in the CRSP
value-weighted market index of about 1 percentage point. Gürkaynak, Sack, and Swanson
(2005b) focus on intraday event windows and find effects of similar magnitudes for the
S&P500. Lucca and Moench (2015) document that stock returns already appreciate in the
twenty-four hours before the actual FOMC announcement. Savor and Wilson (2013) show
that 60%-80% of the realized equity premium is earned around scheduled macroeconomic
news announcements such as the FOMC meetings. Ozdagli and Weber (2016) decompose
the overall response into a direct demand effect and higher-order network effects using
spatial autoregressions, and find that more than 50% of the overall market response comes
from indirect effects. Hanson and Stein (2015) study the effect of monetary policy shocks
on future long-term real rates. Fontaine (2016) estimates a dynamic term structure model
and finds that uncertainty about future rate changes is cyclical. Leombroni, Vedolin,
Venter, and Whelan (2018) construct a European monetary policy communication shock
and show it affects risk premia.
     Besides the effect on the level of the stock market, researchers have recently also
studied cross-sectional differences in the response to monetary policy. Ehrmann and


                                             6
Fratzscher (2004) and Ippolito, Ozdagli, and Perez-Orive (2018), among others, show that
firms with high bank debt, low cash flows, small firms, firms with low credit ratings, low
financial constraints, high price-earnings multiples, and Tobin’s q show a higher sensitivity
to monetary policy shocks, which is in line with bank-lending, balance sheet, and interest
rate channels of monetary policy. Gorodnichenko and Weber (2016) show that firms
with stickier output prices have more volatile cash flows and high conditional volatility
in narrow event windows around FOMC announcements. Weber (2015), Bhamra et al.
(2018), and D’Acunto, Liu, Pflueger, and Weber (2018) study how firm-level and portfolio
returns vary with measured price stickiness, and show that sticky-price firms have higher
systematic risk, lower financial leverage, but are more sensitive to monetary policy shocks.
    We also contribute to a long literature on return predictability. Campbell (1991) and
Cochrane (1992) start from a first-order Taylor series approximation of the definition of
returns, and show that variation in the dividend-price ratio has to predict either future
cash flows or expected returns. Empirically, they find that the dividend-price ratio is a
strong predictor of stock returns, especially at horizons longer than one year, whereas they
do not find any cash-flow predictability. Lettau and Ludvigson (2001) provide evidence
for return predictability using a proxy for the consumption-wealth ratio. Evidence for
return predictability by the dividend-price ratio has declined in recent years (see, e.g.,
Welch and Goyal (2007)). Lettau and Van Nieuwerburgh (2008), Cochrane (2008), and
Van Binsbergen and Koijen (2010) allow for structural breaks in the process for the
dividend-price ratio, impose theoretical predictions, or estimate a latent process and find
strong evidence in favor of return predictability. Ang and Bekaert (2007) and Fama and
French (1988) show that short-term interest rates, term spreads, and default spreads
are strong predictors of aggregate market returns, whereas Kelly and Pruitt (2013) use
information in the cross section of book-to-market ratios. Bianchi, Lettau, and Ludvigson
(2016) show low frequency shifts in the consumption-wealth ratio of Lettau and Ludvigson
(2001) and relate it to changes in the long run expected value of the real federal funds
rate. They show a consumption-wealth ratio corrected for structural breaks has strong


                                             7
predictive power for future stock returns. All these studies find evidence for return
predictability at longer horizons typically longer than a few quarters and up to several
years.
    A recent literature studies the effect of macro announcements on financial markets.
Andersen, Bollerslev, Diebold, and Vega (2003) construct surprises from Money Market
Services and show that the conditional mean of six exchange rate jumps following the
announcement surprises. Gürkaynak, Sack, and Swanson (2005a) use the same surprise
data and find a strong impact of macro surprises on long-term yields. Gilbert (2011) shows
that the reaction of the S&P500 to these surprises is consistent with predictions of rational
expectations trading models, whereas Gilbert, Scotti, Strasser, and Vega (2017) show that
the intrinsic value of macro surprises drives the financial markets response. Ghosh and
Constantinides (2016) show innovations in macroeconomic variables are highly correlated
with the dividend-price ratio. We also use data from Money Market Services to study the
impact of macro surprises on the slope factor and show that financial forecasters adjust
their forecasts for federal funds rates following changes in the slope factor.
    We make the following contributions to the literature. First, we document that
monetary policy has large effects on asset prices outside of the eight scheduled FOMC
meetings. Second, we find that changes in expectations about the future path of short-
term interest rates are important for the response of stock returns, providing evidence in
favor of the effectiveness of forward guidance outside of liquidity traps. Third, we find
that speeches by the chair affect the slope factor, which then predicts future changes in
short-term interest rates. But ultimately, the question remains why financial markets
react so strongly to macroeconomic surprises in general and monetary policy news in
particular. Does monetary policy news predict future consumption growth, do market
participants reach for yield, or does monetary policy directly affect risk premia?




                                             8
                                          II      Data

In this section, we introduce the different data sources, detail the construction of the slope
factor, and report descriptive statistics.


A.       Stock Returns

We sample daily returns for the CRSP value-weighted index including dividends directly
from CRSP. The index is an average of all common stocks trading on NYSE, Amex, or
Nasdaq. We then subtract the risk-free rate to obtain excess returns and compound those
from Thursday of week t + 1 to Wednesday of week t + 2 in line with Lo and MacKinlay
(1988) to minimize the number of missing observations due to exchange closures. If the
Wednesday in week t+2 is missing, we use Thursday’s closing price, and if both Wednesday
and Thursday (in week t + 2) are missing, we use Tuesday’s closing price. If Tuesday,
Wednesday, and Thursday are missing, we report the return as missing for that particular
week.6


B.       Federal Funds Futures Data

Federal funds futures started trading on the Chicago Board of Trade in October 1988.
These contracts have a face value of $5,000,000. Prices are quoted as 100 minus the daily
average federal funds rate as reported by the Federal Reserve Bank of New York. Federal
funds futures face limited counterparty risk due to daily marking to market and collateral
requirements by the exchange. We use end-of-day data of the federal funds futures directly
from the Chicago Mercantile Exchange (CME). Futures contracts with maturity of up to
three years trade on the CME, but futures with maturities longer than six months are
not very liquid.7
       Our sample period starts in 1994 and ends in 2007 for a total of 725 weeks. We
   6
      We lose approximately 0.6% of all observations due to this convention. Most of these observations
are around Christmas and New Year.
    7
      Gürkaynak et al. (2005b) argue that federal fund futures with maturity beyond three months were
illiquid before 1998.


                                                  9
start in 1994 to be comparable to the large event-study literature. With the first meeting
in 1994, the FOMC started to communicate its decision by issuing press releases after
meetings and policy decisions. The liquidity trap and zero lower bound on nominal
interest rates determine the end of our sample because there is little variation in federal
funds futures-implied rates. In robustness checks, we employ data going back to 1988,
when federal funds futures were introduced, and we study changes in longer-term futures
during the liquidity trap period for a sample until 2018.


C.      Slope Factor

Most previous papers have studied the relationship between monetary policy surprises
and stock returns in an event study around FOMC press releases. Kuttner (2001) shows
that scaled changes of the current-month futures allow isolating the surprise component
of monetary policy.8 The FOMC has eight scheduled meetings per year and, starting with
the first meeting in 1994, most press releases are issued around 2:15 p.m. E.T.
       We instead are interested in whether monetary policy also matters for asset prices
outside of narrowly defined event windows and whether changes in expectations for the
path of future short-term rates are important drivers of future stock returns.
       Let f ft,1 denote the rate implied by the one-month federal funds futures on date t
and assume a FOMC meeting takes place during that month. d1 is the day of the FOMC
meeting and m1 is the number of days in the month. We can then write f ft,1 as a weighted
average of the prevailing federal funds target rate, r0 , and the expectation of the target
rate after the meeting, r1 :

                                         d1      m1 − d1
                              f ft,1 =      r0 +         Et (r1 ) + µt,1 ,                            (1)
                                         m1        m1

where µt,1 is a risk premium.9 Gürkaynak et al. (2007) estimate risk premia of one to
   8
    The scaling is necessary because of the settlement terms of the futures contracts; see Kuttner (2001).
   9
    We implicitly assume the beginning of week t is after the previous FOMC meeting. Meetings are
typically around six to eight weeks apart.



                                                   10
three basis points, and Piazzesi and Swanson (2008) show that they only vary at business
cycle frequencies. We focus on weekly changes and neglect risk premia in the following as
is common in the literature.
    The one-week change in the one-month futures implied rate in months with FOMC
meetings is:

                                            m1 − d1
                            ∆f ft,t+1,1 =           [Et+1 (r1 ) − r0 )] .                  (2)
                                              m1

    When t and t + 1 are in different months, we already use the next month’s future;
that is, we roll the contract forward.
    Similarly, we can write the one-week change in the three-month futures implied rate
in months with FOMC meetings as:

                          d3                         m3 − d3
          ∆f ft,t+1,3 =       Et+1 (r3− ) − Et (r3− ) +        [Et+1 (r3 ) − Et (r3 )] ,   (3)
                          m3                             m3

where r3− denotes the federal funds target rate prevailing before the FOMC meeting,
which in most cases will coincide with r1 .
    Changes in the near-term futures contract contain information affecting the level
of all future federal funds target rates, whereas changes in the longer-term futures also
contain information about the path of future short-term rate changes. We assume


                              ∆f ft,t+1,1 = levelt,t+1                                     (4)

                              ∆f ft,t+1,3 = βlevelt,t+1 + slopet,t+1 .                     (5)


    We can now define the slope factor as the residual of a regression of weekly changes in
the three-month federal funds futures-implied rate, ∆f ft,t+1,3 , on a constant and changes
in the one-month futures-implied rate:


                           ∆f ft,t+1,3 = α + β∆f ft,t+1,1 + slopet,t+1 .                   (6)


                                                 11
The definition of our slope factor is similar in spirit to structural vector autoregressions
(VAR), and we identify slope by imposing a zero restriction. Of course, similar to identified
VARs, different assumptions are possible.
    The point estimate of α is -0.00 and is indistinguishable from 0, and the point estimate
of β is 1.17 with a standard deviation of 0.03:


                      ∆f ft,t+1,3 = −0.00 + 1.17 ∆f ft,t+1,1 + slopet,t+1 .
                                      (0.00)   (0.03)



The R2 of the regression is 67%, which indicates that the slope factor explains around
one third of the variation in three-month futures changes.
    Figure 1 plots the times series of slope in the top panel, together with the time
series for changes in the one-month and three-month futures-implied rates in the middle
and bottom panel, respectively. By construction, slope is orthogonal to the change in
the one-month futures-implied rate but exhibits a correlation of 57% with changes in
the three-month futures-implied rate, indicating that the slope factor contains useful
information about the path of future monetary policy changes.
    Figure A.1 in the Online Appendix plots the regression coefficient of equation (6) for
a rolling estimating. The red dashed line uses a constant window of 250 weeks, whereas
the blue solid line indicates estimates from an expanding window sample. The regression
estimate is stable through time and varies between 1.07 and 1.33.
    The autocorrelation of the slope factor is 0.11 and spurious predictability arising from
highly persistent regressors is no concern in our setting (see Stambaugh (1999)).
    In our empirical analysis, we use a regression residual to predict excess returns. Full-
sample estimates incorporate forward-looking information, and the estimation of slope
requires a correction of standard errors. Economically, the point estimate is close to 1.
We exploit this feature and construct as robustness a slope factor as a simple difference in
differences: slope = ∆(f ft+1,3 − f ft,3 ) − ∆(f ft+1,1 − f ft,1 ). This slope has the advantage
that we do not use forward-looking information and it does not require any estimation.
It also allows a simple interpretation of slope as indicating faster future monetary policy

                                                12
tightening and easing: slope = ∆(f ft+1,3 − f ft+1,1 ) − ∆(f ft,3 − f ft,1 ). A positive slope
factor reflects market expectations of a faster monetary policy tightening, or markets
assume that interest rates three months from now will be higher relative to what the
market expected last week and relative to the change in expectations for the federal funds
rate in one month.


D.     Descriptive Statistics

Table 1 reports descriptive statistics of weekly changes in the futures-implied rate, the
slope factor, and weekly stock returns. The slope is a regression residual and has a mean
of 0. The federal funds rate implied by the one- and three-month federal funds futures
are 4.23% and 4.29%, respectively, with average weekly changes of -0.01 for both. The
average federal funds target rate was 4.20% during our sample period, and the CRSP
value-weighted index had an average weekly excess return of 0.12%.



                           III     Empirical Results

A.    Methodology

We focus on one-week predictability of stock returns by the slope factor to establish
an effect from changes in the future path of monetary policy on stock returns.
Contemporaneous windows might cause concerns of reverse causality. Stock prices are
the present discounted value of future dividends, and the CRSP value-weighted index
captures almost 100% of the overall market capitalization in the United States. In the
long run, economy-wide dividends and GDP are co-integrated, good news about future
dividends is good news about the economy, and market participants might expect a
faster tightening of future interest rates following good news. In this case, we would
find a positive contemporaneous relationship between our slope factor and stock returns.
Rigobon and Sack (2003) use a heteroskedasticity-based identification method and indeed



                                             13
find monetary policy systematically reacting to movements in stock prices.10
       Another potential concern of studying the contemporaneous relationship between
the slope factor and stock returns is the fact that both might react to macroeconomic
announcements during the week. Weaker-than-expected unemployment numbers might
lead to a drop in stock prices and expectations that the FOMC might lower the speed of
interest rate increases. We would find a positive contemporaneous association between
slope and stock returns which would, however, be an endogenous response to news about
the economy.
       Changes in slope could still reflect changes in economic fundamentals. An upward
adjustment in inflation expectations or GDP growth could lead to a positive slope factor.11
We would expect a positive association between slope and future stock returns if slope
captures positive news about the macroeconomy, but we find instead slope predicting
negative returns. We might expect no reaction of subsequent stock returns to slope if
slope captures news of changes in inflation expectations, because stocks are claims to real
assets and should be less affected by inflation.12
       In section IVD., we show that speeches by the chair and vice chair, instead, affect the
slope factor. Macro news also affects the slope factor, but has no independent predictive
power for future stock returns conditional on the slope factors (see Online Appendix).
Professional forecasters instead change their forecasts about future federal funds rates as
a response to changes in the slope factor (see section IVB.). Our results are consistent
with a delayed market reaction to monetary policy news and short-run monetary policy
time series momentum.
  10
     We also find a positive contemporaneous association of the slope factor and stock returns at the
weekly frequency which is, however, fully driven by conventional monetary policy shocks (see discussion
in the Online Appendix).
  11
     Empirically, a Taylor (1993) rule in which nominal interest rates respond positively to inflation and
output growth is a good description of actual nominal rates in the data.
  12
     For a discussion, see Katz, Lustig, and Nielsen (2017) but also Fama and Schwert (1977) and Bhamra,
Dorion, Jeanneret, and Weber (2018).




                                                   14
B.      Baseline

Table 2 presents our baseline finding regressing weekly excess returns in percent of the
CRSP value-weighted index starting in week t + 1, Rt+1 , on the slope factor of week t,
slopet , calculated according to equation (6) and additional covariates measured at the
end of week t, Xt :


                                 Rt+1 = α + βslopet + γ0Xt + εt .                                  (7)


We use in-sample slope estimates in our baseline specification but show results for the
simple-difference slope below. We address the first-stage estimation of the slope factor by
reporting bootstrapped standard errors in parentheses. We resample changes in federal
funds futures and returns simultaneously. For each sample we draw, we re-estimate the
slope factor and then estimate the predictive regression (on the re-sampled data). We
repeat this process 1,000 times to obtain standard errors for the regression coefficients in
the predictive regression.13
       The point estimate of β is negative and highly statistically significant. Economically,
a one-standard-deviation increase in the slope factor (0.04) leads to a drop in weekly
returns of 0.3%, which is 1.5 times the average weekly return and 13.5% of a one-standard-
deviation move in returns (2.19%). The slope factor explains around 2% of the weekly
variation in stock returns.
       Campbell, Lo, and MacKinlay (1997) document that weekly stock returns are
negatively autocorrelated in the modern period. We add the lagged excess return of
the CRSP value-weighted index in column (2). We also find negative autocorrelation for
our sample period. However, adding the lagged excess return has little influence on our
point estimate of β and adds little explanatory power. Interestingly, the lagged return
only explains around 1% of the weekly variation in excess returns when it is the only
explanatory variable.
  13
    We do not detect any significant error-term autocorrelation, which is why we do not block bootstrap
the data.


                                                  15
     The remaining columns of Table 2 study the robustness of the predictive power of
the slope factor when we add other, standard return predictors, which are available at
sufficiently high frequencies.
     The dividend-price ratio predicts variation in risk premia at the business-cycle
frequency (see Campbell (1991) and Cochrane (1992)). We add the dividend-price ratio
of the CRSP value-weighted index (dpt ) as a return predictor in column (3). We also find
that high dpt predicts high weekly returns but barely changes the point estimate of the
slope factor.
     Bollerslev et al. (2009) argue that time-varying economic uncertainty affects risk
premia, and they provide evidence of predictability of quarterly excess returns by the
variance risk premium. We add the level of the VIX index (V IXt ) in column (4), realized
variance (RVt ) in column (5), and the variance risk premium (V RPt ) as the difference
between V IXt and RVt in column (6). We do not find evidence for predictability of weekly
stock returns by any of the three variance-related measures, and adding them has little
impact on the predictability by the slope factor.
     Both stock returns and slope might vary with the level of the federal funds rate.
To ensure our baseline regression does not capture these effects, we add the federal
funds target rate as covariate in column (7). We find little evidence supporting this
consideration. The point estimate is statistically insignificant, the point estimate of β
barely changes, and the explanatory power of the regression remains identical.
     The slope of the yield curve might be a useful predictor of recessions and economic
activity.   Fama and French (1988) and Lettau and Ludvigson (2010) document the
forecasting power of the term spread for stock returns. We add the term spread from
the Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland in column (8). The term spread has no predictive
power for weekly excess returns, and adding it as an additional covariate has little impact
on our point estimate of interest.
     In column (9), we add the 30-minute monetary policy shock around FOMC




                                            16
announcements from Gorodnichenko and Weber (2016), (mpt ).14 Tighter monetary policy
negatively predicts the next weeks’ stock returns but has little impact on the forecasting
power of the slope factor.
       Column (10) adds all covariates jointly and supports our baseline finding.               All
predictors jointly explain 7.5% of the weekly variation in stock returns, with the slope
factor remaining highly statistically and economically significant. We find in unreported
results the explanatory power decreases by 1.5% when we exclude the slope factor from
column (10).
       Our baseline analysis stops in 2007 because the federal funds target rate subsequently
hit the zero lower bound on nominal interest rates. Table A.1 in the Online Appendix
report a specification in which we append the sample until the last week of 2018 with
a slope factor constructed from changes in six-months fed funds futures implied rates
regressed on changes in the implied rates of three-months fed funds futures. Results are
consistent with our baseline findings. We also report in Table A.2 in the Online Appendix
results for a slope factor constructed using six-months and one-months futures and results
are similar.


C.      Subsample Analysis

Stock markets react strongly to monetary policy surprises in tight windows around FOMC
press releases (Bernanke and Kuttner (2005)), but an upward drift occurs in stock returns
in the twenty-four hours before scheduled FOMC meetings (see Lucca and Moench (2015)).
We study in Table 3 whether a systematic response of stock returns to monetary policy
surprises around FOMC press releases or an upward drift in stock returns before the release
might drive our findings. Column (1) repeats our baseline estimation. Column (2) removes
all weeks from our sample that contain a scheduled or unscheduled FOMC meeting during
the period over which we measure stock returns. This restriction removes 118 weeks
from our sample but has little impact on our point estimates, statistical significance, or
  14
     We merge the monetary policy shock during the week over which we calculate the slope factor and
set it to zero for weeks without a meeting.


                                                17
explanatory power of the slope factor. Column (3), instead, removes weeks with FOMC
meetings during the period over which we estimate the slope factor. Again, we find
little evidence for FOMC weeks driving our findings. Lastly, column (4) removes weeks
with meetings in either week t or week t + 1, reducing our sample size by 1/3. The point
estimate is now slightly reduced to -6.10 from our baseline estimate of -6.96, but statistical
significance and explanatory power are unchanged. Hence, FOMC meetings do not drive
our results.
    The sensitivity of stock returns to monetary policy shocks varies across types of
events. Ozdagli and Weber (2016) find larger sensitivities of stock returns to monetary
policy shocks on turning points in monetary policy compared to regular meetings, and no
sensitivity on intermeeting policy decisions. Turning points are target-rate changes in the
direction opposite to the previous target-rate change. Turning points signal changes in
the current and future stance on monetary policy (Jensen, Mercer, and Johnson (1996);
Piazzesi (2005); Coibion and Gorodnichenko (2012)). Intermeeting policy decisions are
changes in target rates on unscheduled meetings of the FOMC. Faust et al. (2004) argue
that intermeeting policy decisions are likely to reflect new information about the state of
the economy, and hence, the stock market might react to news about the economy rather
than changes in monetary policy.
    Table A.3 in the Online Appendix adds dummy variables equal to 1 if the week during
which we create the slope factor contains any meeting (meeting), a regular meeting
(regular), an unscheduled meeting (intermeeting), and if the policy decision was a
turning point (turningpoint), as well as interactions with the slope factor. Stock returns
are negative following any meetings, weeks of regular FOMC meetings, intermeetings, and
weeks in which the decision was a turning point (columns (2) to (5)). However, we do not
find any variation of the slope factor as a function of meeting types.
    Faster monetary policy easing might have different effects than an expected increase
in the speed of tightening. Ozdagli and Weber (2016) show for a sample similar to ours
that the stock market reacts mainly to surprise cuts in interest rates. Table A.4 in the


                                             18
Online Appendix conditions the slope factor on positive and negative realizations. We see
in columns (1) and (2) that most of the predictive power comes from negative realizations
of slope: increases in the speed of monetary policy easing are more than three times
as important as positive values of slope. Defining upside and downside slope factors as
realizations more than one standard deviation above or below 0 similar to Lettau et al.
(2014) leads to similar conclusions (see columns (3) and (4)).
        Monetary policy has become more predictable over time, and many slope observations
are small in absolute value. To ensure these observations do not drive our results, we follow
Gorodnichenko and Weber (2016) and restrict our sample to weeks with values of the slope
factor larger than 0.015 in absolute value in column (5), cutting our sample almost in half.
Economic and statistical significance increases when we exclude small values of the slope
factor.
        Section II in the Online Appendix contains extensive robustness checks including
the simple-difference slope, controlling for principal components for federal funds futures
and the target and path of Gürkaynak et al. (2005b) and report results for different
subsamples and forecast horizons. Across sample cuts, controls, and variations, we find a
robust predictive power of slope and no predictive power beyond the one-week horizon.


D.        Uncertainty and Predictability

Periods of heightened uncertainty tend to be periods when stock return predictability
is especially strong (see Cujean and Hasler (2017)). To study whether stock economic
uncertainty is also important for the predictability of the slope factor, we first interact
slope with the VIX (Bloom (2009)) in Table 4.15 We repeat our baseline specification
in column (1) for convenience. In column (2) we indeed see that the predictive power
of slope is concentrated in times of high uncertainty: the interaction term with VIX is
negative and the slope in level loses statistical significance. Columns (3)–(5) introduce
interaction terms with dummy variables that equal 1 when the VIX is above the 50th ,
  15
       We thank Oleksiy Kryvtsov for this excellent suggestion.



                                                    19
75th , and 90th percentile in our sample. In these specifications, we find large and negative
estimates for the interaction terms but also negative point estimates for the slope factor
in levels. These results suggest that the predictability of the slope factor is highest in
times of high economic uncertainty.
    A different way of studying time variation in the predictability is an out-of-sample
forecasting exercise following Welch and Goyal (2007). These authors study the out-
of-sample predictive power of popular return predictors and find none of the popular
predictors beats the rolling-windows mean return. We follow Welch and Goyal (2007)
and plot in Figure 2 the cumulative out-of-sample difference in the squared forecast errors
(SSE) for the naive trailing mean forecasts and forecasts by the slope. The top red line
plots the SSE for the slope factor and the blue line repeats the exercise for the dividend-
price ratio, the most popular return predictor in the asset pricing literature. We see that
slope reliably beats the naive sample mean forecast, that is, the cumulative sum (SSE)
is positive throughout the sample period, starting already in 1994. The predictability
is especially strong starting in 1999 until 2004 and then levels off. The dividend-price
ration, instead, does not outperform the simple mean forecast and results in a negative
SSE during the whole sample period.
    The results so far suggest that the slope factor is a reliable return predictor and has
especially strong predictive power in times of high uncertainty. To better understand
whether uncertainty matters more generally for the monetary policy–stock return nexus,
we revisit the pre-FOMC announcement drift of Lucca and Moench (2015). These authors
show large parts of the realized equity premium in a sample starting in 1994 is earned
in the 24 hours before FOMC decisions. Figure 3 replicates their finding plotting the
cumulative return of all 24 hour windows before all 203 scheduled FOMC meeting for a
sample starting in 1994. We use the SPDR S&P500 ETF tick data from NYSE taq to
construct the returns in the 24 hours before FOMC meetings following Gorodnichenko
and Weber (2016). We find returns for the pre-FOMC announcement drift are large and
positive for a sample from 1997 until 2002 and then again for a sample from 2007 until


                                             20
2009 before the announcement drift levels off until the end of the sample in 2019. To
show the striking return drift in the 24 hours before scheduled FOMC meetings relative
to other 24 hour windows, we also plot in blue the cumulative return of the 203 24 hour
windows 5 trading days before the scheduled FOMC meeting as a placebo test following
Gorodnichenko and Weber (2016).
       The results in this subsection suggest economic uncertainty is an important
determinant for the monetary policy–stock market nexus and more research is needed
to fully understand the interplay.



IV         Economic Mechanism and Magnitudes

A.       Future Changes

We argue that changes in the whole future path of short-term interest rates matter for
changes in asset prices and create a slope factor using changes of federal fund futures of
different horizons. We indeed find that slope can predict stock returns: increases in slope
result in lower future stock returns. However, we have not shown that changes in the
slope factor are related to future changes in federal funds rates.
       Table 5 regresses future changes in target rates on the slope factor. We define the
one-month change in the target rate as the difference in the actual federal funds target rate
over the 21-trading-day period after the period over which we calculate the slope factor.
We define longer-period changes accordingly. We see in column (1) that slope predicts
one-month changes in federal funds target rates with a positive sign. In column (2), we
predict two-month changes in federal funds rates orthogonal to the one-month change.
The slope factor predicts two-month changes with a positive sign and adds predictive
power to the one-month change. In the remaining columns, we regress future changes
of up to six months orthogonalized to the one-month change. We do not detect any
predictability in these changes once we condition on the two-month change.16
 16
      Recall we only use futures of up to three months to create the slope factor.


                                                     21
B.      Changes in Expectations

The slope factor has predictive power for future equity returns but also predicts changes
in future federal funds rates, whereas speeches by the FOMC chair affects the slope factor
as we show below. One interpretation of these results is that members of the FOMC
communicate news about their monetary policy stance throughout the year outside of
scheduled FOMC meetings through speeches and testimonies. If the slope factor reveals
news about the future monetary policy stance to the public, we should see market
participants updating their expectations for future federal funds rates.
       To test for this channel, we regress changes in consensus expectations for future
federal funds rates on the slope factor in Table 6. We obtain monthly forecasts for the
federal funds rate one to three quarters ahead from Blue Chip financial forecasts. Blue
Chip surveys leading business and financial economists typically in a period between
the 22nd and 25th of the previous months, and releases the forecasts on the first of the
month. We create one-month changes in these forecasts and regress them on the three-
week cumulative slope factor ending on or before the 20th of the previous month.17
       We see in columns (1)–(3) that the three-week slope factor significantly predicts
forecast revisions of professional forecasters for future federal funds rates over the next
three quarters and explains around 12% of the variation. The coefficient on the slope
factor is indistinguishable from 1. Slope loses its forecasting power more than one quarter
ahead, once we condition on the forecast revision for the first quarter (see columns (4)
and (5)), which we would expect because the slope factor only contains information for
future federal funds target rates of up to three months ahead. The one-quarter-ahead
forecast revision explains more than 80% of the changes in two- and three-quarters-ahead
predictions, indicating high persistence in forecast revisions.
       Financial market participants update forecasts for future federal funds rates following
changes in slope. This finding is consistent with the idea that changes in slope reveal
  17
    The timing ensures Blue Chip collected the forecasts after the period over which we calculate the
slope factor.




                                                 22
information about the speed of future monetary policy tightening and loosening, and
professional forecasters update their forecast to the new information.


C.    Narrative Evidence: Speeches, Speed, and Momentum

A positive slope factor predicts negative stock returns over the next week. We also find
that macro news has little impact on the predictability (see Online Appendix), but market
participants instead update their expectations about future federal funds rates. These
findings are consistent with delayed market reaction to the monetary policy news, that
is, short-run monetary policy momentum, and provide evidence that monetary policy
news comes out throughout the year and not only during scheduled FOMC meetings.
The FOMC has increased the transparency of their decisions and manages expectations
of participants in financial markets in speeches and testimonies. One way the FOMC
might affect market expectations about the speed of future monetary policy easing and
tightening might be through the tone of speeches, which the slope factor possibly captures.
We now discuss as representative example the narrative background for a week in which
the slope factor was large in absolute value (above the 95th percentile).
     On September 26, 2005, Chairman Alan Greenspan gave a speech to the American
Bankers Association Annual Convention in Palm Dessert. He started off with,

      In my remarks today, I plan, in addition, to focus on one of the key factors
      driving the U.S. economy in recent years: the sharp rise in housing valuations
      and the associated buildup in mortgage debt. Over the past decade, the
      market value of the stock of owner-occupied homes has risen annually by
      approximately 9 percent on average, from $8 trillion at the end of 1995 to $18
      trillion at the end of June of this year. Home mortgage debt linked to these
      structures has risen at a somewhat faster rate.

     The Washington Post article, “Concerns Raised as Home Sales, Prices Rise Again;
Greenspan Issues Sternest Warning Yet to Bankers Group,” says,


                                            23
         U.S. home sales and prices surged again last month, an industry group
         reported yesterday, as Federal Reserve Chairman Alan Greenspan warned
         that the growing use of riskier new mortgages could result in ‘significant
         losses’ for lenders and borrowers if the market cools. And some cooling is
         likely, Greenspan suggested in remarks delivered via satellite to the American
         Bankers Association convention in Palm Desert, Calif., repeating his view
         that ‘home prices seem to have risen to unsustainable levels’ in certain local
         markets. [...] The Fed [...] indicated it will keep moving the rate higher in
         coming months to keep inflation under control.

        The slope factor is 0.08 in the week ending on September 28, 2005, and the following
week’s excess return is -1.50%.


D.        Policy Speeches: Linguistic Analysis

The example in the previous section is suggestive, but by no means conclu-
sive.     We now systematically study whether the tone of speeches correlates with
the slope factor.          We collect all speeches for members of the FOMC from
http://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/. To classify the tone of speeches, we use
a “search-and-count” approach as in Apel and Grimaldi (2012). Search-and-count is
an automated method to classify text into categories. A pre-specified word list which
classifies speeches as “hawkish” or “dovish” is the central input. Using this word list,
we can count the hawkish and dovish terms within one speech and aggregate over the
document. Following this procedure, we obtain a classification if a speech is on average
more hawkish or dovish.18
        As in Apel and Grimaldi (2012), we also compute a net index, to determine if a
speech is on average more hawkish, dovish, or possibly neutral. We calculate the net
  18
     The Online Appendix contains more details on the procedure, the actual classification we use in Table
A.13, and links to the speeches in Table A.14.




                                                   24
index by

                                                                       
                                  #hawk                       #dove
            N etIndex =                            −                            + 1.
                               #hawk + #dove               #hawk + #dove

A value above 1 implies the speech contains more hawkish than dovish terms, and we
would expect a faster future monetary policy tightening; that is, a positive coefficient
when we regress the slope on the net index.
    We test in Table 7 whether the tone of speeches by FOMC officials affects the slope
factor. We see in columns (1) and (2) that more hawkish speeches by any member of
the FOMC result in an increase in the slope factor, independent of whether we use the
net index or the number of hawkish and dovish terms. Neither the coefficient on the net
index nor the coefficient on the components is statistically significant, however.
    The media and market participants might not focus on all speeches by all FOMC
members equally, and not every FOMC member might convey equally important
information on the stance of future monetary policy. At the same time, some FOMC
members might be more powerful and able to affect the future path of actual federal
funds target rates. In columns (3) and (4), we only study speeches by the chair and
vice chair. We see that a more hawkish tone as indicated by the net index is positively
correlated with the slope factor. When we split the net index, we see that a more frequent
mentioning of hawkish words by the chair signals faster monetary tightening, whereas a
more dovish speech is negatively correlated with the slope factor. We see similar results in
columns (5) and (6) when we restrict our sample to speeches by the chair or vice chair that
contain at least one of the hawkish or dovish terms of our classification. Speeches now
explain more than 12% of the variation in the slope factor, which is a regression residual.
In column (7), we interact the hawk and dove classification with a dummy variable which
equals 1 when the speech is by the chair or vice chair and results are similar.
    In line with the interpretation that speeches are a major driver of the variation in
the slope factor, we find only four speeches during the blackout period that have at least
one hawkish or dovish classification. The slope factor is economically small in absolute

                                            25
value in all four weeks and well within one standard deviation of 0.
     The results on the effect of speeches on the slope factor, the slope factor predicting
future interest-rate changes, and the fact that market participants update their forecasts
for future federal funds rates, combined, suggest monetary policy predictability and short-
run monetary policy momentum.
     In Section II G. of the Online Appendix, we also show the reaction of stock returns
to the slope factor does not constitute a reaction to news about the macro economy but
rather a reaction to news about the future path of monetary policy.


E.    Economic Magnitudes

We employ the results in Campbell and Thompson (2008) to assess the economic
significance of our findings. Specifically, we assess how much an investor could possibly
gain following the predictions the slope factor generates, to create a link between statistical
measures of forecast performance (out-of-sample R2 ) and more interesting economic
quantities, such as gains in excess returns or increases in Sharpe ratios. The Online
Appendix contains details of the calculations.
     We find that an investor with mean-variance preferences and unit risk aversion can
increase the average weekly excess returns to 0.81% when trading on the predictions of
the slope factor relative to a weekly excess return of 0.53% a buy-and-hold investor earns.
     Cochrane (1999) suggests an alternative methodology to evaluate the economic
significance of return predictability. When we follow the method in Cochrane (1999),
we get an increase in the weekly Sharpe ratio of almost 20% from 7.31% to 9.00% when
trading on slope.
     Slope is a regression residual and one concern is that trading based on information
about the speed of future monetary policy tightening and loosening might not be profitable
due to transaction costs (Freyberger et al. (2019)). The average percentage bid-ask spread
of the SPDR S&P 500 (SPY) between 2002 and 2015 is 0.01% and the median spread is
0.008%. The average absolute weekly excess return instead is 1.7%, indicating transaction


                                              26
costs are not a major concern.



                           V       Concluding Remarks

Stock prices are the present discounted value of future cash flows and should be sensitive
to changes in market expectations about the whole path of future short-term interest
rates. We construct a slope factor from changes in federal funds futures-implied rates of
different maturities to test for this prediction. Increases in the slope factor predict future
increases in federal funds target rates and negative stock returns at the weekly frequency.
The stock return predictability is a robust feature of the data, holds out-of-sample and
during subsamples, and has predictive power similar to or larger than standard return
predictors.
       The predictive power of the slope factor is large in economic terms. An investor who
conditions on the slope factor when making portfolio decisions can increase his weekly
Sharpe ratio by 20% compared to a buy-and-hold investor.
       Consistent with the idea that “monetary policy is 98 percent talk and only two
percent action,”19 we find that speeches by the chair and vice chair change the slope
factor, which predicts future changes in federal funds target rates as well as forecast
revisions by professional forecasters. Our findings indicate that monetary policy affects
the real economy and financial markets continuously throughout the year, rather than
only during eight scheduled FOMC meetings that have been the focus of an extensive
event-study literature.
       Speeches affect stock returns via their effect on market participants’ expectations
about the speed of future monetary policy loosening or tightening. Our findings provide
evidence for the power of forward guidance and committing to future interest rate policies
outside of liquidity-trap periods.




 19
      See: http://www.brookings.edu/blogs/ben-bernanke/posts/2015/03/30-inaugurating-new-blog


                                                27
References
Andersen, T. G., T. Bollerslev, F. X. Diebold, and C. Vega (2003). Micro effects of
  macro announcements: Real-time price discovery in foreign exchange. The American
  Economic Review 93 (1), 38–62.
Ang, A. and G. Bekaert (2007). Stock return predictability: Is it there? Review of
  Financial Studies 20 (3), 651–707.
Apel, M. and M. Grimaldi (2012). The information content of central bank minutes.
  Riksbank Research Paper Series (92).
Bernanke, B. S. and K. N. Kuttner (2005). What explains the stock market’s reaction to
  Federal Reserve policy? The Journal of Finance 60 (3), 1221–1257.
Bhamra, H. S., C. Dorion, A. Jeanneret, and M. Weber (2018). Low inflation: High
  default risk and high equity valuations. Technical report, National Bureau of Economic
  Research.
Bianchi, F., M. Lettau, and S. C. Ludvigson (2016). Monetary policy and asset valuation:
  Evidence from a Markov-switching cay. Technical report, National Bureau of Economic
  Research.
Bloom, N. (2009). The impact of uncertainty shocks. Econometrica 77 (3), 623–685.
Bollerslev, T., G. Tauchen, and H. Zhou (2009). Expected stock returns and variance risk
  premia. Review of Financial Studies 22 (11), 4463–4492.
Campbell, J. Y. (1991). A variance decomposition for stock returns. Economic
  Journal 101 (405), 157–179.
Campbell, J. Y., A. W. Lo, and A. C. MacKinlay (1997). The econometrics of financial
  markets, Volume 2. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Campbell, J. Y. and S. B. Thompson (2008). Predicting excess stock returns out of
  sample: Can anything beat the historical average? Review of Financial Studies 21 (4),
  1509–1531.
Cochrane, J. H. (1992). Explaining the variance of price-dividend ratios. Review of
  Financial Studies 5 (2), 243–280.
Cochrane, J. H. (1999). New facts in finance. Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago Economic
  Perspectives 23 (3), 36–58.
Cochrane, J. H. (2008). The dog that did not bark: A defense of return predictability.
  Review of Financial Studies 21 (4), 1533–1575.
Coibion, O. and Y. Gorodnichenko (2012). Why are target interest rate changes so
  persistent? American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 4 (4), 126–162.
Cook, T. and T. Hahn (1989). The effect of changes in the federal funds rate target on
  market interest rates in the 1970s. Journal of Monetary Economics 24 (3), 331 – 351.
Cujean, J. and M. Hasler (2017). Why does return predictability concentrate in bad
  times? The Journal of Finance 72 (6), 2717–2758.
D’Acunto, F., R. Liu, C. Pflueger, and M. Weber (2018). Flexible prices and leverage.
  Journal of Financial Economics 129 (1), 46–68.
Ehrmann, M. and M. Fratzscher (2004). Taking stock: Monetary policy transmission to
  equity markets. Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking 36 (4), 719–737.


                                          28
Fama, E. F. and K. R. French (1988). Dividend yields and expected stock returns. Journal
  of Financial Economics 22 (1), 3–25.
Fama, E. F. and G. W. Schwert (1977). Asset returns and inflation. Journal of Financial
  Economics 5 (2), 115–146.
Faust, J., E. T. Swanson, and J. H. Wright (2004). Do Federal Reserve policy
  surprises reveal superior information about the economy?               Contributions to
  Macroeconomics 4 (1), 1–29.
Fontaine, J.-S. (2016). What fed funds futures tell us about monetary policy uncertainty.
  Unpublished Manuscript, Bank of Canada.
Freyberger, J., A. Neuhierl, and M. Weber (2019).              Dissecting characteristics
  nonparametrically. Review of Financial Studies (forthcoming).
Gertler, M. and P. Karadi (2015). Monetary policy surprises, credit costs, and economic
  activity. American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 7 (1), 44–76.
Ghosh, A. and G. M. Constantinides (2016). What information drives asset prices.
  Unpublished Manuscript, University of Chicago.
Gilbert, T. (2011). Information aggregation around macroeconomic announcements:
  Revisions matter. Journal of Financial Economics 101 (1), 114–131.
Gilbert, T., C. Scotti, G. Strasser, and C. Vega (2017). Is the intrinsic value of a
  macroeconomic news announcement related to its asset price impact? Journal of
  Monetary Economics 92, 78 – 95.
Gorodnichenko, Y. and M. Weber (2016). Are sticky prices costly? Evidence from the
  stock market. American Economic Review 106 (1), 165–199.
Greenwood, R., S. G. Hanson, and G. Y. Liao (2018). Asset price dynamics in partially
  segmented markets. The Review of Financial Studies 31 (9), 3307–3343.
Gürkaynak, R. S., B. Sack, and E. Swanson (2005a). The sensitivity of long-term interest
  rates to economic news: Evidence and implications for macroeconomic models. The
  American Economic Review 95 (1), 425–436.
Gürkaynak, R. S., B. P. Sack, and E. T. Swanson (2005b). Do actions speak louder
  than words? The response of asset prices to monetary policy actions and statements.
  International Journal of Central Banking 1 (1), 55–93.
Gürkaynak, R. S., B. P. Sack, and E. T. Swanson (2007). Market-based measures of
  monetary policy expectations. Journal of Business & Economic Statistics 25 (2), 201–
  212.
Hanson, S. G. and J. C. Stein (2015). Monetary policy and long-term real rates. Journal
  of Financial Economics 115 (3), 429–448.
Ippolito, F., A. K. Ozdagli, and A. Perez-Orive (2018). The transmission of monetary
  policy through bank lending: The floating rate channel. Journal of Monetary
  Economics 95, 49–71.
Jensen, G. R., J. M. Mercer, and R. R. Johnson (1996). Business conditions, monetary
  policy, and expected security returns. Journal of Financial Economics 40 (2), 213–237.
Katz, M., H. N. Lustig, and L. N. Nielsen (2017). Are stocks real assets? Review of
  Financial Studies 30 (2), 539–587.
Kelly, B. and S. Pruitt (2013). Market expectations in the cross-section of present values.


                                            29
  The Journal of Finance 68 (5), 1721–1756.
Kuttner, K. (2001). Monetary policy surprises and interest rates: Evidence from the Fed
  funds futures market. Journal of Monetary Economics 47 (3), 523–544.
Leombroni, M., A. Vedolin, G. Venter, and P. Whelan (2018).                 Central bank
  communication and the yield curve. Unpublished Manuscript.
Lettau, M. and S. Ludvigson (2001). Consumption, aggregate wealth, and expected stock
  returns. Journal of Finance 56 (3), 815–849.
Lettau, M. and S. C. Ludvigson (2010). Measuring and modeling variation in the risk-
  return trade-off. In L. P. Hansen and Y. Ait-Sahalia (Eds.), Handbook of Financial
  Econometrics: Tools and Techniques, Volume 1 of Handbooks in Finance, Chapter 11,
  pp. 617 – 690. San Diego: North-Holland.
Lettau, M., M. Maggiori, and M. Weber (2014). Conditional risk premia in currency
  markets and other asset classes. Journal of Financial Economics 114 (2), 197–225.
Lettau, M. and S. Van Nieuwerburgh (2008). Reconciling the return predictability
  evidence. Review of Financial Studies 21 (4), 1607–1652.
Lo, A. W. and A. C. MacKinlay (1988). Stock market prices do not follow random walks:
  Evidence from a simple specification test. Review of Financial Studies 1 (1), 41–66.
Lucca, D. O. and E. Moench (2015). The pre-FOMC announcement drift. The Journal
  of Finance 70 (1), 329–371.
Neuhierl, A. and M. Weber (2018). Monetary momentum. Technical report, National
  Bureau of Economic Research.
Ozdagli, A. and M. Weber (2016). Monetary policy through production networks:
  Evidence from the stock market. Unpublished Manuscript, University of Chicago.
Piazzesi, M. (2005). Bond yields and the Federal Reserve. Journal of Political
  Economy 113 (2), 311–344.
Piazzesi, M. and E. Swanson (2008). Futures prices as risk-adjusted forecasts of monetary
  policy. Journal of Monetary Economics 55 (4), 677–691.
Rigobon, R. and B. Sack (2003). Measuring the reaction of monetary policy to the stock
  market. Quarterly Journal of Economics 118 (2), 639–669.
Savor, P. and M. Wilson (2013). How much do investors care about macroeconomic
  risk? Evidence from scheduled economic announcements. Journal of Financial and
  Quantitative Analysis 48 (2), 343–375.
Stambaugh, R. F. (1999). Predictive regressions. Journal of Financial Economics 54 (3),
  375–421.
Taylor, J. B. (1993). Discretion versus policy rules in practice. In Carnegie-Rochester
  conference series on public policy, Volume 39, pp. 195–214. Elsevier.
Van Binsbergen, Jules, H. and R. S. Koijen (2010). Predictive regressions: A present-value
  approach. The Journal of Finance 65 (4), 1439–1471.
Weber, M. (2015). Nominal rigidities and asset pricing. Unpublished manuscript,
  University of Chicago Booth School of Business.
Welch, I. and A. Goyal (2007). A comprehensive look at the empirical performance of
  equity premium prediction. The Review of Financial Studies 21 (4), 1455–1508.



                                           30
                      Figure 1: Time Series of Slope Factor and Changes in Futures
S lo p e Facto r




                    0.2                                                                                     Slope

                     0

                   −0.2

                   −0.4




                    0.2                                                                         Change in 1M FFF

                     0
∆ff1




                   −0.2

                   −0.4




                    0.2                                                                         Change in 3M FFF

                     0
∆ff3




                   −0.2

                   −0.4
                               95




                                         97




                                                      99




                                                                  01




                                                                              03




                                                                                           05




                                                                                                           07
                           19




                                     19




                                                  19




                                                              20




                                                                          20




                                                                                       20




                                                                                                       20
                          4/




                                    8/




                                                 6/




                                                             3/




                                                                         8/




                                                                                      5/




                                                                                                      3/
                          1/




                                    1/




                                                1/




                                                            1/




                                                                        1/




                                                                                     1/




                                                                                                     1/




                      This figure plots the time series of the slope factor in the top panel, the weekly
                      changes in the one-month futures-implied federal funds rate in the middle panel,
                      and the weekly changes in the three-month futures-implied federal funds rate in the
                      bottom panel for a sample from 1994 to 2007.




                                                              31
         Figure 2: Weekly out-of-Sample Predictive Performance

 70
                    slope
 60                 dp ratio

 50

 40

 30

 20

 10

     0

 -10

 -20

 -30
     95




                                                                       04



                                                                                   06
                    6



                                    8



                                                 0



                                                             02
                     9



                                   9



                                                  0
  19




                                                                    20



                                                                                 20
                  19



                                19



                                               20



                                                          20
4/




                                                                  8/



                                                                               8/
              7/



                               2/



                                          1/



                                                        2/
1/




                                                                  9/



                                                                              9/
             /2



                           /1



                                          /1




                                                         /
                                                      10
           11



                         11



                                        10




     This figure plots the out-of-sample cumulative squared prediction error of a random
     walk against the predictions of the slope factor in red and the dividend-price ratio
     (dp ratio) in blue. We construct the slope factor as a regression residual of weekly
     changes of the three-month federal funds futures-implied rate on the one-month
     federal funds futures-implied rate (see equation (6)). Our sample period is from
     the first week of 1994 to the last week of 2007 for a total of 725 weeks.




                                                 32
          Figure 3: Cumulative pre-FOMC Announcement Drift
 80
                   pre-FOMC drift
 70                week-before drift


 60

 50

 40

 30

 20

 10

     0

 -10
     94


               97


                         00


                                     03


                                                  06


                                                              09


                                                                          12


                                                                                      15


                                                                                                  18
  19


              19


                        20


                                  20


                                              20


                                                           20


                                                                       20


                                                                                   20


                                                                                               20
4/


            5/


                      2/


                                9/


                                            1/


                                                         8/


                                                                     5/


                                                                                 8/


                                                                                             1/
2/


          2/


                    2/



                                 2


                                             3


                                                          2


                                                                      2


                                                                                  2


                                                                                              3
                              1/


                                          1/


                                                       1/


                                                                   1/


                                                                               1/


                                                                                           1/




     This figure plots the cumulative return of the pre-FOMC announcement drift of
     Lucca and Moench (2015) in red for all regular 203 FOMC meetings from 1994
     until May 2019. We use the return of the SPDR S&P500 ETF from 2 pm of
     the day prior to the meeting until 2 pm of the day of the meeting. We also plot
     the cumulative return of all 24 hours windows 5 trading days before all scheduled
     FOMC meetings in blue.




                                                 33
                                     Table 1: Descriptive Statistics

This table reports descriptive statistics for the slope factor, one- and three-month federal funds futures-implied rates
f ft,t+1 , one-week changes in these rates, the actual federal funds target rate, the absolute value of the slope factor,
and weekly excess returns of the CRSP value-weighted index. The sample period is January 1994 to December 2007
for a total of 725 weeks.

              Slopet    f ft,t+1,1     f ft,t+1,3   ∆f ft,t+1,1   ∆f ft,t+1,3   Target Rate      abs(Slopet )      Rt+1
 Mean          0.00        4.23          4.29         -0.01         -0.01           4.20              0.03         0.12
 Std          (0.04)      (1.73)        (1.74)        (0.05)        (0.07)         (1.75)            (0.03)       (2.21)
 Nobs                                                              725




                                                       34
                                                                Table 2: Predictive Regressions

     This table reports weekly predictive regressions of the excess returns of the CRSP value-weighted index on the slope factor (Slopet ), lagged index returns (Rt ),
     the dividend-price ratio (dpt ), the VIX (V IXt ), realized variance (RVt ), the variance risk premium (V RPt ), the federal funds target rate (F edf undst ), the term
     spread (T ermSpreadt ), and the monetary policy shock (mpt ) from Gorodnichenko and Weber (2016). We report bootstrapped standard errors in parentheses.
     We construct the slope factor as a regression residual of weekly changes of the three-month federal funds futures-implied rate on the one-month federal funds
     futures-implied rate (see equation (6)). Our sample period is from the first week of 1994 to the last week of 2007 for a total of 725 weeks.

                                        (1)           (2)        (3)          (4)           (5)            (6)            (7)            (8)            (9)           (10)
      Constant                         0.12         0.13      −0.47       −0.02            0.03           0.14           0.03         −0.05            0.12        −1.36∗
                                      (0.08)       (0.09)      (0.36)      (0.29)         (0.20)         (0.15)         (0.22)         (0.20)         (0.09)        (0.71)
      Slopet                         −7.70∗∗∗      −6.96∗∗∗   −6.88∗∗∗    −6.85∗∗∗       −6.87∗∗∗       −6.95∗∗∗       −6.97∗∗∗       −6.83∗∗∗       −6.35∗∗∗      −5.89∗∗∗
                                      (2.07)        (1.98)     (1.99)      (1.97)         (1.97)         (1.99)         (1.99)         (1.99)         (1.96)        (1.96)
      Rt                                           −0.09∗     −0.08∗      −0.08∗         −0.09∗         −0.09∗         −0.09∗         −0.08∗         −0.11∗∗       −0.10∗∗
                                                    (0.05)     (0.05)      (0.05)         (0.05)         (0.05)         (0.05)         (0.05)         (0.05)        (0.05)
      dpt                                                      36.79∗                                                                                               61.21∗∗
                                                              (20.13)                                                                                              (24.73)
      V IXt                                                                 0.01                                                                                      0.01
                                                                           (0.02)                                                                                    (0.03)




35
      RVt                                                                                  0.01                                                                       0.01
                                                                                          (0.02)                                                                     (0.03)
      V RPt                                                                                               0.00
                                                                                                         (0.03)
      F edf undst                                                                                                        0.02                                      −0.09
                                                                                                                        (0.05)                                      (0.10)
      T ermSpreadt                                                                                                                      0.07                          0.20
                                                                                                                                       (0.07)                        (0.15)
      mpt                                                                                                                                          −11.76∗∗∗      −11.51∗∗∗
                                                                                                                                                    (2.91)         (2.91)


      R2                                1.91         2.61       3.04         2.66           2.66           2.62           2.65           2.55          5.56           6.47
      Nobs                              725          724        724          723            724            723            724            718           724            717
      ∗∗∗               ∗∗
            p < 0.01,        p < 0.05, ∗ p < 0.1
                       Table 3: Predictive Regressions: Meeting Weeks

This table reports weekly predictive regressions of the excess returns of the CRSP value-weighted index on the slope
factor (Slopet ) and lagged index returns (Rt ), excluding weeks with scheduled and unscheduled FOMC meetings.
We report bootstrapped standard errors in parentheses. We construct the slope factor as a regression residual of
weekly changes of the three-month federal funds futures-implied rate on the one-month federal funds futures-implied
rate (see equation (6)). Our sample period is from the first week of 1994 to the last week of 2007 for a total of 725
weeks.
                                                 No Meeting           No Meeting       No Meeting
                                 All Weeks       Return Week         Previous Week   in either Week
                                     (1)             (2)                   (3)             (4)
         Constant                   0.13               0.23∗∗∗           0.12            0.24∗∗
                                   (0.09)             (0.09)            (0.09)          (0.09)
         Slopet                   −6.96∗∗∗            −6.87∗∗∗         −6.58∗∗∗        −6.10∗∗
                                   (1.98)              (2.50)           (2.15)          (2.78)
         Rt                       −0.09∗              −0.08            −0.08           −0.09
                                   (0.05)              (0.06)           (0.06)          (0.07)

         R2                          2.61               2.10             2.25             1.74
         Nobs                        724                606              606              490
         ∗∗∗               ∗∗
               p < 0.01,        p < 0.05, ∗ p < 0.1




                                                                36
                           Table 4: Predictive Regressions: VIX Interactions

This table reports weekly predictive regressions of the excess returns of the CRSP value-weighted index on the slope
factor (Slopet ), lagged index returns (Rt ), the VIX (V IXt ), dummy variables that are 1 when the VIX is larger than
certain quantiles of the VIX distribution as well as interaction terms with the slope factor. We report bootstrapped
standard errors in parentheses. We construct the slope factor as a regression residual of weekly changes of the
three-month federal funds futures-implied rate on the one-month federal funds futures-implied rate (see equation
(6)). Our sample period is from the first week of 1994 to the last week of 2007 for a total of 725 weeks.

                                   Baseline   V IXt continuous   V IXt > Q50 V IXt > Q75 V IXt > Q90
                                     (1)             (2)             (3)         (4)         (5)
 Constant                            0.13          0.04              0.12              0.14∗              0.10
                                    (0.09)        (0.30)            (0.08)            (0.08)             (0.08)
 Slopet                            −6.96∗∗∗        5.34            −3.09∗            −4.44∗∗            −5.38∗∗∗
                                    (1.98)        (6.54)            (1.71)            (1.82)             (1.75)
 Rt                                −0.09∗        −0.06             −0.07             −0.07              −0.07
                                    (0.05)        (0.05)            (0.05)            (0.05)             (0.05)
 V IXt                                             0.00
                                                  (0.02)
 Slope × V IXt                                   −0.64∗
                                                  (0.39)
 1V IX>Q                                                           −0.01             −0.09               0.23
                                                                    (0.16)            (0.24)            (0.47)
 Slope × 1V IX>Q                                                   −8.55∗∗           −9.02∗            −10.39
                                                                    (4.26)            (5.41)            (8.94)

 R2                                   2.61          3.29              3.16              3.14               3.20
 Nobs                                 724           723               724               724                724
 ∗∗∗               ∗∗
       p < 0.01,        p < 0.05, ∗ p < 0.1




                                                      37
                   Table 5: Predictive Regressions: Future Fed Funds Rate

This table reports weekly predictive regressions of changes in future realized federal funds target rates on the slope
factor (Slopet ), and one-month and two-month changes in federal funds rates (∆M 1, ∆M 2) for horizons lasting
from one month (M 1) to six months (M 6). We report bootstrapped standard errors in parentheses. We construct
the slope factor as a regression residual of weekly changes of the three-month federal funds futures-implied rate on
the one-month federal funds futures-implied rate (see equation (6)). Our sample period is from the first week of
1994 to the last week of 2007 for a total of 725 weeks.
                          ∆M 1       ∆M 2 ⊥ ∆M 1    ∆M 3 ⊥ ∆M 1   ∆M 4 ⊥ ∆M 1    ∆M 5 ⊥ ∆M 1       ∆M 6 ⊥ ∆M 1
                           (1)           (2)            (3)           (4)            (5)               (6)
 Constant                 0.00            0.01∗        0.03∗∗∗       0.04∗∗∗          0.05∗∗∗          0.06∗∗∗
                         (0.01)          (0.01)       (0.01)        (0.01)           (0.02)           (0.02)
 Slopet                   0.78∗∗∗         0.98∗∗∗     −0.13          0.02             0.23             0.29
                         (0.23)          (0.21)        (0.30)       (0.35)           (0.45)           (0.63)
 ∆M 1                                     0.36∗∗∗
                                         (0.05)
 ∆M 2                                                  0.87∗∗∗       1.20∗∗∗          1.49∗∗∗          1.73∗∗∗
                                                      (0.03)        (0.05)           (0.06)           (0.07)

 R2                        2.42           15.35        63.41         63.34            61.00            56.80
 Nobs                      726             726          726           726              726              726
 ∗∗∗               ∗∗
       p < 0.01,        p < 0.05, ∗ p < 0.1




                                                        38
                Table 6: Predictive Regressions: Future Forecast Changes

This table reports monthly predictive regressions of changes in expectations of future fed funds rates on the
cumulative slope factor over the previous three weeks (Slopet−3:t ), and the one-month change in expectations
for horizons lasting from one quarter (Q1) to three quarters (Q3). We report Newey-West standard errors in
parentheses. We construct the slope factor as a regression residual of weekly changes of the three-month federal
funds futures-implied rate on the one-month federal funds futures-implied rate (see equation (6)). Our sample period
is from February 1994 to December of 2007 for a total of 163 months.

                                     ∆Q1               ∆Q2           ∆Q3        ∆Q2        ∆Q3
                                      (1)               (2)           (3)        (4)        (5)
         Constant                 −0.01          −0.01             −0.02      −0.00      −0.01
                                   (0.02)         (0.03)            (0.03)     (0.01)     (0.01)
         Slopet−3:t                 0.89∗∗∗            1.02∗∗∗      1.00∗∗∗    0.11       0.12
                                   (0.17)             (0.16)       (0.16)     (0.08)     (0.12)
         ∆Q1                                                                   1.03∗∗∗    1.00∗∗∗
                                                                              (0.04)     (0.04)

         R2                          11.32            12.22         11.55      88.26      82.26
         Nobs                         163              163           163        163        163
         ∗∗∗               ∗∗
               p < 0.01,        p < 0.05, ∗ p < 0.1




                                                              39
                                                     Table 7: Linguistic Analysis Speeches
     This table reports weekly predictive regressions of the slope factor on speeches by members of the FOMC. We use linguistic
     analysis to count the number of occurrences of hawkish or dovish words. The Online Appendix contains our dictionary. Hawk −
     Dove Index is a net index that is larger than 1 if the speech contains more hawkish than dovish terms. Hawk and Dove count
     the occurrences of hawkish and dovish words. Chair is a dummy that equals 1 if a speech is by the chair or vice chair. We
     report Newey-West standard errors in parentheses. We construct the slope factor as a regression residual of weekly changes of
     the three-month federal funds futures-implied rate on the one-month federal funds futures-implied rate (see equation (6)). Our
     sample period is from the first week of June 1996 to the last week of 2007 for a total of 380 weeks.

                                                     (1)       (2)       (3)           (4)          (5)          (6)       (7)
                                                                               ∗∗∗           ∗∗           ∗
     Constant                                     −0.32     −0.13      −1.56         −0.68        −1.99       −0.94     −0.18
                                                   (0.41)    (0.24)     (0.59)        (0.27)       (1.10)      (0.90)    (0.23)
     Hawk-Dove Index                               0.33                 1.06∗∗                     1.73∗∗
                                                  (0.33)               (0.45)                     (0.75)
     Hawk                                                     0.09                    0.56∗∗∗                  0.61∗      0.02
                                                             (0.05)                  (0.21)                   (0.31)     (0.07)




40
     Dove                                                   −0.09                    −0.30∗                   −0.28∗      0.29
                                                             (0.16)                   (0.17)                   (0.17)    (0.25)
     Hawk × Chair                                                                                                         0.43∗
                                                                                                                         (0.22)
     Dove × Chair                                                                                                       −0.68∗∗
                                                                                                                         (0.33)

     R2                                             0.21      0.61      2.98          4.60         12.38       12.35      1.97
     Nobs                                           380       380       173           173           43          43        380
     Only Speeches by Chair                                              X             X             X           X
     At least 1 classification                                                                       X           X
     ∗∗∗               ∗∗
           p < 0.01,        p < 0.05, ∗ p < 0.1
                  Online Appendix:
  Monetary Policy Communication, Policy Slope, and
                  the Stock Market
                            Andreas Neuhierl and Michael Weber

                                    Not for Publication


                 I    Linguistic Speech Classification
In applying the search-and-count approach, we first follow a procedure often employed in
natural language processing, i.e., we first remove stop words (e.g., “and” or “the”) and
then create stem words.
    We      collect   all     speeches   for       members   of      the   FOMC       from
http://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/. To classify the tone of speeches, we use a
“search-and-count” approach as in Apel and Grimaldi (2012). Search-and-classify is an
automated method to classify text into categories. The key input into “search-and-count”
classification is a pre-specified word list which the research classifies as “hawkish” or
“dovish.” Using this pre-specified word list, we can count the hawkish and dovish terms
within one speech and aggregate over the document. Following this procedure, we obtain
a classification if a speech is on average more hawkish or dovish.
    A subtlety arises in applying the approach of Apel and Grimaldi (2012) to our data
as they work with Swedish texts. In Swedish, compound words such as “output gap”
appear without a blank between the two words. In English many interesting words in
our application are compound words, e.g., “labor force participation.” We therefore
first use a list of such compound words to create a list of relevant nouns to be paired
with an adjective or verb. We then look at all two-grams (contiguous combinations of
two words within a document). We require that one word within a two-gram contains
either one of our nouns or verbs or adjectives. After this filtering step, we obtain a list
of two-grams which we classify into hawkish and dovish. To obtain this classification,
we read a large number of speeches to determine in which context these two-grams are
typically used. We make the classified two-grams and our initial word list available under
http://faculty.chicagobooth.edu/michael.weber/research/data/HD classification.xlsx and
in Table A.13.

                                               1
                          II      Additional Results

A.    Difference-in-Differences Slope
In our baseline analysis, we use a first-stage regression to purge the short-run variation
in federal funds futures and define the regression residual as slope. One concern might
be a generated regressor problem or a small sample bias in point estimates, or in sample
overfit. To sidestep these concerns, we now construct a new slope factor as a simple
difference-in-differences estimator:


                         slopesimple dif f = ∆f ft,t+1,3 − ∆f ft,t+1,1 .            (A.1)


This construction has the advantage that it does not rely on first-stage estimation, does
not use full-sample data in the construction, and we do not have to bootstrap standard
errors. Table A.6 reports the results. We see results are economically and statistically
indistinguishable from our baseline results in Table 2.


B.    Blackout Periods
The Fed restricts the extent to which members of the FOMC can give public speeches
during FOMC blackout periods. These periods start at midnight ET seven days before the
beginning of the FOMC meeting and end at midnight ET on the day after the meeting.
Table A.7 in the Online Appendix shows that our results are robust to the exclusion of
blackout weeks. In column (2), we exclude weeks with FOMC meetings; that is, the week
we calculate the slope factor covers the blackout period. Results are economically and
statistically similar to our baseline results in column (1). The same holds true when we
exclude weeks in which our return calculation overlaps with the blackout period or when
we exclude both weeks in columns (3) and (4).


C.    Target, Path, and Slope
Gürkaynak et al. (2005b) document that two factors are necessary to explain the reaction
of yields to monetary policy news. They use the first two principal components in federal
funds futures to explain the reaction of bond yields to FOMC press releases, and show


                                               2
rotations of the principal components resemble a target and a path factor. The target
factor is similar to the measure of monetary policy surprise used in the event-study
literature, whereas the path factor contains information in FOMC press releases that
moves future rates.1 Unconditionally, we find a correlation of the slope factor with the
target factor of 15.09% and with the path factor of 14.37%.
       Table A.8 adds the path and target factors from Gürkaynak et al. (2005b).2 Column
(1) repeats the baseline results. We see in column (2) that a higher target factor increases
the predictive power and leads to a drop in the next weeks’ excess return. Adding the
target factor, however, has no effect on the point estimate of the slope factor. Similar
results hold when we add the path factor in column (3) or both in column (4). Adding the
path factor, however, adds little explanatory power for stock returns. We also add the 30-
minute intraday monetary policy shock around FOMC press releases from Gorodnichenko
and Weber (2016) in column (5). The high-frequency shock further increases the predictive
power and drives out the target factor but has no impact on the point estimate for the
slope factor.
       These results are consistent with Gürkaynak et al. (2005b), who find little predictive
power of their path factor for stock returns. The slope factor differs from their path factor
in that it indicates the speed of future increases or decreases in federal funds target rates
rather than just any future policy change.


D.       Longer Horizons
Table A.9 repeats our baseline estimation of equation (6) for different horizons ranging
from one to four weeks. The predictive power of the slope factors for returns is contained
at the one-week horizon. Returns over the next two to four weeks are still negative but
smaller in absolute value and no longer statistically significant.


E.      Simple-Difference Slope
In Table A.10, we create a placebo slope factor based on the difference between the changes
in the three-month federal funds futures-implied rate and the one-month futures-implied
   1
     The correlation between the target factor of Gürkaynak et al. (2005b) and the monetary policy shock
of Gorodnichenko and Weber (2016) is 95.5% over the common sample.
   2
     The data for target and path factors limit our sample to end in December 2004.



                                                   3
rate:


                                slopeplacebo = f ft+1,3 − f ft+1,1 .                          (A.2)


The placebo slope factor has no predictive power for weekly stock returns across
specifications and explains less than 0.15% of the variation in stock returns.


F.      Contemporaneous Association
We argue in the main body of the paper that studying the contemporaneous association
between the slope factor and the excess returns of the CRSP value-weighted index is
difficult due to endogeneity and reverse-causality concerns. We indeed find a positive,
statistically significant coefficient on slope of 8.52 (s.e. 2.99). Once we remove scheduled
FOMC meeting weeks, the point estimate reduces to 5.57 (s.e. 3.77) and is no longer
statistically significant. Notwithstanding other concerns, scheduled FOMC meetings and
regular monetary policy shocks measured as in Gorodnichenko and Weber (2016) drive the
positive contemporaneous association between the slope-factor and excess stock market
returns.3


G.      Monetary Policy News versus News about the Economy
A Taylor (1993) rule with nominal interest rates reacting to the output gap and inflation
empirically describes actual monetary policy in the United States well. Positive changes
in the slope factor might indicate upward revisions of market participants about future
output growth or inflation. The reaction of stock returns to the slope factor might
therefore constitute a reaction to news about the macro economy rather than monetary
policy shocks.
      Table A.11 adds macroeconomic shocks to our baseline analysis using data from
Haver Analytics. We define macro shocks as the difference between the actual release as
first reported and the median forecast from Haver Analytics. We assign the shock values
to the five-day period over which we calculate the changes in federal funds futures when
  3
    The change in the one-month futures is highly correlated with the standard monetary policy shock
around FOMC meetings during meetings weeks, and enters the calculation of the slope factor with a
negative sign.



                                                 4
the macro announcement occurs between Thursday of week t and Wednesday of week
t + 1.
      We add surprise GDP growth (shock gdp) as an additional covariate to our baseline
specification in column (1) of Table A.11. Positive news about GDP positively predicts
weekly stock returns, but is only marginally statistically significant. GDP news, however,
has little impact on economic or statistical significance of the slope factor. In column
(2), we add news about core consumer price inflation (shock cpi). Higher-than-expected
inflation negatively predicts stock returns, but statistical significance is sparse. Inflation
surprises have no impact on the predictive power of the slope factor. Column (3) adds
both inflation and GDP news jointly. The point estimate on slope barely changes.
      Column (4) also adds news about capacity utilization (shock cu), consumer confi-
dence (shock cc), employment costs (shock ec), initial unemployment claims (shock ic),
the manufacturing composite index (shock mf g), new home sales (shock nhs), non-farm
payroll (shock nf p), core producer price inflation (shock ppi), retail sales (shock rs),
and unemployment (shock ur). In addition to GDP news, retail sales positively predict
the next weeks’ stock returns, whereas higher-than-expected capacity utilization and
news about higher unemployment negatively predict next weeks’ returns. The additional
covariates, however, have no impact on the economic or statistical significance of the slope
factor.4
      In the last column, we regress the slope factor on the macro surprises. Higher-
than-expected capacity utilization, consumer confidence, manufacturing index, non-farm
payroll, producer price inflation, retail sales, and lower-than-expected unemployment
numbers lead to an increase in slope consistent with the idea that stronger macroeconomic
fundamentals warrant an increase in the speed of future monetary policy tightening.
      Table A.11 shows that macro news affects the slope factor, but news about the
economy is unlikely to drive the predictability of weekly stock returns by the slope factor.
Rather, news about the stance of monetary policy seems to be the driving force behind
the stock return predictability by the slope factor.
  4
   We find a point estimate and statistical significance of slope which is unaltered when we measure
macro news over the return week.




                                                 5
H.     Economic Magnitudes
We employ the results in Campbell and Thompson (2008) to assess the economic
significance of our findings. Specifically, we assess how much an investor could possibly
gain following the predictions the slope factor generates, to create a link between statistical
measures of forecast performance (out-of-sample R2 ) and more interesting economic
quantities, such as gains in excess returns or increases in Sharpe ratios.
     To generate out-of-sample forecasts, we first re-estimate equation (6) from 1988
through 1994 and use the parameters estimates (α̂ and β̂) to compute an out-of-sample
version of the slope factor for the time period from 1995 through 2007:
                                                                         
                        slopeoos
                             t     = ∆f ft,t+1,3 − α̂ + β̂∆f ft,t+1,1 .                  (A.3)


     For the period from 1988 through 1994, we also estimate the following predictive
regression:


                                   Rt+1 = γ0 + γ1 slopet + εt .                          (A.4)


     We then use the parameters estimates from equation (A.4) together with the out-of-
sample slope factor to compute an out-of-sample prediction for excess returns, as

                                                          oos
                                    Rd
                                     t+1 = γ̂0 + γ̂1 slopet .                            (A.5)


     Following Campbell and Thompson (2008), we then compute the out-of-sample R2
as

                                           PT                     2
                                              t=1   Rt+1 − Rd
                                                            t+1
                             2
                            ROOS = 1 − PT                          2 ,                  (A.6)
                                              t=1   Rt+1 − R̄t+1

where R̄t+1 denotes the average excess return over the period from 1988 through 1994.
We obtain an out-of-sample R2 of 0.27%.
     Assuming mean-variance preferences with risk-aversion parameter ρ, Campbell and




                                                6
Thompson (2008) show that a buy-and-hold investor will earn an excess return of

                                           S2
                                              ,
                                           ρ

where S 2 denotes the unconditional squared Sharpe ratio.
     An investor conditioning on the prediction of the slope factor will earn an average
excess return of
                                    2    2
                                               
                                   1  S + ROOS
                                           2
                                                 .
                                   ρ  1 − ROOS

     The weekly unconditional Sharpe ratio from 1988 through 2007 is approximately
7.31%, so a buy-and-hold investor with unit risk aversion would have received an average
weekly excess return of 0.53%. An investor using the slope factor to make conditional
portfolio choices would have earned an average weekly excess return of 0.81%.
     Cochrane (1999) suggests an alternative methodology to evaluate the economic
significance of return predictability. Sharpe ratios of a buy-and-hold investor (S) and
                                                                   q 2 2
                                                               ∗      S +ROOS
an investor conditioning on the slope factor are related by S =        1−R2
                                                                              . For our
                                                                           OOS

example, we get an increase in the weekly Sharpe ratio of almost 20%, that is, S ∗ = 9.00%
compared to S = 7.31%.


I.      Subsample Analysis
Table A.12 reports results for varies subsamples and finds the predictive power of slope
estimated across different subsamples for weekly stock returns is a robust feature of the
data.




                                            7
                     Figure A.1: Regression Coefficient for Slope Estimation


                                                                                   Expanding Window
                                                                                   Constant Window




         1.30
βslope




         1.10




         0.90
                     95




                                 97




                                            99




                                                         01




                                                                     03




                                                                                  05




                                                                                               07
                 19




                             19




                                        19




                                                     20




                                                                 20




                                                                              20




                                                                                           20
                4/




                            8/




                                       6/




                                                    3/




                                                                8/




                                                                             5/




                                                                                          3/
                1/




                            1/




                                      1/




                                                   1/




                                                               1/




                                                                            1/




                                                                                        1/




            This figure plots the time series of the regression coefficient, regressing changes
            in the six-month futures-implied federal funds rate on changes in the one-month
            futures-implied federal funds rate from 1994 to 2007. The blue solid line reports
            estimates of an expanding window regression, whereas the red dashed reports
            coefficients for a constant window estimation of 250 weeks.




                                                    8
                                                  Table A.1: Predictive Regressions: Long Sample (1994–2018)

    This table reports weekly predictive regressions of the excess returns of the CRSP value-weighted index on the slope factor (Slopet ), lagged index returns (Rt ),
    the dividend-price ratio (dpt ), the VIX (V IXt ), realized variance (RVt ), the variance risk premium (V RPt ), the federal funds target rate (F edf undst ), the term
    spread (T ermSpreadt ), and the monetary policy shock (mpt ) from Gorodnichenko and Weber (2016). We report bootstrapped standard errors in parentheses.
    We construct the slope factor as a regression residual of weekly changes of the three-month federal funds futures-implied rate on the one-month federal funds
    futures-implied rate (see equation (6)) for the sample until 2007 and use the changes in the six-month and three-month futures-implied rates to construct the
    slope factor subsequently. Our sample period is from the first week of 1994 to the last week of 2018 for a total of 1284 weeks.

                                       (1)             (2)        (3)        (4)           (5)            (6)            (7)            (8)            (9)           (10)
     Constant                         0.11∗∗          0.12∗∗   −0.18       0.11           0.20           0.00           0.14           0.14           0.11∗∗      −0.21
                                     (0.06)          (0.06)     (0.26)    (0.24)         (0.16)         (0.13)         (0.09)         (0.10)         (0.06)        (0.33)
     Slopet                         −4.15∗∗∗        −3.62∗∗    −3.58∗∗   −3.61∗∗        −3.65∗∗        −3.48∗∗        −3.61∗∗        −3.58∗∗        −3.51∗∗       −3.27∗
                                     (1.51)          (1.52)     (1.71)    (1.71)         (1.52)         (1.72)         (1.52)         (1.53)         (1.50)        (1.70)
     Rt                                             −0.06      −0.05     −0.06          −0.06          −0.04          −0.06          −0.06          −0.06∗        −0.04
                                                     (0.04)     (0.04)    (0.04)         (0.04)         (0.04)         (0.04)         (0.04)         (0.04)        (0.04)
     dpt                                                        15.83                                                                                              23.94∗
                                                               (13.09)                                                                                            (13.08)
     V IXt                                                                 0.00                                                                                      0.04




9
                                                                          (0.01)                                                                                    (0.03)
     RVt                                                                                −0.01                                                                     −0.04
                                                                                         (0.01)                                                                    (0.03)
     V RPt                                                                                             −0.03
                                                                                                        (0.03)
     F edf undst                                                                                                      −0.01                                       −0.03
                                                                                                                       (0.02)                                      (0.03)
     T ermSpreadt                                                                                                                    −0.01                        −0.09
                                                                                                                                      (0.05)                       (0.07)
     mpt                                                                                                                                            −6.95∗        −7.23∗
                                                                                                                                                     (4.14)        (4.10)


     R2                               0.50            0.80       0.96       0.81          0.85           1.08           0.81           0.81           1.60           2.28
     Nobs                             1284            1283       1283       1282          1283           1282           1283           1281           1283           1280
     ∗∗∗               ∗∗
           p < 0.01,        p < 0.05, ∗ p < 0.1
                                               Table A.2: Predictive Regressions: 6 month minus 1 month Slope

     This table reports weekly predictive regressions of the excess returns of the CRSP value-weighted index on the slope factor (Slopet ), lagged index returns (Rt ),
     the dividend-price ratio (dpt ), the VIX (V IXt ), realized variance (RVt ), the variance risk premium (V RPt ), the federal funds target rate (F edf undst ), the term
     spread (T ermSpreadt ), and the monetary policy shock (mpt ) from Gorodnichenko and Weber (2016). We report bootstrapped standard errors in parentheses.
     We construct the slope factor as a regression residual of weekly changes of the six-month federal funds futures-implied rate on the one-month federal funds
     futures-implied rate (see equation (6)). Our sample period is from the first week of 1994 to the last week of 2007 for a total of 696 weeks (the six month futures
     contract was not heavily traded at the beginning of the sample which explains the missing weeks).

                                        (1)           (2)       (3)           (4)           (5)            (6)            (7)            (8)            (9)           (10)
      Constant                         0.12∗         0.14∗   −0.46        −0.06          −0.04            0.18           0.01         −0.09            0.11∗       −1.40∗∗
                                      (0.09)        (0.09)    (0.39)       (0.30)         (0.21)         (0.15)         (0.22)         (0.20)         (0.09)        (0.71)
      Slopet                         −3.11∗∗∗      −2.59∗∗   −2.55∗∗      −2.48∗∗        −2.52∗∗        −2.61∗∗∗       −2.60∗∗∗       −2.62∗∗        −2.15∗∗       −2.03∗∗
                                      (1.08)        (1.05)    (1.05)       (1.02)         (1.03)         (1.05)         (1.05)         (1.07)         (1.02)        (1.02)
      Rt                                           −0.10∗    −0.10∗       −0.09∗         −0.10∗         −0.10∗∗        −0.10∗         −0.09∗         −0.12∗∗       −0.11∗∗
                                                    (0.05)    (0.05)       (0.05)         (0.05)         (0.05)         (0.05)         (0.05)         (0.05)        (0.05)
      dpt                                                     36.03∗                                                                                                62.77∗∗∗
                                                             (21.95)                                                                                               (25.94)
      V IXt                                                                 0.01                                                                                      0.00




10
                                                                           (0.02)                                                                                    (0.03)
      RVt                                                                                  0.01                                                                       0.01
                                                                                          (0.02)                                                                     (0.03)
      V RPt                                                                                               0.01
                                                                                                         (0.03)
      F edf undst                                                                                                        0.03                                      −0.10
                                                                                                                        (0.05)                                      (0.10)
      T ermSpreadt                                                                                                                      0.09                          0.23
                                                                                                                                       (0.07)                        (0.15)
      mpt                                                                                                                                          −12.28∗∗∗      −11.96∗∗∗
                                                                                                                                                    (2.82)         (2.88)

      R2                                1.18         2.02      2.39          2.10           2.15           2.06           2.07           2.06          5.26           6.31
      Nobs                              696          695       695           694            695            694            695            689           695            688
      ∗∗∗               ∗∗
            p < 0.01,        p < 0.05, ∗ p < 0.1
                          Table A.3: Predictive Regressions: Meeting Types

This table reports weekly predictive regressions of the returns of the CRSP value-weighted index on the slope factor
(Slopet ) and lagged index returns (Rt ) conditional on meetings types. We report bootstrapped standard errors in
parentheses. We construct the slope factor as a regression residual of weekly changes of the three-month federal
funds futures-implied rate on the one-month federal funds futures-implied rate (see equation (6)). Our sample period
is from the first week of 1994 to the last week of 2007 for a total of 725 weeks.

                                                (1)       (2)        (3)         (4)            (5)
 Constant                                      0.13     0.23∗∗∗    0.23∗∗∗      0.13           0.16∗
                                              (0.09)   (0.09)     (0.09)       (0.08)         (0.09)
 Slopet                                   −6.96∗∗∗     −6.90∗∗∗   −6.91∗∗∗    −7.07∗∗∗      −7.44∗∗∗
                                           (1.98)       (2.49)     (2.40)      (2.10)        (1.95)
 Rt                                       −0.09∗       −0.08      −0.08       −0.09∗∗       −0.08∗∗
                                           (0.05)       (0.05)     (0.05)      (0.04)        (0.04)
 M eeting                                              −0.59∗∗∗
                                                        (0.22)
 Slope × M eeting                                      −0.55
                                                        (4.39)
 Regular                                                          −0.66∗∗∗
                                                                   (0.23)
 Slope × Regular                                                  −0.90
                                                                   (4.60)
 Intermeeting                                                                   1.27
                                                                               (1.01)
 Slope × Intermeeting                                                           0.68
                                                                              (12.45)
 T urningpoint                                                                              −2.33∗∗∗
                                                                                             (0.85)
 Slope × T urningpoint                                                                       28.42
                                                                                            (20.16)

 R2                                            2.61      3.57       3.75         2.84          4.23
 Nobs                                          724       724        724          724           724
 ∗∗∗               ∗∗
       p < 0.01,        p < 0.05, ∗ p < 0.1




                                                        11
                          Table A.4: Predictive Regressions: Asymmetries

This table reports weekly predictive regressions of the excess returns of the CRSP value-weighted index on the slope
factor (Slopet ) lagged index returns (Rt ) allowing for asymmetric effects of slope: Slope > 0 captures positive values
of the slope factor; Slope <= 0 captures negative values of the slope factor; Slopeupside captures values of the slope
factor larger than one standard deviation above 0; Slopedownside captures values of the slope factor larger than
one standard deviation below 0; Slopenormal captures the intermediate values of slope; Slopelarge captures value of
the slope factor larger than 0.015 in absolute value. We report bootstrapped standard errors in parentheses. We
construct the slope factor as a regression residual of weekly changes of the three-month federal funds futures-implied
rate on the one-month federal funds futures-implied rate (see equation (6)). Our sample period is from the first
week of 1994 to the last week of 2007 for a total of 725 weeks.

                                          (1)           (2)            (3)         (4)        (5)
       Constant                       −0.01           0.01           0.05        0.07        0.27∗∗
                                       (0.11)        (0.11)         (0.09)      (0.09)      (0.11)
       Slopet > 0                     −2.54          −2.07
                                       (3.67)         (3.61)
       Slopet <= 0                   −12.21∗∗∗      −11.25∗∗∗
                                      (3.62)         (3.44)
       Rt                                            −0.08∗                     −0.08∗     −0.08
                                                      (0.05)                     (0.05)     (0.06)
       Slopet,    normal                                             7.52        7.84
                                                                    (6.27)      (6.20)
       Slopet,    upside                                            −3.82       −3.41
                                                                     (3.47)      (3.43)
       Slopet,    downside                                         −12.08∗∗∗   −11.21∗∗∗
                                                                    (3.43)      (3.27)
       Slopet,    large                                                                    −7.33∗∗∗
                                                                                            (1.97)

       R2                                2.31          2.96           2.34        3.02        4.22
       Nobs                              725           724            725         724         413
       ∗∗∗               ∗∗
             p < 0.01,        p < 0.05, ∗ p < 0.1




                                                              12
                                    Table A.5: Predictive Regressions: Raw Changes and PCA
             This table reports weekly predictive regressions of the excess returns of the CRSP value-weighted index on the
             slope factor (Slopet ), the first two principal components of changes in federal funds futures (P C1 , P C2 ), and
             the changes in the one-month and three-month federal funds futures-implied rates (∆f ft,t+1,1 , ∆f ft,t+1,3 ). We
             report bootstrapped standard errors in parentheses. We construct the slope factor as a regression residual of weekly
             changes of the three-month federal funds futures-implied rate on the one-month federal funds futures-implied rate
             (see equation (6)). Our sample period is from the first week of 1994 to the last week of 2007 for a total of 725
             weeks.
                                  (1)               (2)      (3)       (4)         (5)           (6)           (7)            (8)
     Constant                    0.14              0.14     0.14∗     0.14        0.12          0.13          0.13           0.13
                                (0.09)            (0.09)   (0.09)    (0.09)      (0.09)        (0.09)        (0.09)         (0.09)
     Slopet                   −6.76∗∗∗                     −7.61∗∗                                          −6.75∗∗∗      −6.32∗∗
                               (1.98)                       (3.85)                                           (1.98)        (2.59)
     Rt                       −0.09∗          −0.10∗       −0.09∗    −0.11∗∗    −0.11∗∗      −0.09∗         −0.09∗        −0.09∗
                               (0.05)          (0.05)       (0.05)    (0.05)     (0.05)       (0.05)         (0.05)        (0.05)




13
     P C1                                          0.90∗   −0.01
                                                  (0.49)    (0.64)
     P C2                                     −2.74         1.11
                                               (2.26)      (3.25)
     ∆f ft,t+1,1                                                     −0.65                      7.41∗∗      −0.50
                                                                      (2.01)                   (3.01)        (2.01)
     ∆f ft,t+1,3                                                                −2.61∗∗      −6.75∗∗∗                     −0.43
                                                                                 (1.30)       (1.98)                       (1.69)

     R2                          2.62              2.15     2.65      1.26        1.86          2.63           2.63          2.63
     Nobs                        695               695      695       695         695           695            695           695
     ∗∗∗               ∗∗
           p < 0.01,        p < 0.05, ∗ p < 0.1
                                                     Table A.6: Predictive Regressions: Difference Slope

     This table reports weekly predictive regressions of the excess returns of the CRSP value-weighted index on the slope factor (Slopet ), lagged index returns (Rt ),
     the dividend-price ratio (dpt ), the VIX (V IXt ), realized variance (RVt ), the variance risk premium (V RPt ), the federal funds target rate (F edf undst ), the term
     spread (T ermSpreadt ) and the monetary policy shock (mpt ) from Gorodnichenko and Weber (2016). We report Newey-West standard errors in parentheses.
     We construct the slope factor as the simple difference of weekly changes of the three-month federal funds futures-implied rate and the one-month federal funds
     futures-implied rate. Our sample period is from the first week of 1994 to the last week of 2007 for a total of 725 weeks.

                                        (1)           (2)        (3)          (4)           (5)            (6)            (7)            (8)            (9)
      Constant                         0.12        −0.64      −0.02         0.03           0.13           0.03         −0.05            0.12         −2.33∗∗∗
                                      (0.09)        (0.42)     (0.30)      (0.16)         (0.12)         (0.24)         (0.23)         (0.08)         (0.77)
      Slopet                         −6.76∗∗∗      −7.05∗∗∗   −6.65∗∗∗    −6.65∗∗∗       −6.76∗∗∗       −6.75∗∗∗       −6.61∗∗∗       −6.23∗∗∗       −6.13∗∗∗
                                      (2.06)        (2.09)     (1.96)      (2.04)         (2.07)         (2.01)         (2.04)         (1.89)         (1.85)
      Rt                             −0.09∗∗       −0.09∗∗    −0.08∗∗     −0.09∗∗        −0.09∗∗        −0.09∗∗        −0.08∗∗        −0.11∗∗∗       −0.10∗∗
                                      (0.04)        (0.04)     (0.04)      (0.04)         (0.04)         (0.04)         (0.04)         (0.04)         (0.04)
      dpt                                           41.80∗∗                                                                                          94.60∗∗∗
                                                   (20.13)                                                                                          (26.71)
      V IXt                                                    0.01                                                                                    0.02
                                                              (0.02)                                                                                  (0.03)




14
      RVt                                                                   0.01                                                                       0.02
                                                                           (0.01)                                                                     (0.02)
      V RPt                                                                                0.00
                                                                                          (0.02)
      F edf undst                                                                                         0.02                                       −0.12
                                                                                                         (0.05)                                       (0.09)
      T ermSpreadt                                                                                                       0.07                          0.19
                                                                                                                        (0.08)                        (0.13)
      mpt                                                                                                                           −11.81∗∗∗      −11.73∗∗∗
                                                                                                                                     (2.53)         (2.49)

      R2                                2.59         3.22       2.64         2.64           2.60           2.62           2.53           5.56          7.28
      Nobs                              724          724        723          724            723            724            718            724           717
      ∗∗∗               ∗∗
            p < 0.01,        p < 0.05, ∗ p < 0.1
                         Table A.7: Predictive Regressions: Blackout Periods

This table reports weekly predictive regressions of the excess returns of the CRSP value-weighted index on the slope
factor (Slopet ) and lagged index returns (Rt ), excluding weeks during blackout period which restrict the extent of
public communication. We report bootstrapped standard errors in parentheses. We construct the slope factor as a
regression residual of weekly changes of the three-month federal funds futures-implied rate on the one-month federal
funds futures-implied rate (see equation (6)). Our sample period is from the first week of 1994 to the last week of
2007 for a total of 725 weeks.

                                   No Blackout Period         No Blackout Period     No Blackout Period
                         All Weeks    Slope Week                 Return Week           in either Week
                             (1)          (2)                        (3)                     (4)
 Constant                   0.13               0.23                 0.04                      0.13
                           (0.09)             (0.09)               (0.09)                    (0.09)
 Slopet                   −6.96∗∗∗            −6.87∗∗∗            −6.63∗∗∗                 −6.36∗∗∗
                           (1.98)              (1.98)              (1.98)                   (1.98)
 Rt                       −0.09∗              −0.08∗              −0.07∗                   −0.08∗
                           (0.05)              (0.05)              (0.05)                   (0.05)

 R2                          2.61               2.10                 2.54                     2.17
 Nobs                        724                606                  606                      490
 ∗∗∗               ∗∗
       p < 0.01,        p < 0.05, ∗ p < 0.1




                                                         15
               Table A.8: Predictive Regressions: Target and Path Factor

This table reports weekly predictive regressions of the returns of the CRSP value-weighted index on the slope factor
(Slopet ), lagged index returns (Rt ), the target (T arget f actor) and path (P ath f actor) factors from Gürkaynak
et al. (2005b), and the monetary policy shock (mpt ) from Gorodnichenko and Weber (2016). We report bootstrapped
standard errors in parentheses. We construct the slope factor as a regression residual of weekly changes of the
three-month federal funds futures-implied rate on the one-month federal funds futures-implied rate (see equation
(6)). Our sample period is from the first week of 1994 to the last week of 2007 for a total of 725 weeks.

                                         (1)          (2)        (3)         (4)           (5)
      Constant                          0.13        0.14       0.13        0.14           0.07
                                       (0.10)      (0.10)     (0.10)      (0.10)         (0.10)
      Slopet                         −7.48∗∗∗      −6.93∗∗∗   −7.28∗∗∗   −6.71∗∗∗       −6.66∗∗∗
                                      (2.07)        (2.06)     (2.04)     (2.02)         (2.01)
      Rt                             −0.06         −0.08      −0.06      −0.08          −0.08
                                      (0.05)        (0.05)     (0.05)     (0.05)         (0.05)
      T arget f actor                              −0.10∗∗∗              −0.10∗∗∗         0.10
                                                    (0.03)                (0.03)         (0.09)
      P ath f actor                                           −0.04∗     −0.04∗∗        −0.04∗∗
                                                               (0.02)     (0.02)         (0.02)
      mpt                                                                             −20.66∗∗∗
                                                                                       (8.14)

      R2                                2.42         4.57       3.13        5.38          6.76
      Nobs                              568          568        568         568           568
      ∗∗∗               ∗∗
            p < 0.01,        p < 0.05, ∗ p < 0.1




                                                         16
                Table A.9: Predictive Regressions: Different Horizons

This table reports weekly predictive regressions of the excess returns of the CRSP value-weighted index on the
slope factor (Slopet ) for different forecast horizons running from one week to four weeks. We report bootstrapped
standard errors in parentheses. We construct the slope factor as a regression residual of weekly changes of the
three-month federal funds futures-implied rate on the one-month federal funds futures-implied rate (see equation
(6)). Our sample period is from the first week of 1994 to the last week of 2007 for a total of 725 weeks.

                                           R(t,t+1)      R(t,t+2)     R(t,t+3)   R(t,t+4)
                                             (1)           (2)          (3)        (4)
                  Constant                   0.12           0.23∗∗      0.33∗∗     0.43∗∗∗
                                            (0.08)         (0.11)      (0.14)     (0.16)
                  Slopet                   −7.70∗∗∗       −3.31       −2.83       −5.17
                                            (2.07)         (3.01)      (3.23)      (3.84)

                  R2                          1.91             0.19     0.10       0.23
                  Nobs                        725              725      725        725
                  ∗∗∗               ∗∗
                        p < 0.01,        p < 0.05, ∗ p < 0.1




                                                           17
                   Table A.10: Predictive Regressions: Placebo Slope

This table reports weekly predictive regressions of the excess returns of the CRSP value-weighted index on a placebo
slope factor (SlopeP lacebo ) and lagged index returns (Rt ). We report bootstrapped standard errors in parentheses.
We construct the placebo slope factor as the difference between the three-month federal funds futures-implied rate
and the one-month federal funds futures-implied rate (see equation (A.2)). Our sample period is from the first week
of 1994 to the last week of 2007 for a total of 725 weeks.

                                                                (1)         (2)
                             Constant                       0.15            0.17∗
                                                           (0.10)          (0.10)
                             Slopet     P lacebo          −0.43           −0.45
                                                           (0.45)          (0.45)
                             Rt                                           −0.10∗∗
                                                                           (0.05)

                             R2                              0.15           1.25
                             Nobs                            725            724
                             ∗∗∗               ∗∗
                                   p < 0.01,        p < 0.05, ∗ p < 0.1




                                                           18
                       Table A.11: Predictive Regressions: Macro News

This table reports weekly predictive regressions of the excess returns of the CRSP value-weighted index on the
slope factor (Slopet ), lagged index returns (Rt ), and macro surprises from Haver Analytics: news about GDP
growth (shock gdp), core consumer price inflation (shock cpi), capacity utilization (shock cu), consumer confidence
(shock cc), employment costs (shock ec), initial unemployment claims (shock ic), the manufacturing composite
index (shock mf g), new home sales (shock nhs), non-farm payroll (shock nf p), core producer price inflation
(shock ppi), retail sales (shock rs), and unemployment (shock ur). We report bootstrapped standard errors in
parentheses. We construct the slope factor as a regression residual of weekly changes of the three-month federal
funds futures-implied rate on the one-month federal funds futures-implied rate (see equation (6)). Our sample period
is from the first week of 1994 to the last week of 2007 for a total of 725 weeks.

                                         (1)             (2)        (3)        (4)       (5)
          Constant                       0.13            0.13       0.12       0.09     −0.00
                                        (0.09)          (0.09)     (0.09)     (0.09)     (0.00)
          Slopet                       −6.84∗∗∗        −6.86∗∗∗   −6.74∗∗∗   −6.71∗∗∗
                                        (1.98)          (1.99)     (1.99)     (2.04)
          Rt                           −0.09∗∗         −0.09∗∗    −0.09∗∗    −0.08∗
                                        (0.05)          (0.05)     (0.05)     (0.05)
          shock gdp                      0.59∗                      0.58∗      0.55∗    −0.00
                                        (0.37)                     (0.37)     (0.37)     (0.01)
          shock cpi                                    −1.99      −1.98      −1.43        0.02
                                                        (1.58)     (1.58)     (1.57)     (0.04)
          shock cu                                                           −0.77∗       0.02∗∗
                                                                              (0.52)     (0.01)
          shock cc                                                           −0.03        0.00∗∗
                                                                              (0.04)     (0.00)
          shock ec                                                             0.04       0.04
                                                                              (1.56)     (0.04)
          shock ic                                                           −0.00      −0.00∗
                                                                              (0.00)     (0.00)
          shock mf g                                                         −0.05        0.00∗∗∗
                                                                              (0.07)     (0.00)
          shock nhs                                                          −0.00        0.00
                                                                              (0.00)     (0.00)
          shock nf p                                                         −0.00∗∗      0.00∗∗∗
                                                                              (0.00)     (0.00)
          shock ppi                                                            0.58       0.02∗∗
                                                                              (0.68)     (0.01)
          shock rs                                                             0.54∗      0.02∗∗∗
                                                                              (0.35)     (0.01)
          shock ur                                                           −2.40∗∗    −0.05∗∗
                                                                              (1.20)     (0.02)

          R2                            2.97            2.76       3.12       5.17       9.23
                                                             19
          Nobs                          724             724        724        724        726
          ∗∗∗               ∗∗
                p < 0.01,        p < 0.05, ∗ p < 0.1
                       Table A.12: Predictive Regressions: Subsamples

This table reports weekly predictive regressions of the excess returns of the CRSP value-weighted index on the slope
factor (Slopet ) for different subsamples. We report bootstrapped standard errors in parentheses. We construct the
slope factor as a regression residual of weekly changes of the three-month federal funds futures-implied rate on the
one-month federal funds futures-implied rate (see equation (6)). Our sample period is from the first week of 1994
to the last week of 2007 for a total of 725 weeks.

                                            1994-2007      1994-2002   1988-2007   1988-2002
                                               (1)            (2)         (3)         (4)
              Constant                         0.13          0.11        0.14∗∗      0.12
                                              (0.09)        (0.11)      (0.07)      (0.08)
              Slopet                        −6.96∗∗∗
                                             (1.98)
              Rt                            −0.09∗         −0.06       −0.09∗∗     −0.07
                                             (0.05)         (0.06)      (0.04)      (0.05)
              Slope1994−2002                               −8.05∗∗∗
                                                            (2.32)
              Slope1988−2007                                           −4.63∗∗∗
                                                                        (1.56)
              Slope1988−2002                                                       −4.96∗∗∗
                                                                                    (1.62)

              R2                               2.61          2.85        1.75        1.65
              Nobs                             724           463         995         734
              ∗∗∗               ∗∗
                    p < 0.01,        p < 0.05, ∗ p < 0.1




                                                           20
                          Table A.13: Hawk–Dove Classification
This table reports the classification of the twograms we use to classify speeches by FOMC members as dovish or
hawkish. Our sample period is from June 1996 to December 2007.

                            Dovish                                Hawkish
              anchor inflationexpectations            aggregatedemand higher
              anchored inflationexpectations          assetprices increase
              boost aggregatedemand                   assetprices rise
              boost economicactivity                  businessinvestment increased
              cut federalfundsrate                    declines unemploymentrate
              cut interestrates                       declining unemploymentrate
              cuts federalfundsrate                   drop unemploymentrate
              cutting federalfundsrate                economicactivity increased
              declines assetprices                    economicoutlook increased
              declines crudeoil                       employment increased
              declines economicactivity               energyprices rise
              declines employment                     exchangerates lower
              declines energyprices                   gradualincreases federalfundsrate
              declines houseprices                    grossdomesticproduct rising
              declines laborforceparticipation        growing currentaccountdeficit
              declining houseprices                   higher assetprices
              declining interestrates                 higher employment
              downwardpressure assetprices            higher energyprices
              downwardpressure houseprices            higher federalfundsrate
              downwardpressure interestrates          higher houseprices
              drop crudeoil                           higher inflationexpectations
              drop houseprices                        higher interestrates
              easedstance monetarypolicy              higher productivitygrowth
              easing monetarypolicy                   higher unitlaborcosts
              employment declined                     houseprices increase
              employment fallen                       houseprices increased
              employment fell                         houseprices rise
              employment stable                       houseprices rising
              federalfundsrate lower                  increase assetprices
              firmlyanchored inflationexpectations    increase coreinflation
              houseprices declined                    increase currentaccountsurpluses
              houseprices fallen                      increase economicactivity
              houseprices fell                        increase employment
              increase aggregatedemand                increase energyprices
              increase currentaccountdeficit          increase federalfundsrate
              increase laborproductivity              increase houseprices
              increase unemploymentrate               increase inflationexpectations
              increased productivitygrowth            increase interestrates
              increases laborproductivity             increase productivitygrowth
              increases productivitygrowth            increase resourceutilization
                                                               continued on next page


                                                 21
                  Table A.13: Hawk–Dove Classification (continued)

Continued from previous page.

                            Dovish                                Hawkish
              inflationexpectations anchored          increase targetfederalfunds
              inflationexpectations declined          increase unitlaborcosts
              inflationexpectations firmlyanchored    increased economicactivity
              inflationexpectations remainedstable    increased employment
              inflationexpectations stable            increased laborforceparticipation
              inflationexpectations wellanchored      increases aggregatedemand
              interestrates declined                  increases assetprices
              interestrates drop                      increases businessinvestment
              interestrates easing                    increases crudeoil
              interestrates lower                     increases employment
              interestrates lowering                  increases energyprices
              interestrates remain                    increases federalfundsrate
              keeping interestrates                   increases houseprices
              keeping monetarypolicy                  increases inflationexpectations
              laborproductivity increased             increases interestrates
              lower energyprices                      increases outputgap
              lower federalfundsrate                  increases unitlaborcosts
              lower houseprices                       inflationexpectations increased
              lower inflationexpectations             interestrates higher
              lower interestrates                     interestrates increase
              lower levelrealoilprices                interestrates increased
              lower potentialoutput                   interestrates mightrise
              lowered federalfundsrate                interestrates mustrise
              lowering federalfundsrate               interestrates raise
              lowering interestrates                  interestrates raised
              monetarypolicy easing                   interestrates rise
              nonaccelerating inflationrate           interestrates rising
              productivitygrowth increased            lower currentaccountdeficit
              productivitygrowth increases            lower productivitygrowth
              raise aggregatedemand                   lower unemploymentrate
              rapid productivitygains                 monetarypolicy tightening
              reduce federalfundsrate                 personalsavingrate fallen
              reduce interestrates                    raise federalfundsrate
              reduce unemploymentrate                 raise interestrates
              reduced economicactivity                raised interestrates
              reduced federalfundsrate                raising assetprices
              reduced interestrates                   raising federalfundsrate
              reducing federalfundsrate               raising interestrates
              reducing interestrates                  rapid productivitygrowth
                                                               continued on next page



                                                 22
                  Table A.13: Hawk–Dove Classification (continued)

Continued from previous page.

                                Dovish                          Hawkish
                reduction aggregatedemand             reduce currentaccountdeficit
                reduction federalfundsrate            reductions unemploymentrate
                reduction inflationexpectations       resourceutilization increased
                reduction interestrates               rise assetprices
                reductions federalfundsrate           rise coreinflation
                reductions interestrates              rise employment
                resourceutilization subdued           rise energyprices
                rise productivitygrowth               rise federalfundsrate
                rise unemploymentrate                 rise headlineinflation
                rising currentaccountdeficit          rise houseprices
                rising productivitygrowth             rise inflationexpectations
                risks economicactivity                rise interestrates
                risks economicoutlook                 rise personalsavingrate
                risks outlookeconomicactivity         rise unitlaborcosts
                stabilizing economicactivity          rising assetprices
                stabilizing employment                rising employment
                stabilizing monetarypolicy            rising energyprices
                stable economicconditions             rising houseprices
                stable inflationexpectations          rising inflationexpectations
                stable inflationrate                  rising interestrates
                stable interestrates                  risks longterminflationoutlook
                stable monetarypolicy                 sharpincreases energyprices
                stableprices moderate                 sharpincreases interestrates
                subdued unitlaborcosts                sharprise interestrates
                sustainable employment                tightening monetarypolicy
                unemploymentrate declined             unemploymentrate declining
                unemploymentrate rising               unemploymentrate fallen
                upwardpressure exchangerates          unemploymentrate fell
                wellanchored inflationexpectations    unemploymentrate lower
                                                      upwardpressure coreinflation
                                                      upwardpressure interestrates




                                                 23
                          Table A.14: Speeches by FOMC members

This table reports the speeches we use for the linguistic analysis, the speaker with link to the speech, the role of the
speaker, the number of hawkish and dovish words, and the net index. The sample period is June 1996 to December
2007 for a total of 794 speeches.

                             Speaker                                                                         Net
     Date                    with link                 Role         Chair       # Hawks        # Doves      Index
  6/13/1996          Alan Greenspan                 Chairman         yes             0             0           1
  6/18/1996          Edward W. Kelley, Jr.          Governor                         0             0           1
    9/8/1996         Laurence H. Meyer              Governor                         1             1           1
  9/19/1996          Alan Greenspan                 Chairman         yes             0             0           1
  10/2/1996          Lawrence B. Lindsey            Governor                         0             0           1
  10/5/1996          Alan Greenspan                 Chairman         yes             0             0           1
  10/7/1996          Alan Greenspan                 Chairman         yes             0             0           1
  10/9/1996          Lawrence B. Lindsey            Governor                         1             1           1
 10/11/1996          Lawrence B. Lindsey            Governor                         0             0           1
 10/16/1996          Alan Greenspan                 Chairman         yes             0             0           1
 10/24/1996          Susan M. Phillips              Governor                         0             0           1
 10/31/1996          Edward W. Kelley, Jr.          Governor                         0             0           1
 11/18/1996          Alan Greenspan                 Chairman         yes             0             0           1
 11/21/1996          Laurence H. Meyer              Governor                         0             0           1
 11/25/1996          Susan M. Phillips              Governor                         0             0           1
  12/3/1996          Edward W. Kelley, Jr.          Governor                         0             0           1
  12/5/1996          Alan Greenspan                 Chairman         yes             0             1           0
  12/6/1996          Alan Greenspan                 Chairman         yes             2             0           2
 12/19/1996          Alice M. Rivlin                Vice Chair       yes             0             0           1
    1/5/1997         Laurence H. Meyer              Governor                         0             1           0
  1/14/1997          Alan Greenspan                 Chairman         yes             1             0           2
  1/16/1997          Laurence H. Meyer              Governor                         3             2          1.2
  1/24/1997          Laurence H. Meyer              Governor                         0             0           1
  1/28/1997          Susan M. Phillips              Governor                         0             0           1
  1/29/1997          Edward W. Kelley, Jr.          Governor                         0             0           1
  2/14/1997          Susan M. Phillips              Governor                         0             0           1
  2/21/1997          Alan Greenspan                 Chairman         yes             0             0           1
    3/3/1997         Susan M. Phillips              Governor                         0             0           1
    3/7/1997         Alan Greenspan                 Chairman         yes             0             0           1
  3/13/1997          Alice M. Rivlin                Vice Chair       yes             0             0           1
  3/22/1997          Alan Greenspan                 Chairman         yes             0             0           1
                                                     24                     continued on next page
               Table A.14: Speeches by FOMC members (continued)

Continued from previous page.

                          Speaker                                                          Net
     Date                 with link          Role       Chair      # Hawks   # Doves      Index
   4/4/1997        Alice M. Rivlin         Vice Chair    yes          0          1          0
  4/10/1997        Laurence H. Meyer       Governor                   0          0          1
  4/12/1997        Alan Greenspan          Chairman      yes          0          0          1
  4/24/1997        Laurence H. Meyer       Governor                   11         2       1.692308
  4/29/1997        Alan Greenspan          Chairman      yes          0          0          1
   5/1/1997        Alan Greenspan          Chairman      yes          0          0          1
   5/3/1997        Alan Greenspan          Chairman      yes          0          0          1
   5/8/1997        Alan Greenspan          Chairman      yes          3          0          2
  5/23/1997        Laurence H. Meyer       Governor                   0          1          0
  6/10/1997        Alan Greenspan          Chairman      yes          0          0          1
  6/18/1997        Susan M. Phillips       Governor                   0          0          1
  6/18/1997        Laurence H. Meyer       Governor                   0          0          1
   9/4/1997        Laurence H. Meyer       Governor                   2          3         0.8
   9/5/1997        Alan Greenspan          Chairman      yes          0          0          1
  9/12/1997        Alan Greenspan          Chairman      yes          0          0          1
  9/12/1997        Laurence H. Meyer       Governor                   0          0          1
  9/17/1997        Laurence H. Meyer       Governor                   2          2          1
  9/19/1997        Susan M. Phillips       Governor                   0          0          1
  9/23/1997        Edward W. Kelley, Jr.   Governor                   0          0          1
  10/5/1997        Alan Greenspan          Chairman      yes          0          0          1
 10/11/1997        Alan Greenspan          Chairman      yes          0          0          1
 10/14/1997        Alan Greenspan          Chairman      yes          0          0          1
 10/14/1997        Alan Greenspan          Chairman      yes          0          0          1
 10/14/1997        Laurence H. Meyer       Governor                   5          2       1.428571
 10/15/1997        Susan M. Phillips       Governor                   0          0          1
 10/30/1997        Susan M. Phillips       Governor                   0          0          1
 10/31/1997        Laurence H. Meyer       Governor                   0          0          1
  11/4/1997        Susan M. Phillips       Governor                   0          0          1
  11/7/1997        Alan Greenspan          Chairman      yes          0          0          1
  12/1/1997        Laurence H. Meyer       Governor                   0          0          1
  12/2/1997        Alan Greenspan          Chairman      yes          3          0          2
  12/3/1997        Alan Greenspan          Chairman      yes          0          0          1
                                            25                  continued on next page
               Table A.14: Speeches by FOMC members (continued)

Continued from previous page.

                           Speaker                                                          Net
     Date                  with link             Role    Chair      # Hawks   # Doves      Index
 12/15/1997        Edward W. Kelley, Jr.    Governor                   0          0          1
   1/3/1998        Alan Greenspan           Chairman      yes          3          0          2
   1/8/1998        Laurence H. Meyer        Governor                   2          3         0.8
  1/12/1998        Alan Greenspan           Chairman      yes          0          0          1
  1/16/1998        Alan Greenspan           Chairman      yes          0          0          1
  2/11/1998        Edward W. Kelley, Jr.    Governor                   0          0          1
  2/17/1998        Alice M. Rivlin          Vice Chair    yes          0          0          1
  2/26/1998        Alan Greenspan           Chairman      yes          0          0          1
  2/27/1998        Alan Greenspan           Chairman      yes          0          0          1
  2/27/1998        Edward M. Gramlich       Governor                   1          1          1
   3/2/1998        Laurence H. Meyer        Governor                   0          0          1
   3/3/1998        Alan Greenspan           Chairman      yes          0          0          1
   3/4/1998        Roger W. Ferguson, Jr.   Governor                   1          0          2
   3/6/1998        Edward M. Gramlich       Governor                   0          0          1
   3/9/1998        Roger W. Ferguson, Jr.   Governor                   0          0          1
  3/16/1998        Laurence H. Meyer        Governor                   7          3         1.4
  3/17/1998        Susan M. Phillips        Governor                   0          0          1
  3/19/1998        Roger W. Ferguson, Jr.   Governor                   0          0          1
  3/19/1998        Alice M. Rivlin          Vice Chair    yes          0          0          1
  3/26/1998        Susan M. Phillips        Governor                   0          0          1
   4/2/1998        Alan Greenspan           Chairman      yes          0          0          1
   4/2/1998        Laurence H. Meyer        Governor                   3          4       0.857143
   4/4/1998        Roger W. Ferguson, Jr.   Governor                   0          0          1
   4/9/1998        Laurence H. Meyer        Governor                   1          2       0.666667
  4/16/1998        Laurence H. Meyer        Governor                   0          0          1
  4/16/1998        Roger W. Ferguson, Jr.   Governor                   1          1          1
  4/23/1998        Alice M. Rivlin          Vice Chair    yes          0          0          1
  4/30/1998        Laurence H. Meyer        Governor                   2          1       1.333333
   5/2/1998        Alan Greenspan           Chairman      yes          0          0          1
   5/7/1998        Alan Greenspan           Chairman      yes          0          0          1
   5/7/1998        Alice M. Rivlin          Vice Chair    yes          0          0          1
  5/12/1998        Laurence H. Meyer        Governor                   0          0          1
                                            26                   continued on next page
               Table A.14: Speeches by FOMC members (continued)

Continued from previous page.

                           Speaker                                                         Net
     Date                  with link             Role    Chair      # Hawks   # Doves     Index
  5/12/1998        Alice M. Rivlin          Vice Chair    yes          0          0        1
  5/20/1998        Alan Greenspan           Chairman      yes          0          0        1
   6/3/1998        Laurence H. Meyer        Governor                   0          1        0
   6/9/1998        Laurence H. Meyer        Governor                   0          0        1
  6/18/1998        Alice M. Rivlin          Vice Chair    yes          2          0        2
   7/9/1998        Roger W. Ferguson, Jr.   Governor                   2          3        0.8
  7/10/1998        Alan Greenspan           Chairman      yes          0          0        1
  7/20/1998        Roger W. Ferguson, Jr.   Governor                   0          0        1
  8/28/1998        Alan Greenspan           Chairman      yes          1          0        2
   9/4/1998        Alan Greenspan           Chairman      yes          0          0        1
  9/15/1998        Edward M. Gramlich       Governor                   0          0        1
  9/17/1998        Roger W. Ferguson, Jr.   Governor                   2          2        1
  9/18/1998        Laurence H. Meyer        Governor                   0          0        1
  9/28/1998        Alice M. Rivlin          Vice Chair    yes          0          0        1
  9/29/1998        Roger W. Ferguson, Jr.   Governor                   0          0        1
  10/5/1998        Laurence H. Meyer        Governor                   0          7        0
 10/14/1998        Roger W. Ferguson, Jr.   Governor                   0          0        1
 10/16/1998        Roger W. Ferguson, Jr.   Governor                   0          0        1
 10/22/1998        Roger W. Ferguson, Jr.   Governor                   0          1        0
 10/22/1998        Laurence H. Meyer        Governor                   0          0        1
 10/22/1998        Alice M. Rivlin          Vice Chair    yes          2          0        2
 10/27/1998        Roger W. Ferguson, Jr.   Governor                   0          0        1
 10/29/1998        Edward W. Kelley, Jr.    Governor                   0          1        0
  11/5/1998        Alan Greenspan           Chairman      yes          1          0        2
  11/6/1998        Edward M. Gramlich       Governor                   0          0        1
 11/12/1998        Laurence H. Meyer        Governor                   0          0        1
   1/3/1999        Roger W. Ferguson, Jr.   Governor                   1          3        0.5
   1/4/1999        Laurence H. Meyer        Governor                   0          0        1
  1/11/1999        Laurence H. Meyer        Governor                   0          0        1
  1/15/1999        Roger W. Ferguson, Jr.   Governor                   0          1        0
  1/21/1999        Roger W. Ferguson, Jr.   Governor                   0          0        1
  2/11/1999        Roger W. Ferguson, Jr.   Governor                   1          0        2
                                            27                   continued on next page
               Table A.14: Speeches by FOMC members (continued)

Continued from previous page.

                          Speaker                                                          Net
    Date                  with link          Role       Chair      # Hawks   # Doves      Index
 2/16/1999        Alan Greenspan           Chairman      yes          0          0          1
 2/24/1999        Alice M. Rivlin          Vice Chair    yes          0          0          1
 2/25/1999        Laurence H. Meyer        Governor                   7          6       1.076923
 2/25/1999        Roger W. Ferguson, Jr.   Governor                   0          0          1
  3/1/1999        Alice M. Rivlin          Vice Chair    yes          0          0          1
  3/3/1999        Roger W. Ferguson, Jr.   Governor                   0          0          1
  3/8/1999        Edward M. Gramlich       Governor                   0          0          1
  3/8/1999        Alan Greenspan           Chairman      yes          2          0          2
  3/9/1999        Alan Greenspan           Chairman      yes          0          0          1
 3/10/1999        Edward W. Kelley, Jr.    Governor                   0          0          1
 3/12/1999        Laurence H. Meyer        Governor                   0          0          1
 3/16/1999        Alan Greenspan           Chairman      yes          0          1          0
 3/16/1999        Roger W. Ferguson, Jr.   Governor                   0          0          1
 3/19/1999        Alan Greenspan           Chairman      yes          0          0          1
 3/25/1999        Edward W. Kelley, Jr.    Governor                   0          1          0
  4/6/1999        Alice M. Rivlin          Vice Chair    yes          0          0          1
 4/13/1999        Roger W. Ferguson, Jr.   Governor                   0          0          1
 4/14/1999        Laurence H. Meyer        Governor                   5          4       1.111111
 4/16/1999        Alan Greenspan           Chairman      yes          0          0          1
 4/22/1999        Laurence H. Meyer        Governor                   8          3       1.454545
 4/22/1999        Edward M. Gramlich       Governor                   3          3          1
 4/26/1999        Laurence H. Meyer        Governor                   0          1          0
 4/29/1999        Alan Greenspan           Chairman      yes          1          0          2
  5/6/1999        Alan Greenspan           Chairman      yes          0          2          0
 5/13/1999        Alice M. Rivlin          Vice Chair    yes          0          0          1
 5/13/1999        Alice M. Rivlin          Vice Chair    yes          0          0          1
  6/1/1999        Alice M. Rivlin          Vice Chair    yes          0          0          1
  6/2/1999        Alan Greenspan           Chairman      yes          0          0          1
  6/3/1999        Laurence H. Meyer        Governor                   0          0          1
 6/10/1999        Roger W. Ferguson, Jr.   Governor                   0          1          0
 6/10/1999        Alan Greenspan           Chairman      yes          0          0          1
 6/14/1999        Laurence H. Meyer        Governor                   0          0          1
                                            28                  continued on next page
               Table A.14: Speeches by FOMC members (continued)

Continued from previous page.

                           Speaker                                                          Net
     Date                  with link             Role    Chair      # Hawks   # Doves      Index
  6/16/1999        Edward M. Gramlich       Governor                   1          0          2
  6/22/1999        Roger W. Ferguson, Jr.   Governor                   0          0          1
  7/29/1999        Roger W. Ferguson, Jr.   Governor                   0          0          1
  8/27/1999        Alan Greenspan           Chairman      yes          0          0          1
   9/8/1999        Alan Greenspan           Chairman      yes          0          0          1
   9/8/1999        Laurence H. Meyer        Governor                   7          3         1.4
   9/9/1999        Roger W. Ferguson, Jr.   Governor                   0          0          1
  9/15/1999        Edward M. Gramlich       Governor                   0          0          1
  9/16/1999        Edward W. Kelley, Jr.    Governor                   0          0          1
  9/17/1999        Alan Greenspan           Chairman      yes          0          0          1
  9/17/1999        Edward M. Gramlich       Governor                   0          0          1
  9/21/1999        Roger W. Ferguson, Jr.   Governor                   2          1       1.333333
  9/27/1999        Laurence H. Meyer        Governor                   0          0          1
  9/27/1999        Alan Greenspan           Chairman      yes          0          0          1
  9/28/1999        Roger W. Ferguson, Jr.   Governor                   0          0          1
  9/30/1999        Alan Greenspan           Chairman      yes          0          0          1
  10/1/1999        Laurence H. Meyer        Governor                   0          0          1
  10/6/1999        Roger W. Ferguson, Jr.   Vice Chair                 0          0          1
 10/11/1999        Alan Greenspan           Chairman      yes          0          0          1
 10/12/1999        Laurence H. Meyer        Governor                   4          6         0.8
 10/14/1999        Alan Greenspan           Chairman      yes          0          0          1
 10/15/1999        Alan Greenspan           Chairman      yes          0          0          1
 10/19/1999        Alan Greenspan           Chairman      yes          0          0          1
 10/28/1999        Roger W. Ferguson, Jr.   Vice Chair                 0          0          1
 10/28/1999        Alan Greenspan           Chairman      yes          2          0          2
  11/2/1999        Alan Greenspan           Chairman      yes          1          0          2
  11/4/1999        Edward M. Gramlich       Governor                   1          1          1
 11/15/1999        Alan Greenspan           Chairman      yes          0          0          1
 11/30/1999        Laurence H. Meyer        Governor                   4          3       1.142857
 12/15/1999        Laurence H. Meyer        Governor                   0          0          1
   1/7/2000        Roger W. Ferguson, Jr.   Vice Chair                 4          0          2
  1/13/2000        Edward M. Gramlich       Governor                   1          1          1
                                            29                   continued on next page
               Table A.14: Speeches by FOMC members (continued)

Continued from previous page.

                          Speaker                                                          Net
    Date                  with link          Role       Chair      # Hawks   # Doves      Index
 1/13/2000        Alan Greenspan           Chairman      yes          4          2       1.333333
 1/14/2000        Laurence H. Meyer        Governor                   0          0          1
 1/20/2000        Laurence H. Meyer        Governor                   1          0          2
  2/3/2000        Laurence H. Meyer        Governor                   0          0          1
 2/17/2000        Roger W. Ferguson, Jr.   Vice Chair                 1          1          1
 2/23/2000        Laurence H. Meyer        Governor                   0          1          0
 2/25/2000        Laurence H. Meyer        Governor                   0          0          1
  3/3/2000        Laurence H. Meyer        Governor                   6          1       1.714286
  3/6/2000        Alan Greenspan           Chairman      yes          1          0          2
  3/6/2000        Roger W. Ferguson, Jr.   Vice Chair                 0          0          1
  3/7/2000        Edward M. Gramlich       Governor                   0          0          1
  3/8/2000        Alan Greenspan           Chairman      yes          1          0          2
 3/13/2000        Edward M. Gramlich       Governor                   0          0          1
 3/22/2000        Alan Greenspan           Chairman      yes          0          0          1
 3/30/2000        Edward W. Kelley, Jr.    Governor                   0          0          1
  4/5/2000        Alan Greenspan           Chairman      yes          3          0          2
  4/6/2000        Roger W. Ferguson, Jr.   Vice Chair                 0          0          1
  4/7/2000        Alan Greenspan           Chairman      yes          1          0          2
 4/10/2000        Alan Greenspan           Chairman      yes          0          0          1
 4/11/2000        Alan Greenspan           Chairman      yes          0          0          1
 4/12/2000        Laurence H. Meyer        Governor                   25         2       1.851852
 4/14/2000        Alan Greenspan           Chairman      yes          0          0          1
 4/14/2000        Edward M. Gramlich       Governor                   0          0          1
 4/17/2000        Edward M. Gramlich       Governor                   0          0          1
 4/20/2000        Edward M. Gramlich       Governor                   1          1          1
 4/27/2000        Alan Greenspan           Chairman      yes          1          0          2
  5/4/2000        Alan Greenspan           Chairman      yes          0          0          1
  5/4/2000        Roger W. Ferguson, Jr.   Vice Chair                 0          0          1
  5/9/2000        Roger W. Ferguson, Jr.   Vice Chair                 5          1       1.666667
 5/11/2000        Roger W. Ferguson, Jr.   Vice Chair                 0          1          0
 5/12/2000        Roger W. Ferguson, Jr.   Vice Chair                 0          1          0
 5/18/2000        Alan Greenspan           Chairman      yes          0          0          1
                                            30                  continued on next page
               Table A.14: Speeches by FOMC members (continued)

Continued from previous page.

                           Speaker                                                          Net
     Date                  with link             Role    Chair      # Hawks   # Doves      Index
  5/22/2000        Roger W. Ferguson, Jr.   Vice Chair                 0          0          1
  5/25/2000        Alan Greenspan           Chairman      yes          0          0          1
  5/26/2000        Roger W. Ferguson, Jr.   Vice Chair                 0          0          1
  5/31/2000        Laurence H. Meyer        Governor                   0          0          1
   6/1/2000        Laurence H. Meyer        Governor                   0          0          1
   6/6/2000        Laurence H. Meyer        Governor                   11         5        1.375
  6/13/2000        Alan Greenspan           Chairman      yes          1          1          1
  7/11/2000        Alan Greenspan           Chairman      yes          0          0          1
  7/12/2000        Alan Greenspan           Chairman      yes          0          0          1
  8/25/2000        Alan Greenspan           Chairman      yes          0          1          0
  8/31/2000        Laurence H. Meyer        Governor                   0          0          1
  9/15/2000        Roger W. Ferguson, Jr.   Vice Chair                 0          1          0
  9/18/2000        Alan Greenspan           Chairman      yes          0          0          1
 10/11/2000        Roger W. Ferguson, Jr.   Vice Chair                 0          0          1
 10/16/2000        Alan Greenspan           Chairman      yes          0          0          1
 10/19/2000        Laurence H. Meyer        Governor                   15         3       1.666667
 10/19/2000        Alan Greenspan           Chairman      yes          0          1          0
 10/19/2000        Roger W. Ferguson, Jr.   Vice Chair                 0          0          1
 10/20/2000        Roger W. Ferguson, Jr.   Vice Chair                 0          0          1
 10/24/2000        Laurence H. Meyer        Governor                   2          3         0.8
 10/31/2000        Roger W. Ferguson, Jr.   Vice Chair                 3          0          2
 11/14/2000        Alan Greenspan           Chairman      yes          0          0          1
 11/20/2000        Alan Greenspan           Chairman      yes          0          0          1
 11/21/2000        Edward M. Gramlich       Governor                   0          0          1
  12/5/2000        Alan Greenspan           Chairman      yes          2          0          2
  12/6/2000        Edward M. Gramlich       Governor                   0          0          1
  12/6/2000        Roger W. Ferguson, Jr.   Vice Chair                 6          1       1.714286
  12/8/2000        Alan Greenspan           Chairman      yes          0          0          1
  1/12/2001        Roger W. Ferguson, Jr.   Vice Chair                 4          4          1
  1/25/2001        Roger W. Ferguson, Jr.   Vice Chair                 0          0          1
  2/14/2001        Roger W. Ferguson, Jr.   Vice Chair                 0          0          1
  2/15/2001        Laurence H. Meyer        Governor                   0          0          1
                                            31                   continued on next page
               Table A.14: Speeches by FOMC members (continued)

Continued from previous page.

                          Speaker                                                          Net
    Date                  with link          Role       Chair      # Hawks   # Doves      Index
 2/20/2001        Edward M. Gramlich       Governor                   2          5       0.571429
 2/27/2001        Roger W. Ferguson, Jr.   Vice Chair                 1          1          1
  3/5/2001        Laurence H. Meyer        Governor                   0          0          1
  3/7/2001        Alan Greenspan           Chairman      yes          0          0          1
  3/9/2001        Roger W. Ferguson, Jr.   Vice Chair                 0          0          1
 3/15/2001        Laurence H. Meyer        Governor                   0          0          1
 3/23/2001        Edward M. Gramlich       Governor                   0          0          1
 3/27/2001        Alan Greenspan           Chairman      yes          0          0          1
 3/28/2001        Laurence H. Meyer        Governor                   1          1          1
  4/5/2001        Edward M. Gramlich       Governor                   0          0          1
  4/5/2001        Roger W. Ferguson, Jr.   Vice Chair                 0          0          1
  4/6/2001        Alan Greenspan           Chairman      yes          0          0          1
 4/19/2001        Roger W. Ferguson, Jr.   Vice Chair                 0          3          0
 4/19/2001        Edward M. Gramlich       Governor                   0          0          1
 4/26/2001        Roger W. Ferguson, Jr.   Vice Chair                 0          0          1
 4/27/2001        Alan Greenspan           Chairman      yes          1          1          1
 5/10/2001        Alan Greenspan           Chairman      yes          1          1          1
 5/10/2001        Laurence H. Meyer        Governor                   0          0          1
 5/17/2001        Laurence H. Meyer        Governor                   0          0          1
 5/18/2001        Alan Greenspan           Chairman      yes          0          0          1
 5/21/2001        Roger W. Ferguson, Jr.   Vice Chair                 0          0          1
 5/21/2001        Laurence H. Meyer        Governor                   1          2       0.666667
 5/24/2001        Laurence H. Meyer        Governor                   6          0          2
 5/24/2001        Alan Greenspan           Chairman      yes          5          2       1.428571
  6/6/2001        Laurence H. Meyer        Governor                   9          3         1.5
 6/11/2001        Edward M. Gramlich       Governor                   0          0          1
 6/14/2001        Roger W. Ferguson, Jr.   Vice Chair                 4          0          2
 6/20/2001        Alan Greenspan           Chairman      yes          0          0          1
 6/20/2001        Edward M. Gramlich       Governor                   1          0          2
 6/28/2001        Alan Greenspan           Chairman      yes          0          0          1
 6/28/2001        Alan Greenspan           Chairman      yes          1          1          1
 7/17/2001        Laurence H. Meyer        Governor                   0         10          0
                                            32                  continued on next page
               Table A.14: Speeches by FOMC members (continued)

Continued from previous page.

                           Speaker                                                          Net
     Date                  with link             Role    Chair      # Hawks   # Doves      Index
  7/18/2001        Roger W. Ferguson, Jr.   Vice Chair                 0          1          0
   8/3/2001        Edward M. Gramlich       Governor                   0          0          1
  8/31/2001        Alan Greenspan           Chairman      yes          1          0          2
  8/31/2001        Roger W. Ferguson, Jr.   Vice Chair                 0          0          1
   9/4/2001        Roger W. Ferguson, Jr.   Vice Chair                 0          0          1
 10/11/2001        Alan Greenspan           Chairman      yes          0          0          1
 10/12/2001        Laurence H. Meyer        Governor                   0          1          0
 10/15/2001        Laurence H. Meyer        Governor                   0          0          1
 10/16/2001        Roger W. Ferguson, Jr.   Vice Chair                 0          0          1
 10/23/2001        Alan Greenspan           Chairman      yes          0          0          1
 10/23/2001        Edward M. Gramlich       Governor                   0          0          1
 10/24/2001        Alan Greenspan           Chairman      yes          0          0          1
 10/26/2001        Alan Greenspan           Chairman      yes          0          0          1
  11/8/2001        Roger W. Ferguson, Jr.   Vice Chair                 0          0          1
  11/8/2001        Edward M. Gramlich       Governor                   0          0          1
 11/13/2001        Alan Greenspan           Chairman      yes          0          1          0
 11/27/2001        Laurence H. Meyer        Governor                   4          4          1
 11/30/2001        Edward M. Gramlich       Governor                   2          3         0.8
 11/30/2001        Alan Greenspan           Chairman      yes          0          0          1
  12/3/2001        Alan Greenspan           Chairman      yes          0          0          1
  12/5/2001        Laurence H. Meyer        Governor                   0          0          1
 12/18/2001        Laurence H. Meyer        Governor                   0          0          1
   1/8/2002        Roger W. Ferguson, Jr.   Vice Chair                 0          1          0
  1/10/2002        Alan Greenspan           Chairman      yes          0          0          1
  1/11/2002        Alan Greenspan           Chairman      yes          0          1          0
  1/16/2002        Roger W. Ferguson, Jr.   Vice Chair                 1          6       0.285714
  1/16/2002        Laurence H. Meyer        Governor                   2          5       0.571429
  1/16/2002        Alan Greenspan           Chairman      yes          0          0          1
  1/18/2002        Edward M. Gramlich       Governor                   0          0          1
   2/7/2002        Mark W. Olson            Governor                   0          0          1
   2/8/2002        Mark W. Olson            Governor                   0          0          1
  2/20/2002        Edward M. Gramlich       Governor                   5          0          2
                                            33                   continued on next page
               Table A.14: Speeches by FOMC members (continued)

Continued from previous page.

                          Speaker                                                          Net
    Date                  with link          Role       Chair      # Hawks   # Doves      Index
 2/27/2002        Roger W. Ferguson, Jr.   Vice Chair                 2          6         0.5
 2/28/2002        Alan Greenspan           Chairman      yes          0          1          0
 2/28/2002        Susan Schmidt Bies       Governor                   3          0          2
  3/1/2002        Edward M. Gramlich       Governor                   0          0          1
  3/4/2002        Roger W. Ferguson, Jr.   Vice Chair                 0          0          1
  3/4/2002        Roger W. Ferguson, Jr.   Vice Chair                 0          0          1
  3/7/2002        Edward M. Gramlich       Governor                   0          0          1
 3/12/2002        Mark W. Olson            Governor                   0          0          1
 3/13/2002        Alan Greenspan           Chairman      yes          0          0          1
 3/21/2002        Susan S. Bies            Governor                   1          3         0.5
 3/26/2002        Mark W. Olson            Governor                   0          0          1
 3/26/2002        Alan Greenspan           Chairman      yes          0          0          1
  4/8/2002        Edward M. Gramlich       Governor                   0          0          1
 4/22/2002        Alan Greenspan           Chairman      yes          0          0          1
 4/30/2002        Mark W. Olson            Governor                   0          0          1
  5/2/2002        Edward M. Gramlich       Governor                   0          0          1
  5/3/2002        Alan Greenspan           Chairman      yes          0          0          1
  5/9/2002        Roger W. Ferguson, Jr.   Vice Chair                 0          0          1
 5/10/2002        Alan Greenspan           Chairman      yes          0          0          1
 5/11/2002        Roger W. Ferguson, Jr.   Vice Chair                 0          0          1
 5/13/2002        Roger W. Ferguson, Jr.   Vice Chair                 0          0          1
 5/17/2002        Mark W. Olson            Governor                   0          0          1
 5/21/2002        Mark W. Olson            Governor                   0          0          1
 5/21/2002        Roger W. Ferguson, Jr.   Vice Chair                 0          0          1
 5/31/2002        Mark W. Olson            Governor                   0          0          1
 6/10/2002        Susan S. Bies            Governor                   0          0          1
 6/11/2002        Susan S. Bies            Governor                   1          3         0.5
 6/20/2002        Susan S. Bies            Governor                   0          0          1
  7/5/2002        Edward M. Gramlich       Governor                   0          0          1
  7/8/2002        Mark W. Olson            Governor                   0          0          1
 7/26/2002        Mark W. Olson            Governor                   0          0          1
 8/30/2002        Alan Greenspan           Chairman      yes          2          1       1.333333
                                            34                  continued on next page
               Table A.14: Speeches by FOMC members (continued)

Continued from previous page.

                           Speaker                                                          Net
     Date                  with link             Role    Chair      # Hawks   # Doves      Index
  9/25/2002        Alan Greenspan           Chairman      yes          0          0          1
  9/25/2002        Alan Greenspan           Chairman      yes          0          0          1
  9/25/2002        Alan Greenspan           Chairman      yes          0          0          1
  9/28/2002        Susan S. Bies            Governor                   1          2       0.666667
  10/1/2002        Susan S. Bies            Governor                   1          0          2
  10/3/2002        Roger W. Ferguson, Jr.   Vice Chair                 0          0          1
  10/7/2002        Alan Greenspan           Chairman      yes          0          0          1
  10/8/2002        Susan S. Bies            Governor                   1          0          2
  10/9/2002        Roger W. Ferguson, Jr.   Vice Chair                 0          0          1
 10/15/2002        Ben S. Bernanke          Governor                   12         2       1.714286
 10/16/2002        Roger W. Ferguson, Jr    Vice Chair                 2          3         0.8
 10/16/2002        Roger W. Ferguson, Jr    Vice Chair                 0          0          1
 10/16/2002        Edward M. Gramlich       Governor                   0          0          1
 10/22/2002        Mark W. Olson            Governor                   0          0          1
 10/23/2002        Alan Greenspan           Chairman      yes          0          0          1
 10/24/2002        Roger W. Ferguson, Jr.   Vice Chair                 0          0          1
 10/29/2002        Alan Greenspan           Chairman      yes          0          0          1
  11/7/2002        Susan S. Bies            Governor                   0          0          1
  11/7/2002        Edward M. Gramlich       Governor                   0          0          1
  11/8/2002        Ben S. Bernanke          Governor                   2          0          2
 11/12/2002        Alan Greenspan           Chairman      yes          0          1          0
 11/12/2002        Roger W. Ferguson, Jr.   Vice Chair                 0          7          0
 11/12/2002        Roger W. Ferguson, Jr.   Vice Chair                 0          1          0
 11/12/2002        Mark W. Olson            Governor                   0          0          1
 11/12/2002        Susan S. Bies            Governor                   0          1          0
 11/18/2002        Mark W. Olson            Governor                   0          0          1
 11/18/2002        Alan Greenspan           Chairman      yes          0          0          1
 11/19/2002        Alan Greenspan           Chairman      yes          0          0          1
 11/20/2002        Roger W. Ferguson, Jr.   Vice Chair                 1          0          2
 11/21/2002        Ben S. Bernanke          Governor                   1          1          1
 11/22/2002        Donald L. Kohn           Governor                   1          1          1
 12/13/2002        Susan S. Bies            Governor                   0          0          1
                                            35                   continued on next page
               Table A.14: Speeches by FOMC members (continued)

Continued from previous page.

                           Speaker                                                          Net
     Date                  with link             Role    Chair      # Hawks   # Doves      Index
 12/13/2002        Mark W. Olson            Governor                   1          0          2
 12/19/2002        Alan Greenspan           Chairman      yes          1          1          1
   1/4/2003        Edward M. Gramlich       Governor                   1          4         0.4
   2/3/2003        Ben S. Bernanke          Governor                   2          5       0.571429
   2/5/2003        Roger W. Ferguson, Jr.   Vice Chair                 0          0          1
   2/6/2003        Mark W. Olson            Governor                   0          0          1
  2/11/2003        Susan Schmidt Bies       Governor                   3          0          2
  2/12/2003        Roger W. Ferguson, Jr    Vice Chair                 1          2       0.666667
  2/21/2003        Ben S. Bernanke          Governor                   1          3         0.5
  2/27/2003        Susan Schmidt Bies       Governor                   0          0          1
  2/28/2003        Donald L. Kohn           Governor                   10         8       1.111111
   3/4/2003        Alan Greenspan           Chairman      yes          0          0          1
   3/7/2003        Alan Greenspan           Chairman      yes          0          0          1
  3/13/2003        Mark W. Olson            Governor                   0          0          1
  3/24/2003        Donald L. Kohn           Governor                   2          1       1.333333
  3/25/2003        Ben S. Bernanke          Governor                   2          5       0.571429
  3/28/2003        Alan Greenspan           Chairman      yes          0          0          1
   4/3/2003        Alan Greenspan           Chairman      yes          0          0          1
   4/4/2003        Alan Greenspan           Chairman      yes          0          0          1
   4/7/2003        Roger W. Ferguson, Jr.   Vice Chair                 0          0          1
   4/9/2003        Roger W. Ferguson, Jr.   Vice Chair                 0          0          1
   4/9/2003        Alan Greenspan           Chairman      yes          0          0          1
  4/10/2003        Mark W. Olson            Governor                   0          0          1
  4/24/2003        Edward M. Gramlich       Governor                   0          0          1
  4/24/2003        Ben S. Bernanke          Governor                   1          0          2
  4/28/2003        Roger W. Ferguson, Jr.   Vice Chair                 0          0          1
   5/7/2003        Susan Schmidt Bies       Governor                   0          0          1
   5/8/2003        Alan Greenspan           Chairman      yes          0          0          1
  5/13/2003        Alan Greenspan           Chairman      yes          0          0          1
  5/16/2003        Roger W. Ferguson, Jr.   Vice Chair                 0          2          0
  5/22/2003        Mark W. Olson            Governor                   2          1       1.333333
  5/30/2003        Susan Schmidt Bies       Governor                   0          0          1
                                            36                   continued on next page
               Table A.14: Speeches by FOMC members (continued)

Continued from previous page.

                           Speaker                                                          Net
     Date                  with link             Role    Chair      # Hawks   # Doves      Index
  5/31/2003        Ben S. Bernanke          Governor                   0          3          0
  6/10/2003        Donald L. Kohn           Governor                   0          0          1
  6/10/2003        Roger W. Ferguson, Jr.   Vice Chair                 0          0          1
  6/11/2003        Susan Schmidt Bies       Governor                   0          0          1
  6/11/2003        Roger W. Ferguson, Jr.   Vice Chair                 1          2       0.666667
  6/11/2003        Ben S. Bernanke          Governor                   0          0          1
  6/13/2003        Edward M. Gramlich       Governor                   2          0          2
  6/16/2003        Susan Schmidt Bies       Governor                   0          0          1
  6/17/2003        Roger W. Ferguson, Jr.   Vice Chair                 0          0          1
  6/20/2003        Donald L. Kohn           Governor                   0          0          1
  6/26/2003        Mark W. Olson            Governor                   0          0          1
  7/23/2003        Ben S. Bernanke          Governor                   1          3         0.5
   8/7/2003        Susan Schmidt Bies       Governor                   0          0          1
  8/10/2003        Susan Schmidt Bies       Governor                   0          0          1
  8/18/2003        Edward M. Gramlich       Governor                   0          0          1
  8/29/2003        Alan Greenspan           Chairman      yes          0          0          1
   9/4/2003        Edward M. Gramlich       Governor                   0          0          1
   9/4/2003        Ben S. Bernanke          Governor                   0          2          0
  9/22/2003        Mark W. Olson            Governor                   0          0          1
  9/24/2003        Donald L. Kohn           Governor                   14         0          2
  9/26/2003        Alan Greenspan           Chairman      yes          0          0          1
  10/1/2003        Edward M. Gramlich       Governor                   0          1          0
  10/2/2003        Ben S. Bernanke          Governor                   6          5       1.090909
  10/8/2003        Susan Schmidt Bies       Governor                   4          2       1.333333
  10/8/2003        Roger W. Ferguson, Jr.   Vice Chair                 0          1          0
  10/8/2003        Roger W. Ferguson, Jr.   Vice Chair                 0          0          1
  10/9/2003        Edward M. Gramlich       Governor                   0          0          1
 10/17/2003        Ben S. Bernanke          Governor                   0          0          1
 10/17/2003        Donald L. Kohn           Governor                   0          1          0
 10/24/2003        Ben S. Bernanke          Governor                   1          0          2
 10/29/2003        Alan Greenspan           Chairman      yes          0          0          1
 10/31/2003        Susan Schmidt Bies       Governor                   1          0          2
                                            37                   continued on next page
               Table A.14: Speeches by FOMC members (continued)

Continued from previous page.

                           Speaker                                                          Net
     Date                  with link             Role    Chair      # Hawks   # Doves      Index
  11/6/2003        Alan Greenspan           Chairman      yes          0          2          0
  11/6/2003        Ben S. Bernanke          Governor                   1          3         0.5
 11/13/2003        Roger W. Ferguson, Jr.   Vice Chair                 0          0          1
 11/14/2003        Edward M. Gramlich       Governor                   0          0          1
 11/20/2003        Alan Greenspan           Chairman      yes          0          1          0
 11/21/2003        Roger W. Ferguson, Jr.   Vice Chair                 0          2          0
 11/22/2003        Mark W. Olson            Governor                   0          0          1
  12/2/2003        Roger W. Ferguson, Jr.   Vice Chair                 0          0          1
 12/11/2003        Alan Greenspan           Chairman      yes          0          0          1
   1/3/2004        Alan Greenspan           Chairman      yes          3          2         1.2
   1/3/2004        Ben S. Bernanke          Governor                   3          1         1.5
   1/3/2004        Ben S. Bernanke          Governor                   0          0          1
   1/4/2004        Ben S. Bernanke          Governor                   3          2         1.2
   1/4/2004        Roger W. Ferguson, Jr.   Vice Chair                 1          0          2
   1/7/2004        Donald L. Kohn           Governor                   3          1         1.5
  1/13/2004        Alan Greenspan           Chairman      yes          0          0          1
  1/14/2004        Ben S. Bernanke          Governor                   0          0          1
  1/26/2004        Alan Greenspan           Chairman      yes          0          0          1
 11/19/2004        Alan Greenspan           Chairman      yes          1          0          2
  12/2/2004        Ben S. Bernanke          Governor                   0          0          1
  12/7/2004        Susan Schmidt Bies       Governor                   0          0          1
   2/4/2004        Susan Schmidt Bies       Governor                   0          0          1
  2/19/2004        Susan Schmidt Bies       Governor                   1          0          2
  2/20/2004        Ben S. Bernanke          Governor                   1          2       0.666667
  2/20/2004        Alan Greenspan           Chairman      yes          0          1          0
  2/23/2004        Alan Greenspan           Chairman      yes          2          1       1.333333
  2/25/2004        Edward M. Gramlich       Governor                   2          1       1.333333
  2/25/2004        Susan Schmidt Bies       Governor                   0          0          1
  2/26/2004        Susan Schmidt Bies       Governor                   5          4       1.111111
  2/26/2004        Ben S. Bernanke          Governor                   0          1          0
  2/27/2004        Mark W. Olson            Governor                   0          0          1
  2/27/2004        Alan Greenspan           Chairman      yes          0          0          1
                                            38                   continued on next page
               Table A.14: Speeches by FOMC members (continued)

Continued from previous page.

                          Speaker                                                          Net
    Date                  with link          Role       Chair      # Hawks   # Doves      Index
  3/1/2004        Mark W. Olson            Governor                   0          0          1
  3/2/2004        Alan Greenspan           Chairman      yes          0          0          1
  3/2/2004        Ben S. Bernanke          Governor                   13         2       1.733333
 3/12/2004        Alan Greenspan           Chairman      yes          0          1          0
 3/17/2004        Alan Greenspan           Chairman      yes          0          1          0
 3/25/2004        Alan Greenspan           Chairman      yes          0          0          1
 3/25/2004        Donald L. Kohn           Governor                   6          0          2
 3/26/2004        Edward M. Gramlich       Governor                   0          0          1
 3/26/2004        Donald L. Kohn           Governor                   0          0          1
 3/27/2004        Ben S. Bernanke          Governor                   0          0          1
 3/30/2004        Ben S. Bernanke          Governor                   2          3         0.8
 3/31/2004        Edward M. Gramlich       Governor                   2          1       1.333333
  4/1/2004        Ben S. Bernanke          Governor                   0          0          1
  4/1/2004        Donald L. Kohn           Governor                   8          1       1.777778
  4/8/2004        Roger W. Ferguson, Jr.   Vice Chair                 3          0          2
 4/15/2004        Ben S. Bernanke          Governor                   1          2       0.666667
 4/16/2004        Alan Greenspan           Chairman      yes          0          0          1
 4/16/2004        Ben S. Bernanke          Governor                   0          0          1
 4/22/2004        Susan Schmidt Bies       Governor                   5          4       1.111111
 4/22/2004        Ben S. Bernanke          Governor                   4          4          1
 4/23/2004        Roger W. Ferguson, Jr.   Vice Chair                 0          0          1
 4/23/2004        Ben S. Bernanke          Governor                   4          4          1
 4/26/2004        Mark W. Olson            Governor                   0          0          1
 4/26/2004        Susan Schmidt Bies       Governor                   0          0          1
 4/27/2004        Alan Greenspan           Chairman      yes          0          0          1
 4/27/2004        Susan Schmidt Bies       Governor                   0          0          1
  5/5/2004        Mark W. Olson            Governor                   0          2          0
  5/6/2004        Susan Schmidt Bies       Governor                   0          0          1
  5/6/2004        Alan Greenspan           Chairman      yes          2          0          2
  5/6/2004        Mark W. Olson            Governor                   0          0          1
 5/13/2004        Alan Greenspan           Chairman      yes          0          0          1
 5/14/2004        Edward M. Gramlich       Governor                   2          1       1.333333
                                            39                  continued on next page
               Table A.14: Speeches by FOMC members (continued)

Continued from previous page.

                          Speaker                                                          Net
    Date                  with link          Role       Chair      # Hawks   # Doves      Index
 5/17/2004        Roger W. Ferguson, Jr.   Vice Chair                 0          1          0
 5/17/2004        Susan Schmidt Bies       Governor                   0          0          1
 5/19/2004        Susan Schmidt Bies       Governor                   0          0          1
 5/20/2004        Edward M. Gramlich       Governor                   0          0          1
 5/20/2004        Ben S. Bernanke          Governor                   1          0          2
 5/20/2004        Alan Greenspan           Chairman      yes          0          0          1
 5/21/2004        Edward M. Gramlich       Governor                   1          1          1
 5/22/2004        Roger W. Ferguson, Jr.   Vice Chair                 0          0          1
  6/3/2004        Susan Schmidt Bies       Governor                   0          0          1
  6/4/2004        Donald L. Kohn           Governor                   5          2       1.428571
  6/8/2004        Alan Greenspan           Chairman      yes          1          0          2
 6/10/2004        Mark W. Olson            Governor                   0          0          1
 6/15/2004        Mark W. Olson            Governor                   0          2          0
 6/21/2004        Ben S. Bernanke          Governor                   0          1          0
 6/22/2004        Susan Schmidt Bies       Governor                   0          0          1
 6/24/2004        Edward M. Gramlich       Governor                   0          0          1
  7/7/2004        Roger W. Ferguson, Jr.   Vice Chair                 1          1          1
 7/15/2004        Susan Schmidt Bies       Governor                   4          1         1.6
 7/16/2004        Susan Schmidt Bies       Governor                   0          0          1
 7/21/2004        Roger W. Ferguson, Jr.   Vice Chair                 1          0          2
 8/12/2004        Edward M. Gramlich       Governor                   0          0          1
 8/12/2004        Susan Schmidt Bies       Governor                   0          0          1
 8/27/2004        Alan Greenspan           Chairman      yes          0          1          0
 9/10/2004        Edward M. Gramlich       Governor                   0          0          1
 9/16/2004        Edward M. Gramlich       Governor                   1          2       0.666667
 9/28/2004        Susan Schmidt Bies       Governor                   0          0          1
 9/30/2004        Susan Schmidt Bies       Governor                   5          1       1.666667
 10/4/2004        Ben S. Bernanke          Governor                   0          0          1
 10/5/2004        Alan Greenspan           Chairman      yes          0          0          1
 10/6/2004        Roger W. Ferguson, Jr.   Vice Chair                 5          1       1.666667
 10/7/2004        Roger W. Ferguson, Jr.   Vice Chair                 2          0          2
 10/7/2004        Ben S. Bernanke          Governor                   1          2       0.666667
                                            40                  continued on next page
               Table A.14: Speeches by FOMC members (continued)

Continued from previous page.

                           Speaker                                                          Net
     Date                  with link             Role    Chair      # Hawks   # Doves      Index
  10/7/2004        Alan Greenspan           Chairman      yes          0          0          1
  10/8/2004        Ben S. Bernanke          Governor                   0          1          0
  10/8/2004        Roger W. Ferguson, Jr.   Vice Chair                 0          2          0
 10/14/2004        Ben S. Bernanke          Governor                   1          0          2
 10/15/2004        Donald L. Kohn           Governor                   1          0          2
 10/15/2004        Alan Greenspan           Chairman      yes          0          0          1
 10/19/2004        Alan Greenspan           Chairman      yes          0          0          1
 10/21/2004        Ben S. Bernanke          Governor                   6          2         1.5
 10/21/2004        Susan Schmidt Bies       Governor                   0          0          1
 10/23/2004        Susan Schmidt Bies       Governor                   4          0          2
 10/26/2004        Roger W. Ferguson, Jr.   Vice Chair                 1          0          2
 10/29/2004        Roger W. Ferguson, Jr.   Vice Chair                 0          0          1
  11/5/2004        Susan Schmidt Bies       Governor                   0          0          1
 11/15/2004        Mark W. Olson            Governor                   4          1         1.6
 11/18/2004        Susan Schmidt Bies       Governor                   0          0          1
   1/6/2005        Donald L. Kohn           Governor                   0          0          1
   1/7/2005        Ben S. Bernanke          Governor                   0          0          1
   1/7/2005        Roger W. Ferguson, Jr.   Vice Chair                 1          5       0.333333
   1/9/2005        Donald L. Kohn           Governor                   2          0          2
  1/12/2005        Roger W. Ferguson, Jr.   Vice Chair                 3          2         1.2
  1/18/2005        Susan Schmidt Bies       Governor                   5          1       1.666667
  1/19/2005        Ben S. Bernanke          Governor                   7          4       1.272727
  1/27/2005        Roger W. Ferguson, Jr.   Vice Chair                 3          2         1.2
   2/4/2005        Alan Greenspan           Chairman      yes          0          0          1
   2/6/2005        Alan Greenspan           Chairman      yes          0          0          1
   2/7/2005        Susan Schmidt Bies       Governor                   0          0          1
  2/11/2005        Ben S. Bernanke          Governor                   0          3          0
  2/24/2005        Ben S. Bernanke          Governor                   7          4       1.272727
  2/28/2005        Mark W. Olson            Governor                   0          0          1
   3/2/2005        Edward M. Gramlich       Governor                   0          1          0
   3/8/2005        Ben S. Bernanke          Governor                   7          5       1.166667
  3/10/2005        Alan Greenspan           Chairman      yes          2          0          2
                                            41                   continued on next page
               Table A.14: Speeches by FOMC members (continued)

Continued from previous page.

                          Speaker                                                          Net
    Date                  with link          Role       Chair      # Hawks   # Doves      Index
 3/10/2005        Ben S. Bernanke          Governor                   5          3         1.25
 3/11/2005        Alan Greenspan           Chairman      yes          1          0          2
 3/14/2005        Susan Schmidt Bies       Governor                   0          0          1
 3/18/2005        Alan Greenspan           Chairman      yes          0          0          1
 3/30/2005        Ben S. Bernanke          Governor                   0          0          1
 3/31/2005        Susan Schmidt Bies       Governor                   0          0          1
  4/5/2005        Alan Greenspan           Chairman      yes          0          0          1
  4/8/2005        Alan Greenspan           Chairman      yes          0          0          1
 4/14/2005        Donald L. Kohn           Governor                   11         0          2
 4/14/2005        Ben S. Bernanke          Governor                   5          3         1.25
 4/18/2005        Susan Schmidt Bies       Governor                   7          1         1.75
 4/20/2005        Roger W. Ferguson, Jr.   Vice Chair                 5          2       1.428571
 4/21/2005        Edward M. Gramlich       Governor                   0          0          1
 4/22/2005        Donald L. Kohn           Governor                   11         3       1.571429
 4/27/2005        Roger W. Ferguson, Jr.   Vice Chair                 0          2          0
  5/5/2005        Alan Greenspan           Chairman      yes          0          0          1
 5/12/2005        Roger W. Ferguson, Jr.   Vice Chair                 0          0          1
 5/15/2005        Alan Greenspan           Chairman      yes          0          0          1
 5/16/2005        Mark W. Olson            Governor                   0          0          1
 5/17/2005        Susan Schmidt Bies       Governor                   0          0          1
 5/19/2005        Alan Greenspan           Chairman      yes          3          0          2
 5/19/2005        Susan Schmidt Bies       Governor                   0          0          1
 5/19/2005        Mark W. Olson            Governor                   0          0          1
 5/20/2005        Donald L. Kohn           Governor                   1          2       0.666667
 5/20/2005        Alan Greenspan           Chairman      yes          1          1          1
 5/26/2005        Edward M. Gramlich       Governor                   0          1          0
 5/26/2005        Susan Schmidt Bies       Governor                   0          0          1
 5/27/2005        Roger W. Ferguson, Jr.   Vice Chair                 4          0          2
  6/3/2005        Edward M. Gramlich       Governor                   0          0          1
  6/3/2005        Mark W. Olson            Governor                   1          0          2
  6/6/2005        Alan Greenspan           Chairman      yes          1          0          2
  6/7/2005        Susan Schmidt Bies       Governor                   1          0          2
                                            42                  continued on next page
               Table A.14: Speeches by FOMC members (continued)

Continued from previous page.

                           Speaker                                                          Net
     Date                  with link             Role    Chair      # Hawks   # Doves      Index
   6/8/2005        Susan Schmidt Bies       Governor                   0          0          1
  6/14/2005        Susan Schmidt Bies       Governor                   1          0          2
  6/15/2005        Donald L. Kohn           Governor                   0          0          1
  6/23/2005        Mark W. Olson            Governor                   0          0          1
  7/21/2005        Donald L. Kohn           Governor                   0          0          1
  8/26/2005        Alan Greenspan           Chairman      yes          2          1       1.333333
  8/27/2005        Donald L. Kohn           Governor                   1          3         0.5
  8/27/2005        Alan Greenspan           Chairman      yes          1          0          2
  9/16/2005        Mark W. Olson            Governor                   1          0          2
  9/24/2005        Roger W. Ferguson        Vice Chair                 0          0          1
  9/26/2005        Susan Schmidt Bies       Governor                   0          0          1
  9/26/2005        Alan Greenspan           Chairman      yes          2          1       1.333333
  9/27/2005        Alan Greenspan           Chairman      yes          0          0          1
  9/28/2005        Roger W. Ferguson, Jr.   Vice Chair                 0          0          1
  9/29/2005        Donald L. Kohn           Governor                   1          2       0.666667
 10/11/2005        Donald L. Kohn           Governor                   1          2       0.666667
 10/12/2005        Alan Greenspan           Chairman      yes          0          0          1
 10/12/2005        Susan Schmidt Bies       Governor                   1          0          2
 10/12/2005        Mark W. Olson            Governor                   2          2          1
 10/13/2005        Mark W. Olson            Governor                   2          2          1
 10/17/2005        Alan Greenspan           Chairman      yes          2          1       1.333333
 10/18/2005        Roger W. Ferguson, Jr.   Vice Chair                 15         0          2
 10/19/2005        Donald L. Kohn           Governor                   14         3       1.647059
 10/26/2005        Alan Greenspan           Chairman      yes          0          0          1
 10/27/2005        Alan Greenspan           Chairman      yes          0          0          1
  11/3/2005        Roger W. Ferguson, Jr.   Vice Chair                 0          0          1
  11/7/2005        Mark W. Olson            Governor                   0          0          1
 11/14/2005        Alan Greenspan           Chairman      yes          1          0          2
 11/15/2005        Mark W. Olson            Governor                   0          0          1
 11/15/2005        Roger W. Ferguson, Jr.   Vice Chair                 5          1       1.666667
 11/28/2005        Roger W. Ferguson, Jr.   Vice Chair                 0          0          1
 11/29/2005        Roger W. Ferguson, Jr    Vice Chair                 1          0          2
                                            43                   continued on next page
               Table A.14: Speeches by FOMC members (continued)

Continued from previous page.

                           Speaker                                                          Net
     Date                  with link             Role    Chair      # Hawks   # Doves      Index
 11/30/2005        Susan Schmidt Bies       Governor                   1          0          2
  12/2/2005        Alan Greenspan           Chairman      yes          0          0          1
  12/2/2005        Alan Greenspan           Chairman      yes          0          0          1
  12/5/2005        Mark W. Olson            Governor                   0          0          1
  12/6/2005        Susan Schmidt Bies       Governor                   0          0          1
 12/14/2005        Alan Greenspan           Chairman      yes          0          0          1
  1/18/2006        Susan Schmidt Bies       Governor                   2          1       1.333333
   2/2/2006        Susan Schmidt Bies       Governor                   1          0          2
   2/6/2006        Ben S. Bernanke          Chairman      yes          0          0          1
  2/23/2006        Roger W. Ferguson, Jr.   Vice Chair                 0          0          1
  2/24/2006        Ben S. Bernanke          Chairman      yes          4          2       1.333333
  2/24/2006        Roger W. Ferguson, Jr.   Vice Chair                 0          0          1
   3/3/2006        Roger W. Ferguson, Jr.   Vice Chair                 21         1       1.909091
   3/8/2006        Ben S. Bernanke          Chairman      yes          0          0          1
  3/10/2006        Roger W. Ferguson, Jr.   Vice Chair                 0          0          1
  3/13/2006        Mark W. Olson            Governor                   0          0          1
  3/16/2006        Donald L. Kohn           Governor                   4          0          2
  3/20/2006        Ben S. Bernanke          Chairman      yes          1          5       0.333333
  3/29/2006        Susan Schmidt Bies       Governor                   0          0          1
  3/31/2006        Susan Schmidt Bies       Governor                   0          0          1
  3/31/2006        Roger W. Ferguson, Jr.   Vice Chair                 0          0          1
   4/3/2006        Randall S. Kroszner      Governor                   0          0          1
   4/5/2006        Ben S. Bernanke          Chairman      yes          0          0          1
   4/6/2006        Randall S. Kroszner      Governor                   0          1          0
  4/10/2006        Mark W. Olson            Governor                   0          0          1
  4/10/2006        Susan Schmidt Bies       Governor                   0          0          1
  4/13/2006        Donald L. Kohn           Governor                   14         1       1.866667
  4/13/2006        Mark W. Olson            Governor                   3          1         1.5
  4/17/2006        Roger W. Ferguson, Jr.   Vice Chair                 0          2          0
  4/20/2006        Ben S. Bernanke          Chairman      yes          0          0          1
  4/27/2006        Donald L. Kohn           Governor                   0          1          0
  4/28/2006        Susan Schmidt Bies       Governor                   0          0          1
                                            44                   continued on next page
               Table A.14: Speeches by FOMC members (continued)

Continued from previous page.

                        Speaker                                                         Net
    Date                with link         Role       Chair      # Hawks   # Doves      Index
  5/3/2006        Ben S. Bernanke       Chairman      yes          0          0          1
  5/4/2006        Susan Schmidt Bies    Governor                   2          0          2
 5/11/2006        Donald L. Kohn        Governor                   0          0          1
 5/16/2006        Ben S. Bernanke       Chairman      yes          0          0          1
 5/16/2006        Susan Schmidt Bies    Governor                   0          0          1
 5/16/2006        Mark W. Olson         Governor                   0          0          1
 5/18/2006        Ben S. Bernanke       Chairman      yes          0          0          1
 5/18/2006        Donald L. Kohn        Governor                   0          1          0
 5/24/2006        Randall S. Kroszner   Governor                   0          0          1
 5/25/2006        Mark W. Olson         Governor                   1          0          2
  6/5/2006        Ben S. Bernanke       Chairman      yes          3          0          2
  6/6/2006        Susan Schmidt Bies    Governor                   0          0          1
  6/9/2006        Ben S. Bernanke       Chairman      yes          0          0          1
 6/12/2006        Ben S. Bernanke       Chairman      yes          0          0          1
 6/12/2006        Mark W. Olson         Governor                   0          0          1
 6/12/2006        Susan Schmidt Bies    Governor                   0          0          1
 6/13/2006        Ben S. Bernanke       Chairman      yes          0          0          1
 6/14/2006        Susan Schmidt Bies    Governor                   2          0          2
 6/15/2006        Ben S. Bernanke       Chairman      yes          10         0          2
 6/15/2006        Randall S. Kroszner   Governor                   2          1       1.333333
 6/16/2006        Donald L. Kohn        Governor                   1          3         0.5
 6/16/2006        Randall S. Kroszner   Governor                   2          1       1.333333
  7/4/2006        Susan Schmidt Bies    Governor                   0          0          1
  7/6/2006        Donald L. Kohn        Vice Chair                 1          1          1
 7/18/2006        Kevin Warsh           Governor                   2          0          2
 8/25/2006        Ben S. Bernanke       Chairman      yes          0          0          1
 8/31/2006        Ben S. Bernanke       Chairman      yes          1          4         0.4
  9/1/2006        Ben S. Bernanke       Chairman      yes          0          0          1
 9/11/2006        Donald L. Kohn        Vice Chair                 0          0          1
 9/27/2006        Randall S. Kroszner   Governor                   6          3       1.333333
 10/4/2006        Ben S. Bernanke       Chairman      yes          1          0          2
 10/4/2006        Donald L. Kohn        Vice Chair                 5          3         1.25
                                            45               continued on next page
               Table A.14: Speeches by FOMC members (continued)

Continued from previous page.

                         Speaker                                                         Net
     Date                with link         Role       Chair      # Hawks   # Doves      Index
 10/11/2006        Susan Schmidt Bies    Governor                   0          0          1
 10/12/2006        Frederic S. Mishkin   Governor                   1          0          2
 10/16/2006        Ben S. Bernanke       Chairman      yes          0          0          1
 10/17/2006        Susan Schmidt Bies    Governor                   2          0          2
  11/1/2006        Ben S. Bernanke       Chairman      yes          1          0          2
  11/2/2006        Susan S. Bies         Governor                   2          1       1.333333
  11/3/2006        Donald L. Kohn        Vice Chair                 0          0          1
 11/10/2006        Ben S. Bernanke       Chairman      yes          0          1          0
 11/16/2006        Randall S. Kroszner   Governor                   0          2          0
 11/21/2006        Kevin Warsh           Governor                   0          0          1
 11/28/2006        Ben S. Bernanke       Chairman      yes          3          5         0.75
 11/30/2006        Susan Schmidt Bies    Governor                   0          0          1
  12/1/2006        Ben S. Bernanke       Chairman      yes          0          0          1
  12/1/2006        Donald L. Kohn        Vice Chair                 1          1          1
 12/15/2006        Ben S. Bernanke       Chairman      yes          0          1          0
   1/5/2007        Ben S. Bernanke       Chairman      yes          0          0          1
   1/8/2007        Donald L. Kohn        Vice Chair                 3          3          1
  1/11/2007        Susan Schmidt Bies    Governor                   2          0          2
  1/17/2007        Frederic S. Mishkin   Governor                   10         0          2
  1/18/2007        Susan Schmidt Bies    Governor                   3          1         1.5
   2/6/2007        Ben S. Bernanke       Chairman      yes          0          0          1
  2/21/2007        Donald L. Kohn        Vice Chair                 0          0          1
  2/26/2007        Susan Schmidt Bies    Governor                   0          0          1
   3/2/2007        Ben S. Bernanke       Chairman      yes          1          3         0.5
   3/5/2007        Randall S. Kroszner   Governor                   0          0          1
   3/5/2007        Kevin Warsh           Governor                   1          0          2
   3/6/2007        Ben S. Bernanke       Chairman                   0          0          1
   3/9/2007        Randall S. Kroszner   Governor                   0          2          0
   3/9/2007        Donald L. Kohn        Vice Chair                 1          0          2
  3/12/2007        Randall S. Kroszner   Governor                   5          2       1.428571
  3/22/2007        Randall S. Kroszner   Governor                   0          0          1
  3/22/2007        Donald L. Kohn        Vice Chair                 0          0          1
                                            46                continued on next page
               Table A.14: Speeches by FOMC members (continued)

Continued from previous page.

                        Speaker                                                         Net
    Date                with link         Role       Chair      # Hawks   # Doves      Index
 3/23/2007        Frederic S. Mishkin   Governor                   0          7          0
 3/30/2007        Ben S. Bernanke       Chairman      yes          0          1          0
 4/10/2007        Frederic S. Mishkin   Governor                   3         11       0.428571
 4/11/2007        Ben S. Bernanke       Chairman      yes          0          0          1
 4/20/2007        Frederic S. Mishkin   Governor                   2          2          1
 4/25/2007        Ben S. Bernanke       Chairman      yes          0          0          1
 4/26/2007        Frederic S. Mishkin   Governor                   0          0          1
  5/1/2007        Ben S. Bernanke       Chairman      yes          1          0          2
 5/10/2007        Randall S. Kroszner   Governor                   0          0          1
 5/15/2007        Ben S. Bernanke       Chairman      yes          0          0          1
 5/15/2007        Randall S. Kroszner   Governor                   0          0          1
 5/16/2007        Donald L. Kohn        Vice Chair                 0          0          1
 5/16/2007        Randall S. Kroszner   Governor                   1          1          1
 5/17/2007        Ben S. Bernanke       Chairman      yes          1          0          2
 5/22/2007        Ben S. Bernanke       Chairman      yes          0          0          1
 5/23/2007        Randall S. Kroszner   Governor                   0          0          1
 5/24/2007        Frederic S. Mishkin   Governor                   1          3         0.5
  6/1/2007        Randall S. Kroszner   Governor                   5          1       1.666667
  6/5/2007        Ben S. Bernanke       Chairman      yes          1          0          2
  6/5/2007        Kevin Warsh           Governor                   0          0          1
 6/14/2007        Randall S. Kroszner   Governor                   0          0          1
 6/15/2007        Ben S. Bernanke       Chairman      yes          2          0          2
 6/23/2007        Frederic S. Mishkin   Governor                   0          0          1
 7/10/2007        Ben S. Bernanke       Chairman      yes          4          8       0.666667
 7/12/2007        Randall S. Kroszner   Governor                   0          0          1
  8/1/2007        Randall S. Kroszner   Governor                   0          0          1
 8/31/2007        Ben S. Bernanke       Chairman      yes          2          1       1.333333
  9/1/2007        Frederic S. Mishkin   Governor                   0          1          0
  9/6/2007        Randall S. Kroszner   Governor                   0          0          1
 9/10/2007        Frederic S. Mishkin   Governor                   0          1          0
 9/11/2007        Ben S. Bernanke       Chairman      yes          2          0          2
 9/21/2007        Donald L. Kohn        Vice Chair                 1          4         0.4
                                            47               continued on next page
               Table A.14: Speeches by FOMC members (continued)

Continued from previous page.

                         Speaker                                                    Net
     Date                with link         Role       Chair   # Hawks   # Doves    Index
  9/21/2007        Kevin Warsh           Governor                0         1         0
  9/21/2007        Frederic S. Mishkin   Governor                0         0         1
  9/24/2007        Ben S. Bernanke       Chairman      yes       0         0         1
  9/27/2007        Frederic S. Mishkin   Governor                2         4      0.666667
  9/28/2007        Frederic S. Mishkin   Governor                1         1         1
  10/5/2007        Donald L. Kohn        Vice Chair              1         0         2
  10/5/2007        Kevin Warsh           Governor                0         1         0
 10/11/2007        Randall S. Kroszner   Governor                0         2         0
 10/12/2007        Ben S. Bernanke       Chairman      yes       0         0         1
 10/12/2007        Donald L. Kohn        Vice Chair              0         2         0
 10/15/2007        Ben S. Bernanke       Chairman      yes       1         1         1
 10/19/2007        Ben S. Bernanke       Chairman      yes       0         1         0
 10/20/2007        Frederic S. Mishkin   Governor                7         2      1.555556
 10/22/2007        Randall S. Kroszner   Governor                0         0         1
 10/26/2007        Frederic S. Mishkin   Governor               10         4      1.428571
  11/5/2007        Frederic S. Mishkin   Governor                4         4         1
  11/5/2007        Randall S. Kroszner   Governor                0         0         1
  11/6/2007        Ben S. Bernanke       Chairman      yes       0         0         1
  11/7/2007        Kevin Warsh           Governor                0         3         0
 11/13/2007        Randall S. Kroszner   Governor                0         0         1
 11/14/2007        Ben S. Bernanke       Chairman      yes       0         1         0
 11/16/2007        Randall S. Kroszner   Governor                2         3        0.8
 11/28/2007        Donald L. Kohn        Vice Chair              1         2      0.666667
 11/29/2007        Ben S. Bernanke       Chairman      yes       0         0         1
 11/29/2007        Frederic S. Mishkin   Governor                2         6        0.5
 11/30/2007        Randall S. Kroszner   Governor                0         0         1




                                            48
