                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




          THE ECONOMIC CONTRIBUTION OF UNAUTHORIZED WORKERS:
                         AN INDUSTRY ANALYSIS

                                         Ryan Edwards
                                        Francesc Ortega

                                      Working Paper 22834
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w22834


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                  November 2016




Edwards’s work is directly supported by funds from the Center for American Progress. Ortega is
grateful to CAP for funding this project. The authors would like to thank Tanya Arditi, Marshall
Fitz, Tom Jawetz, Robert Lynch, Silva Mathema, Rita Medina, and Phil Wolgin for helpful
comments and criticisms during a presentation at the Center for American Progress. They would
also like to thank Agustin Indaco, Sarah Bohn, Gretchen Donehower, Giev Kashkooli, Ed
Kissam, Phil Martin, Pia Orrenius, Manuel Pastor, Jennifer Van Hook, Bob Warren, and
Robert Warren for helpful remarks. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and
do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2016 by Ryan Edwards and Francesc Ortega. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
The Economic Contribution of Unauthorized Workers: An Industry Analysis
Ryan Edwards and Francesc Ortega
NBER Working Paper No. 22834
November 2016
JEL No. F22,J15,J31,J61

                                         ABSTRACT

This paper provides a quantitative assessment of the economic contribution of unauthorized
workers to the U.S. economy, and the potential gains from legalization. We employ a theoretical
framework that allows for multiple industries and a heterogeneous workforce in terms of skills
and productivity. Capital and labor are the inputs in production and the different types of labor
are combined in a multi-nest CES framework that builds on Borjas (2003) and Ottaviano and Peri
(2012). The model is calibrated using data on the characteristics of the workforce, including an
indicator for imputed unauthorized status (Center for Migration Studies, 2014), and industry
output from the Bureau of Economic Analysis. Our results show that the economic contribution
of unauthorized workers to the U.S. economy is substantial, at approximately 3% of private-
sector GDP annually, which amounts to close to $5 trillion over a 10-year period. These effects
on production are smaller than the share of unauthorized workers in employment, which is close
to 5%. The reason is that unauthorized workers are less skilled and appear to be less productive,
on average, than natives and legal immigrants with the same observable skills. We also find that
legalization of unauthorized workers would increase their contribution to 3.6% of private-sector
GDP. The source of these gains stems from the productivity increase arising from the expanded
labor market opportunities for these workers which, in turn, would lead to an increase in capital
investment by employers.


Ryan Edwards
Department of Economics
Queens College, CUNY
Powdermaker Hall 300-S
Flushing, NY 11367
and NBER
redwards@qc.cuny.edu

Francesc Ortega
Queens College CUNY
Economics department,
300A Powdermaker Hall,
65-30 Kissena Blvd, Flushing, New York 11367
fortega@qc.cuny.edu
1        Introduction

There is wide consensus that the problem of the large unauthorized population in the United
States needs to be addressed soon. A crucial input into the debate is an assessment of the
economic contribution of unauthorized workers, and the potential gains from legalizing
these workers. The main goal of our project is to o↵er such a quantitative assessment
using a state-of-the-art theoretical framework that accounts for the large heterogeneity in
the characteristics of the unauthorized workers that we observe in the data, and for the
complementarities in production between these workers and the rest of the workforce.
        More specifically, we adopt the multi-nest CES theoretical framework proposed by Borjas
(2003) and Ottaviano and Peri (2012), and adapt it to analyze the contributions to output of
unauthorized workers at the industry level. We calibrate the model using data from a special
extract of the American Community Survey (years 2011-2013) provided by the Center for
Migration Studies (2014), which contains a variable that assigns documentation status to all
foreign-born workers in the sample along with detailed information on employment, skills
and wages, and the Bureau of Economic Analysis’ National Accounts.1 We then conduct
simulations at the industry level to quantify the economic contribution of unauthorized
workers to the level of production in the industry. We do so by comparing industry output as
currently observed in the data to output in a counterfactual without unauthorized workers.
Similarly, we also conduct simulations of the economic e↵ects of providing legal status to
these workers. We distinguish between short and long-run e↵ects, where the latter scenario
takes into account the adjustment to the capital stock following changes in the workforce.
        A large body of literature has analyzed the labor market e↵ects of immigration. Most
studies in this literature estimate reduced-form models or econometric specifications derived
from highly simplified models. In a very influential study, Borjas (2003) presented a multi-
nest CES production model that emphasized the role of complementarities in production
and allowed for a clear discussion of within and between skill group e↵ects. Manacorda et
al. (2012) and Ottaviano and Peri (2012) further extended the theoretical setup to allow
for imperfect substitution in production between natives and immigrants with the same
education and potential experience. We adopt their theoretical framework, extend it to
consider documentation status, adding a new level to the multi-nest CES framework. As
we argue later, for our purpose of estimating the contribution of unauthorized workers to
production, the calibration of the productivity terms for each type of labor is much more
    1
        We describe these data and the documentation status imputation in Section 2.



                                                       1
important quantitatively than the parametrization of the elasticities of substitution.
      Our work is also related to the studies that estimate the e↵ects of legalization and
naturalization. The vast majority of these studies focus on the e↵ects on the earnings of
immigrants (Chiswick (1978), Bratsberg et al. (2002), Kossoudji and Cobb-Clark (2002),
Lofstrom et al. (2013), Lynch and Oakford (2013), and Pastor and Scoggins (2012), among
others). Instead our focus is on overall income and output at the industry level. Because of
our interest on the aggregate income e↵ects of unauthorized immigration, our study is more
closely related to the work of Lynch and Oakford (2013). These authors study the e↵ects
of legalization and citizenship on U.S. GDP, in addition to several other outcomes, such
as employment, tax revenues and earnings of the immigrants themselves. They conclude
that granting legal status and citizenship to unauthorized immigrants will increase their
income by 25 percent, with roughly similar contribution from legalization and naturaliza-
tion. Projecting over a 10-year period their estimates imply a cumulative increase in GDP
of approximately $1.4 trillion.2
      Relative to the existing literature, our analysis of the economic contribution of unau-
thorized workers is novel in several dimensions. First, we focus on the e↵ects on the level
of production at the industry level. Second, our analysis is based on a fully specified eco-
nomic model that we calibrate using a combination aggregate and individual level data.
This model accounts for the degree of complementarities in production between di↵erent
types of workers, and allows us to assess the role played by these somewhat controversial
parameters on the results. In addition we show that the model can be calibrated to in-
corporate the large heterogeneity among the unauthorized workforce in terms of skills and
productivity. Finally, an important benefit of our structural approach is that we can sim-
ulate policy-relevant counterfactual scenarios, such as the removal of unauthorized workers
or their legalization. To the best of our knowledge, our study is the first one providing
estimates of the contribution of unauthorized workers along with the potential gains from
providing legal access to these workers.
      Our descriptive analysis of the data reveals some interesting patterns that play an impor-
tant role in our simulation results. First, we document the large variation across industries
in the share of unauthorized workers. Specifically, in the period 2011-2013 the share of
unauthorized workers in employment is highest in Agriculture (18%), Construction (13%)
and Leisure and hospitality (10%), well above the national average of 4.9%. Our data
  2
    Their estimates build on the study of the e↵ects of 1986 IRCA conducted by the Department of Labor
(1996), which concluded that legalization led to a 15 percent increase in the earnings of unauthorized
immigrants between 1986 and 1992.


                                                  2
also reveal important di↵erences in average wages by industry, nativity and documentation
status. In most industries legal immigrants and natives have similar earnings, while the
earnings of unauthorized workers are substantially lower. Naturally, these wage di↵erences
reflect, to a large extent di↵erences in skills. In our data unauthorized immigrants have an
average of 3 years of schooling less than the average U.S.-born and legal immigrant worker.
Nonetheless unauthorized workers are not a homogeneous group, displaying large di↵erences
in educational attainment by industry of employment.
       We can now turn to our main results. The simulation of the counterfactual where
unauthorized workers are removed from each industry at a time reveals that these workers
are responsible for about 3% of private-sector GDP, which amounts to approximately $5
trillion over a 10-year period. At first the removal of unauthorized workers would reduce
aggregate production by about 1.7%, but the loss would be magnified as employers downsize
the stock of capital in order to match the reduced workforce. These aggregate estimates hide
large di↵erences across industries, largely reflecting the shares of unauthorized workers in
industry employment. Once capital has adjusted, value-added in Agriculture, Construction
and Leisure and hospitality would fall by 8-9%. However, the largest losses in dollars
would take place in Manufacturing, Wholesale and retail trade, Finance and Leisure and
hospitality. Likewise we also find large di↵erences across states that largely reflect the
employment shares of unauthorized workers in each state, along with the state’s industry
specialization.
       We also note that even though unauthorized workers are about 5% of employment, their
contribution to private-sector GDP is around 3%. This is due to di↵erences in productiv-
ity between these workers and the rest of the workforce. While part of the productivity
di↵erential is due to the lower measured skills, our calibration procedure also reveals large
residual di↵erences in productivity, after controlling for measured educational attainment
and potential experience.
       In order to gauge the role played by the challenges imposed by the lack of legal status
on the productivity of unauthorized workers, we simulate a scenario where unauthorized
workers are assumed to have the same productivity as legal immigrant workers with the
same levels of education and potential experience.3
       Because documented foreign-born workers are about 25% more productive than undoc-
   3
     To the extent that acquiring legal status might induce undocumented immigrant workers to acquire more
human capital or switch industry of employment, our estimates should be interpreted as a lower-bound on
the economic e↵ects of legalization. Indeed Rivera-Batiz (1999) provides some evidence of skill upgrading
following legalization.



                                                    3
umented ones with the same levels of education and experience, legalization would have a
large e↵ect on the earnings of undocumented workers. The consequences in terms of in-
dustry production would be much more muted. After adjustments in the stock of capital,
industry GDP would increase by 1-2% in Agriculture, Construction and Leisure and hospi-
tality. For the economy as a whole, our results suggest an increase in private-sector GDP
of about 0.6%.
    The structure of the paper is as follows. In Section 2 we describe our data. Section 3
presents descriptive statistics. Section 4 describes our model. Section 5 describes our cali-
bration of the parameters. Section 6 defines our counterfactual scenarios, while Section 7
reports our main results. Section 8 discusses some caveats and Section 9 gathers our con-
clusions.


2     Data
2.1   Sources

Most of our analysis draws from special extracts of the American Community Survey (ACS)
of the U.S. Census Bureau for the years 2011, 2012, and 2013 provided by the Center for
Migration Studies (2014). Our pooled sample across these three years contains 9,357,842
individuals in total, 4,154,227 of whom report employment.
    The key variable in our analysis is an individual-level measure of imputed undocumented
status, a binary indicator for every record in the ACS. Although the ACS does not ask about
legal status per se, it does ask about citizenship, country of birth, and year of immigration,
in addition to a wide array of demographic and socioeconomic characteristics including
employment status. The specific methodology used to impute authorized status is described
in detail in Warren (2014), and we summarize it here.
    The procedure is essentially a two-step process. In the first step, the overall size of
the undocumented population is obtained starting from Census estimates of total foreign-
born residents and subtracting accumulated counts of legalized foreign born residents drawn
from official statistics kept by the U.S. Department of Homeland Security. The second step
imputes documentation status at the individual level. First developed by Passel and Clark
(1998) for the Urban Institute, the method has continued to evolve within government and
policy circles. Recent contributions include those by Baker and Rytina (2013), Warren and
Warren (2013), and Passel and Cohn (2014, 2015), in addition to Warren (2014). Each of
these e↵orts utilizes survey information to identify foreign-born respondents in the CPS or



                                              4
ACS who are likely to be unauthorized based on their characteristics. Chief among these
characteristics that indicate likely documented status are year of arrival, because of the
amnesty granted under the Immigration Reform and Control Act of 1986 (IRCA). Other
key variables used in the imputation procedure are country of origin, occupation, industry,
and receipt of government benefits. Workers with certain occupations that require licensing,
such as legal professions, police and fire, and some medical professions, are assumed to be
authorized, as well as individuals in government or in the military.4
    Existing estimates of the characteristics of the imputed unauthorized population ob-
tained from the Census, the ACS and the CPS tend to be largely consistent with each other,
indicating “face validity” (Warren, 2014). In a recent study, Pastor and Scoggins (2016)
provide a comparison between several of the existing approaches to estimate the unautho-
rized population or subsets of it. Reassuringly, the results are fairly consistent across these
studies. Likewise, the imputation carried out by Borjas (2016) also provides additional
confirmation. The broader validity of these types of estimates is less clear. Assessments
remain constrained by the nature of the problem; without large representative surveys that
ask legal status, it is unclear how to produce comparable but alternative measures of the
truth.5
    In addition to these data, our calibration also makes use of the GDP estimates produced
by the Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA). Our industry definitions consist of conventional
“one-digit” industries identified via the North American Industry Classification System
(NAICS) as used by Passel and Cohn (2015) and others. Specifically, we focus on the
industries 1-12 below, which are often referred to as private-sector GDP:
      1.   Agriculture, forestry, fishing, hunting       8. Financial activities
      2.   Mining                                        9. Professional and business services
      3.   Construction                                  10. Educational and health services
      4.   Manufacturing                                 11. Leisure and hospitality
      5.   Wholesale and retail trade                    12. Other services
      6.   Transportation and utilities                  13. Government
      7.   Information
Combined these thirteen industries produce all of national GDP. As we discussed earlier,
our imputations of authorized status assume that there are no undocumented workers in
   4
     Anecdotal evidence shows that there are some unauthorized workers in these industries, particularly in
the military. Nevertheless the size of this group is negligible.
   5
     The Survey of Income and Program Participation (SIPP), also a Census product, directly asks respon-
dents about legal status but is roughly one sixth the size of the ACS. Using the SIPP as their baseline of
truth, Van Hook et al. (2015) show that imputed legal status within Census products such as ACS can
produce significant bias in estimates of outcomes that are directly linked to legal status, such as health
insurance coverage. For our purposes this concern is probably less relevant.


                                                    5
public administration or the military, so we omit this industry from consideration.

2.2   Sample definitions

Because the calibration of our model will draw from Ottaviano and Peri (2012), we build
skill cells closely following their definitions. We classify workers within each industry (and
state) as belonging to one out of 96 possible categories on the basis of their education, po-
tential experience, nativity and documentation status. We consider 4 educational groups:
individuals with either 0–11 years, 12 years, 13–15 years, or 16 years and more of school-
ing. Potential experience measures years since the last year of schooling, and we build 8
categories: 1–5, 6–10, 11–15, 16–20, 21–25, 26–30, 31–35, or 36–40 years.
    To build our samples we pool observations across the 2011, 2012, and 2013 waves of the
ACS data in the CMS extracts, taking simple averages of quantities within each cell and
weighted averages of dollar amounts converted to 2013 dollars using the consumer price
index. We build two slightly di↵erent samples.
    Following Ottaviano and Peri, our wage sample drops individuals with potential ex-
perience less than 1 or greater than 40, eliminating workers at the extremes of the age
distribution. We further eliminate individuals living in group quarters, those younger than
18, those who reported not working last year, those who did not report valid salary in-
come, and the self-employed. We use the wage sample to calibrate the worker productivity
parameters in the model.
    Our employment sample is more inclusive and includes all valid observations of em-
ployed workers within the ACS. In this sample definition, we treat experience groupings as
bottom and top-coded, including those with less than 1 year of potential experience into
the first experience group and those with more than 40 years into the top experience group.
The worker counts (and hours worked) obtained from this sample will be the basis for the
construction of our labor aggregates in each industry (and state).


3     Descriptive statistics

There is great heterogeneity in the distribution of unauthorized workers across industries
and states in the United States. While the share of undocumented workers in employment is
4.9 percent for the U.S. as a whole, this figure is much higher in some states. In California,
the employment share of undocumented workers is 10.2 percent, and it ranges between 6.2




                                              6
and 8.7 percent in Texas, Nevada, New Jersey and New York.6
    Likewise, the distribution of unauthorized workers across industries varies widely, as il-
lustrated by Table 1. Of the roughly 7.1 million undocumented foreign-born workers in the
U.S. in 2011–2013, the largest concentrations are found in the Leisure and Hospitality sector
(1.3 million), Construction (1.1 million), Professional and Business services (1.0 million),
and Manufacturing (0.9 million). However, the industries with the highest undocumented
shares are Agriculture (18 percent),7 Construction (13 percent), and Leisure and Hospital-
ity (10 percent), as can be seen in column 4.8 In other industries, the undocumented are
smaller shares of total employment, but they are never absent altogether except from Gov-
ernment (due to the design of the imputation procedure). Even in industries with relatively
high education requirements, such as Finance and Information, undocumented immigrants
account for about 2 percent of the workforce.
    Although their numbers and shares of unauthorized immigrants have been declining in
recent years (Passel and Cohn, 2014), roughly half of unauthorized immigrants are Mexican.
Table 2 reports a breakdown of unauthorized workers by national origin (Mexico, Central
and South America, Asia and Others) and industry. According to our data 3.8 million
unauthorized workers (55% of the total) are Mexican, 1.8 million (26%) originate from
Central and South America, and 0.9 million from Asia (13%). The industries employing the
highest numbers of unauthorized Mexican workers are Leisure and Hospitality (0.78 million)
and Construction (0.74 million). These two industries also employ the highest numbers of
Central and South American unauthorized workers. In contrast, the industries that employ
the highest numbers of Asian unauthorized workers are Professional and business services
(0.17 million), Leisure and hospitality (0.14 million) and Wholesale and retail trade (0.14
million).
    Our data also reveal large di↵erence in weekly earnings across industries, nativity and
documentation status. As displayed in Table 3, on average across all industries, the weekly
wages for U.S.-born workers are $1,039. Legal immigrants earn, on average, slightly more
($1,050). In comparison the earnings of unauthorized workers are about 40 percent lower
($581 per week). This ordinal ranking of wages is observed in several industries, although
natives earn on average more than legal immigrants in some industries. In Agriculture, the
   6
     In absolute numbers, the five states with the most undocumented workers are California, Texas, New
York, Florida, and Illinois (Table 12).
   7
     The foreign-born share in Agriculture may be substantially higher than the ACS implies because of the
high prevalence of seasonal workers.
   8
     Note also that these shares are practically unchanged if we compute them on the basis of hours worked
(as in column 6), rather than employment.



                                                    7
weekly earnings of natives, documented foreign-born and undocumented foreign-born are
$734, $491 and $378. Likewise in Construction natives earn $962, compared to $803 and
$510 for documented and undocumented immigrants, respectively. In contrast, in Educa-
tional and health services, the highest earnings correspond to legal immigrants ($1,115),
followed by natives ($962) and by undocumented immigrants ($641).
        It is also interesting to scrutinize further the large variation in the average weekly
wages earned by unauthorized workers across industries, shown in the rightmost column
of Table 3. Across industries we observe large di↵erences, ranging from the roughly $400
paid in Agriculture and Leisure and hospitality to these workers, to the approximately
$1,300 paid in the Information sector.
        To some extent these di↵erences in average wages are due to the higher concentra-
tion of undocumented workers in low-wage industries, such as Leisure and hospitality or
Agriculture. As one would expect, the di↵erences in average wages that remain when we
condition on industry of employed are partly due to di↵erences in educational attainment
and in (potential) work experience. As documented in Table 4, native and foreign-born
workers with legal status have, respectively, 13.9 and 13.3 years of education, which is al-
most 3 years more than the average undocumented worker (10.6 years). Similarly, native
and legal foreign-born workers have 3.4 and 5.8 years of potential experience more than
undocumented immigrants (Table 5). Nonetheless, as we discuss later (in the calibration),
residual productivity di↵erences also play an important role in accounting for wage di↵er-
ences by nativity and documentation status, after accounting for industry of employment,
and measured education and potential experience.


4        Theoretical framework

The economy consists of j = 1, ..., J industries. Output in industry j is produced by means
of a constant-returns Cobb-Douglas production function:
                                                           ↵   1 ↵j
                                             Y j = Aj K j j L j       ,                       (1)

where ↵j 2 (0, 1) is the capital share in industry j.

4.1        Labor Aggregate

Let us now describe in detail the labor aggregate, L, in the previous equation.9 We allow
workers to di↵er in education (e = 1, ..., E), potential years of work experience (x = 1, ..., X),
    9
        To simplify our notation we now omit the industry j subindex.


                                                       8
nativity (U.S.-born or foreign-born) and, if foreign-born, also by documentation status. In
total the number of labor types is given by 3 ⇥ E ⇥ X.
    We aggregate all these types of workers by means of a multi-nested constant-elasticity
of substitution (CES) aggregator.10 To construct the labor aggregate we need data on the
number of workers in each industry by education, experience, nativity, and documentation
status. We denote the vector of data by V = {N at, DF B, U F B}, where N at, DF B, and
U F B stand for the counts (or hours worked) of native workers, documented foreign-born
(DFB), and undocumented foreign-born (UFB). In addition we need values for an array of
worker productivity terms ⇥ = {✓}, one for each worker type and industry, and elasticities
of substitution across worker types ⌃ = { }. It is helpful to employ the following compact
notation to make explicit the inputs needed to compute the labor aggregates L(V ; ⇥, ⌃).
    Specifically, for each industry, the labor aggregate is given by four levels of CES ag-
gregation, with potentially di↵erent elasticities of substitution. To maximize comparability
with previous studies, we choose the following nesting structure:11



          L = C(Le=1 , ..., Le=E |✓e ,       e)

        Le = C(Le,x=1 , ..., Le,x=X |✓e,x ,        x ),   for e = 1, 2, 3, E
       Le,x = C(N ate,x , LFe,xB |✓e,x
                                   N at F B
                                       , ✓e,x , ,    n ),     for e = 1, ..., E and x = 1, ..., X
      LFe,xB = C(DF Be,x , U F Be,x |✓e,x
                                      DF B U F B
                                          , ✓e,x ,               d ),   for e = 1, ..., E and x = 1, ..., X,

where the CES aggregator is defined by
                                     ⇣                                                               ⌘   1
                                            /(      1)             /(     1)               /(   1)
          C(x1 , x2 , ..., xM |✓, ) = ✓1 x1              + ✓2 x2               + ... + ✓M xM                 .

In words, we have four levels of CES aggregation, depicted graphically in Figure 1. The
fourth level aggregates the labor services of documented and undocumented foreign-born
workers with the same education and experience. The third level aggregates the labor
services of foreign-born and native workers with the same education and experience. The
second level aggregates labor across experience groups, for a given education level, and the
first level combines education groups. Each CES aggregator is parameterized by an elasticity
  10
     The use of this multi-nest CES production function for the analysis of the economic e↵ects of immigration
was pioneered Borjas (2003) and later extended by Ottaviano and Peri (2012). In these studies the production
function was assumed to apply to the economy as a whole.
  11
     This nesting structure is based on model A in Ottaviano and Peri (2012). The only di↵erence is that
we have introduced an additional layer that disaggregates the foreign-born population by documentation
status. If documented and undocumented foreign-born workers are assumed to be perfect substitutes then
this framework corresponds exactly to the one in Ottaviano and Peri (2012).


                                                          9
of substitution and productivity coefficients for each labor input. One productivity term in
each nest is normalized to unity.
       We note that there are four relevant elasticities of substitution, collected in vector
⌃ = ( e,      x,   n,   d ).   Because workers are increasingly more similar in terms of observable
skills as we move up the CES layers, it makes sense to consider elasticities of substitution
that (weakly) increase as we move from level 1 through 4. The elasticities of substitution
appearing in levels 1 through 3 have already been estimated by Ottaviano and Peri (2012).
The elasticity of substitution between documented and undocumented foreign-born workers
with the same education and potential experience has not been estimated in the literature,
as far as we know.12 Thus we will consider a range of di↵erent values and check our results
for robustness.
       Let us now discuss which parameters vary by industry and which do not. For industry j,
the labor aggregate will be computed as follows: Lj = L(Vj ; ⇥j , ⌃). Namely, we shall assume
that the elasticities of substitution estimated by Ottaviano and Peri (2012) apply across
all industries. Worker-type productivities and the counts of workers and hours worked,
however, will vary by industry, as observed in the data.

4.2      Capital

Let us now turn to the stock of capital. We assume that employers have access to a perfectly
elastic capital market, with a fixed rental rate R. For our application it is conceptually
helpful to distinguish between short-run and long-run e↵ects. The key distinction between
the two time horizons is whether the capital stock is assumed to remain fixed or adjusts
over time.
       In the long run, we assume that the capital stock adjusts over time so that when the
workforce changes, the marginal product of capital in each industry adjusts so as to return
to its original value (R).
       It is straightforward to verify that because of constant-returns to scale in the industry
production functions, the long-run capital stock in each industry is proportional to the size
of the labor aggregate, that is, Kj = j Lj .13 As a result the long-run relationship between
  12
     Implicitly, previous studies have assumed it was infinity.
  13
     Let R denote the (constant) rate of returns of capital and MPK the marginal product of capital. Because
of linear homogeneity in the production function, R = M P K(Kj , Lj ) = M P K(j , 1). Thus capital per unit
of labor will remain invariant to changes in the labor aggregate, once the capital stock has adjusted. As a
result, we can write Y = A (K(L))↵ L1 ↵ = (Aj ↵ ) L = B LR L. Note that we also assume that total factor
productivity is constant throughout.




                                                     10
the labor aggregate and the level of output in an industry is given by

                                                   Yj = BjLR Lj .                                          (2)

In contrast, we assume that the capital stock, Kj , is invariant to changes in labor in the
short run. Thus the short-run relationship between output and labor will be given by

                                                    ⇣        ⌘
                                      ↵     1 ↵j          ↵     1   ↵j           1 ↵j
                          Y j = Aj K j j L j       = Aj K j j L j        = BjSR Lj      .                  (3)

    These expressions show that changes in the workforce will a↵ect industry output dif-
ferently in the short and long runs, with the di↵erence in the relative e↵ects being entirely
determined by the labor share in the industry, 1                ↵j . For instance, an increase (decrease)
in the size of the workforce will typically lead to a smaller increase (decrease) in industry
output in the short run than in the long run. The reason is that temporarily, production will
have to be carried out with a sub-optimally low (high) stock of capital. Once the industry
is able to resize its stock of capital, the full economic impact of the change in the workforce
will materialize. Because not all worker types are the same, the quantitative impact of a
shock to the size of the workforce will not only depend on its overall size, but also on the
skill composition of the new workers and on how substitutable they are with the rest of the
workforce. We also note that the labor share 1                 ↵j varies widely across industries, as we
will discuss in the next section. This will imply that some industries will be much more
responsive in the short run to changes in the workforce than others.


5     Calibration

We need to assign values to the parameters of the model: {1                   ↵j , BjLR , BjSR , ⇥j , ⌃}, where
only the elasticities of substitution ⌃ are assumed to be equal across industries. In our
calibration we will consider J = 12 industries, E = 4 levels of education and X = 8
potential experience brackets.

5.1     Elasticities of substitution

The first step consists in choosing values for the elasticities of substitution. As noted ear-
lier, ( e ,   x,   n)   have already been estimated in the literature. We follow Ottaviano and
Peri (2012) and set ( e ,       x,   n)   = (3, 6, 20). The elasticities of substitution across education
groups and across experience groups (with a given education) are fairly uncontroversial. The
elasticity of substitution between native and immigrant labor within education-experience


                                                        11
cells is more disputed. Borjas (2003) assumes that this elasticity is infinite, whereas Man-
acorda et al. (2012) estimate it to be around 10 using data for the U.K. Thus our choice of
a value of 20 seems reasonable. At any rate we will examine the sensitivity of our results
to the value assumed for this parameter.
       In contrast, the elasticity of substitution between documented and undocumented foreign-
born workers (within education-experience cells),               d,   is unknown. As far as we know, all
previous studies have implicitly assumed this elasticity to be infinite. Accordingly, we pick
a high value for this parameter (         d   = 1, 000), and will carry out sensitivity analysis.

5.2      Productivities by type of labor and labor aggregates

We follow a sequential process to calibrate productivity terms ⇥j and to compute the
CES aggregates at each level. The process relies crucially on data on relative wages and
employment (or hours worked). We carry out this process separately for each industry, but
in the remainder of the section we omit the industry subindex j to ease notation.
       We begin with level 4, which combines documented and undocumented foreign-born
workers. Using equation (1), we first calculate the relative marginal product of labor for
documented and undocumented foreign-born workers with a specific level of education and
experience. Under the assumption that wages are given by marginal products, we have
                                          !✓           ◆
                           DF B
                          we,x       DF B
                                    ✓e,x     DF Be,x 1/ d
                           UF B
                                =    UF B
                                                            .                       (4)
                          we,x      ✓e,x      U F Be,x

This expression says that the relative DFB-UFB wage depends on the relative productivity
between these two types of workers and their relative abundance.14 We normalize ✓e,x
                                                                                 U F B = 1.

Thus given a value for         d,   and data on relative wages and relative labor supplies, we can
compute the value for         DF B .
                             ✓e,x      More intuitively, relative productivities are determined by
relative wages, after adjusting for relative supplies.
       Once the relative productivity term has been backed out, we can then compute, for each
cell (e, x), the labor aggregate LFe,xB using

                                LFexB = C(DF Be,x , U F Be,x |✓e,x
                                                               DF B
                                                                    ,       d ).                             (5)

We are then ready to move up to level 3. Analogous to the previous argument, we derive the
expression for relative wages between native and foreign-born labor with the same education
  14
    This equation is also the basis for the estimation of d in Ottaviano and Peri (2012). Conditional on fixed
e↵ects for education and experience, the elasticity of substitution is identified on the basis of the correlation
between changes in the relative size of the two groups and the relative wage.


                                                       12
and experience:                                         !✓
                                   N at          N at                        ◆       1/
                                  we,x          ✓e,x            N ate,x                   n

                                   FB
                                        =        FB
                                                                                              .          (6)
                                  we,x          ✓e,x             LFe,xB
                         F B = 1. Given data on the relative wage on the left-hand side,
As before, we normalize ✓e,x
and the relative employment supply of the two labor types, we can pin down the value for
                                                  N at . In turn we can then compute labor
the relative native-immigrant productivity terms ✓e,x
aggregate Le,x using
                                    Lex = C(N ate,x , LFe,xB |✓e,x
                                                               N at
                                                                    ,                n ).                (7)

Turning now to level 2, for each cell e, we can obtain ✓e,x from
                                    ✓          ◆✓          ◆    1/   x
                           we,x         ✓e,x        Le,x
                                =                                        , for x = 2, ..., X,            (8)
                           we,1         ✓e,1        Le,1

and then compute aggregate Le for each e using15

                          Le = C(Le,1 , ..., Le,X |✓e,x ,            x ),   for x = 2, ..., X.           (9)

Finally, level 1 relates the relative wages between education level e = 2, ..., E and the lowest
level of education. For each cell e, we obtain ✓e from
                                ✓ ◆ ✓ ◆ 1/ e
                          we      ✓e     Le
                             =                     , for e = 2, ..., E,                                 (10)
                          w1      ✓1     L1
and compute L using
                                         L = C(L1 , ..., L4 |✓e ,             e ).                      (11)

       At this point it is helpful to examine the values that we obtain for these parameters.
Table 6 reports the relative productivities for three select industries characterized by high
shares of undocumented foreign-born employment (Agriculture, Construction, and Leisure
and Hospitality), along with the average for the corresponding productivity terms across
all 12 industries (columns 6 and 10). Several observations are worth noting. First, columns
3 to 6 show that on average across education-experience groups, the productivity of native
relative to foreign-born labor is larger than one (after adjusting for relative scarcity).16 In
Agriculture the mean (across skill groups) for this parameter is 1.41, in Construction 1.31,
and in Leisure and Hospitality, 1.12. In comparison, averaging across all industries, we find
that native workers tend to be about 21 percent more productive than foreign-born labor
  15
     We have normalized ✓e,1 = 1 and ✓e,x denotes the vector of relative productivity terms across experience
groups with education level e.
  16
     Strictly speaking, native workers earn more than foreign-born workers with the same education and
potential experience, after controlling for their relative employment (or aggregate hours worked).


                                                           13
with the same education and potential experience. Let us now turn to columns 7-10, which
focus on the productivity of documented foreign-born workers relative to observationally
equivalent undocumented ones. Averaging across all industries (and skill groups), we find
that documented workers are 27 percent more productive than undocumented ones with the
same education and experience. In Agriculture, Construction, and Leisure and Hospitality
the documentation premium is higher, ranging from 27 to 39 percent.
       It is also interesting to move up one more level and examine the relative productivities
across education groups. The results are reported in Table 7. For any given industry, as
we move toward higher education levels (to the right on the table), the coefficients increase
almost always monotonically. This is a reflection of the returns to education in each industry.
On average across all industries, the productivity of high-school graduates relative to high-
school dropouts in the same industry is twice as high. Having some college education leads
to an additional (but moderate) increase in productivity. Finally, our calibration implies
that college graduates are more than 4 times as productive as high-school dropouts, and
about twice as productive as high-school graduates.

5.3      Labor shares

Having calibrated the relative productivities and computed the level-1 labor aggregate for
each industry, Lj , we are now able to turn toward the parameters of the industry production
functions: labor shares and aggregate productivity terms.
       We computed the labor shares at the industry level using data from the Bureau of
Economic Analysis and following the methodology in Figura and Ratner (2015). In essence,
we construct labor shares in each industry as compensation of employees divided by value
added less taxes on production and imports (net of subsidies). We calculated these shares
for years 2011, 2012 and 2013 separately and then took the average. Table 8 reports the
resulting values. There is a large amount of variation in labor shares across industries,
which range here between 0.23 and 0.86. Agriculture, Mining and Financial activities have
the lowest labor shares of all industries (below 0.25). In contrast, service industries display
labor shares that range between 0.70 and 0.86. When considering all industries together
(excluding defense) the labor share we obtain is 0.57. Our estimates of industry labor
shares are consistent with the historical patterns discussed by Elsby et al. (2013) in a recent
review.17
  17
    Variation in labor shares across industries dwarfs both the small year-to-year fluctuations in industry
labor shares visible in Table 8 and the recent secular decline in the aggregate labor share. The latter is the
main focus of Elsby et al. (2013) and Karabarbounis and Neiman (2014), who suggest that either import


                                                     14
5.4     Aggregate productivity by industry

We calibrate aggregate productivities on the basis of the relationships between industry
output and the overall labor aggregates derived in equations (2) and (3). Given the values
for the labor aggregate in each industry, and the value of GDP for that industry in year
2013, we back out the aggregate productivity terms.18 Specifically, for each industry j, we
set
                                                         Yj2013
                                           BjSR =         1 ↵j                                        (12)
                                                         Lj
                                                         Yj2013
                                           BjLR    =            .                                     (13)
                                                          Lj
Respectively, these are the short and long-run aggregate productivity terms for each industry
j. We are now equipped to use the calibrated model for our counterfactual analysis.


6      Counterfactuals

We are now ready to tackle the main goal of the paper: to assess the economic contribution
of the undocumented foreign-born population to the industries that employ them. In a
manner analogous to how trade economists assess the gains from trade, we estimate the
contribution of undocumented foreign-born workers (UFB) by comparing industry produc-
tion in a counterfactual scenario without UFB to the baseline with the observed workforce
in year 2013.19
      Our thought experiment is also helpful to estimate the economic costs associated to
removing unauthorized workers from the United States. However, it is important to keep in
mind that a full treatment of this question would require to take into account the direct costs
of locating and deporting all these individuals, in addition to the costs of increasing border
enforcement, and the consequences of disrupting families and communities throughout the
whole country. Thus our analysis only provides a very narrow interpretation of the economic
costs of mass deportation.
      It is helpful to consider the following stylized timing. Period 0 is the baseline and
corresponds to the data in 2013. The labor force contains over 7 million unauthorized
competition or declining prices of investment goods, or both, may be at play. Elsby et al. (2013) helpfully
explore the array of extant measures of the labor share. Our measures are essentially equal to those of
Figura and Ratner (2015), which match the “compensation (payroll share)” measure presented by Elsby et
al. at the top of their Table 1.
   18
      In this calculation we build labor aggregates on the basis of hours worked.
   19
      The gains from trade are assessed by comparing income under a no-trade counterfactual to the baseline
with the observed trade levels.


                                                    15
workers. In period 1 the unauthorized population is removed but the stock of capital
remains constant (short run). Because of its relative abundance, the marginal product of
capital (MPK) falls below its rental rate. In period 2 the stock of capital has adjusted
(downward) so that the MPK rises back to equate the rental rate (long run). The following
table summarizes the key information.

                             Counterfactual scenarios: Removal of UFB
           Scenario          Output       Labor          Capital                                         MPK

           (0) Baseline           Y0                  L0             K0 = L0               M P K(K0 , L0 ) = R

           (1) Short run       YeSR        e 1 = L0
                                           L               UFB           K0                            e1 ) < R
                                                                                            M P K(K0 , L

           (2) Long run        YeLR        e 1 = L0
                                           L               UFB       e 1 = L
                                                                     K      e1                    e1, L
                                                                                            M P K(K   e1 ) = R

                Notes: Variables with a tilde denote counterfactual values that are
                not observed in the data, such as the workforce or the stock of capital
                in the removal scenario. UFB stands for undocumented foreign-born.
                R denotes the (constant) rental rate of capital. L e 1 = L0 U F B is
                symbolic notation for the labor aggregate after removing undocu-
                mented workers.
       To be more specific, this is how we compute the foreign-born labor aggregates in the
baseline and in the counterfactual scenario without UFB workers:

                      LFe,xB = C(DF Be,x , U F Be,x |✓e,x
                                                      DF B
                                                           ,                 d)                                   (14)
                                                                                            d
                      f0 F B = C(DF Be,x , 0|✓DF B ,
                      L                                         d)   = ✓DF B            d       1
                                                                                                    DF Be,x ,     (15)
                         e,x                  e,x


for each education-experience cell.
       We define the short-run e↵ect of the removal of the undocumented foreign-born popu-
lation to industry j as the ratio of the output in the long-run scenario and the baseline (as
observed in the 2013 data).20 That is,
                                                  !                                    !1       ↵
                                  SR       YeSR              e1
                                                        AK0↵ L 1
                                                                     ↵            e1
                                                                                  L
                              G        =              =                  =                          .             (16)
                                             Y0         AK0↵ L10     ↵            L0
       Similarly, we define the long-run cost of the removal of the undocumented foreign-born
population to industry j as the ratio of the output in long-run scenario to baseline. That
is,
  20
       We omit the j subindex to lighten the notation.



                                                           16
                                         !
                                  YeLR            e ↵L
                                                 AK   e1       ↵          e 1 )↵ L
                                                                       A(L      e1    ↵       e1
                                                                                               L
                        GLR =                =      1 1
                                                                   =               1
                                                                                           =      ,    (17)
                                    Y0           AK0↵ L10      ↵
                                                                       A(L0 )↵ L10    ↵       L0
         where  is the capital-labor ratio that results when the stock of capital in the industry
is such that its marginal product equals the rental rate for capital.21
         One remarkable feature of equations (16) and (17) is that the short and long-run contri-
butions, as we have defined them, are not functions of the stock of capital. They are solely
functions of the ratio of labor aggregates with and without the undocumented population.
We also note that both GSR and GLR will be smaller than (or equal to) one given that
e 0 > L1 and 0 < ↵ < 1. Furthermore, the short-run cost of removal will always be smaller
L
than the long-run one, with the gap between the two being exclusively determined by the
labor share in the industry. As a result, in industries with higher labor share the short and
long-run e↵ects will be closer to each other.
         We calculate dollar amounts for the short and long-run e↵ects as follows:

                                                                   !
                                                   YeSR
                       SRE = YeSR        Y0 =                  1 Y0 = GSR              1 Y0            (18)
                                                     Y0
                                                                   !
                                                   YeLR
                       LRE = YeLR        Y0 =                  1 Y0 = GLR              1 Y0 .          (19)
                                                     Y0

         Because the terms GSR and GLR will typically be lower than one, the SRE and LRE
dollar gains will be negative, that is, they will amount to losses, and the long-run losses will
be larger than the short-run ones in each industry: LRE < SRE  0.


7         Results
7.1        Removal of Unauthorized Workers

We are now ready to turn to our estimates of the contribution of the undocumented popu-
lation to the output of each industry. We do so by quantifying the reduction in output in
the counterfactual removal scenario compared to the baseline.
         The results are reported in Table 9. The first column reports GDP (in billions of dollars)
for each industry in year 2013. Columns 2-4 report the short-run e↵ects associated to the
thought experiment of removing all unauthorized workers, measured by the ratio of industry
    21
    By definition, the long-run is characterized by a capital-labor ratio at which the MPK equals the rental
rate of capital. We are also assuming that at the baseline the economy is at a long-run equilibrium.



                                                          17
output in the removal scenario relative to the baseline. Column 2 measures labor services
using employment, while column 3 uses hours worked. As it turns out, the results (in this
and the other tables) are practically identical regardless of which of the two measures of
work we use. Naturally, all coefficients in columns 2 and 3 are below 1, indicating that
output is lower in the removal scenario in all industries. The highest short-run costs in
terms of relative output lost are su↵ered by Construction and Leisure and Hospitality, at
over 5 percent. Column 4 quantifies the short-run contributions in 2013 dollar amounts,
taking into account the size in terms of GDP of each of the industries. By this measure
the largest losses associated to removal are found in Manufacturing, Wholesale and retail
trade, and Leisure and hospitality, at about $30-40 billion each. The overall short-run loss
across the 12 industries amounts to $241 billion.
       We now turn to columns 5-7, which report the long-run e↵ects. As expected, once
employers downsize their capital to match the reduced workforce, output falls further. As
seen in columns 5 and 6, the largest relative losses are found in Agriculture (9 percent),
Leisure and Hospitality (8 percent), and Construction (8 percent). In terms of dollars, the
largest losses again correspond to Manufacturing, followed by Financial activities, Wholesale
and Retail trade, and Leisure and hospitality. The overall long-run annual loss amounts to
$434 billion, doubling the short-run loss. This figure amounts to 3% of the private-sector
GDP accounted for by our 12 industries.
       It is worth noting that a naı̈ve calculation that did not take into account the skill
distribution of unauthorized workers, their relative productivity, and their substitutability
in terms of native (and documented foreign-born) workers, would have led to substantial
overestimates of losses from the removal of unauthorized workers, and thus, their economic
contribution. We measure this bias in the robustness section.22
       The chief reason for the lower contribution to output, relative to employment, is found in
the lower productivity of unauthorized workers relative to native workers in most skill cells
and industries. The lower relative productivity stems from two di↵erent sources. The first
is due to the ‘worse’ distribution in terms of education and potential work experience. As
shown in Table 5, immigrants tend to be younger than natives (by about 3 years) and than
legal immigrants (by about 6 years) in most industries. In addition their average educational
attainment is lower by about 3 years of schooling than that of native and legal immigrants
  22
    In our setup with constant returns to scale in industry production functions, and the elastic long-run
supply of capital, the naı̈ve calculation would map, one-for-one, the employment shares of unauthorized
workers into shares in output. Thus a reduction of almost 5% in employment would imply a long-run
reduction in output of about 5%, but our estimate is a substantially lower 3% drop in output.



                                                   18
(Table 4). The second source of the productivity disadvantage of unauthorized workers is
reflected in the relative productivity parameters. Compared to documented foreign-born
workers with the same education and potential experience in the same industry, and after
adjusting for relative supply, our calibration implied that documented foreign-born workers
were on average 27 percent more productive than unauthorized ones (last row Table 6).23
In addition, relative to natives in the same skill group and industry, foreign-born labor also
appears to be less productive than native labor by about 21 percent when averaging across
all industries.24

7.2     Robustness

We now consider several robustness checks in order to assess the sensitivity of our main
results to the values assumed for the elasticities of substitution, and to gauge the importance
of allowing for heterogeneous productivity across all types of labor. Throughout this section
we focus on long-run results, which do not depend on the values adopted for the labor shares.
    Given the higher uncertainty around the specific values for the elasticities of substitution
between natives and immigrants (                    n)   and between documented and undocumented foreign-
born workers (      d ),   we will focus our sensitivity analysis on these two elasticities. Under the
restriction that the elasticities of substitution need to be weakly increasing as we move up
the CES nests (0           e      x      n           d ),   a reasonably large range of elasticities around our
preferred values is contained in the first three scenarios in the table below:

                                    Robustness Scenarios
                                       Educ. Exp. Nat-FB                         DFB-UFB    Productivities
         Scenario                               e               x          n         d           ⇥
         Baseline                           3                   6          20     1,000      Calibrated
         Low d                              3                   6          20      20        Calibrated
         High n                             3                   6        1,000    1,000      Calibrated
         Equal productivities               3                   6          20     1,000           1

    After examining the quantitative role of the elasticities of substitution, we turn to gauge
the role played by the labor productivity terms (⇥). Accordingly, the fourth scenario adopts
  23
     The table also uncovers a great deal of heterogeneity across industries, averaging across all skill groups in
Agriculture and Construction, we find that the relative productivity of DFB over UFB is 39 and 36 percent,
respectively.
  24
     We stress that this comparison is based on labor aggregates, which already incorporate productivity
terms. Specifically, the native-immigrant productivity gap partly reflects the fact that an important share
of all foreign-born workers are unauthorized and, thus, faces the productivity penalty discussed earlier. As
a result, it is not entirely correct to simply add up the productivity penalties of levels 4 (DFB-UFB) and 3
(Nat-FB).



                                                                    19
the baseline elasticities but imposes equal productivities across all groups of workers.25

7.2.1      Low substitution between documented and undocumented

One of the innovations in our setup is to allow for imperfect substitution between docu-
mented and undocumented foreign-born workers, conditional on the same education and
potential experience. Due to the lack of available estimates for this elasticity, in our base-
line calibration we have assumed a fairly high elasticity (              d   = 1, 000) in order to take a
conservative approach toward the contributions of the undocumented to production, and to
be consistent with the existing literature, which has implicitly assumed and infinite value.
       We now evaluate quantitatively the role played by this parameter. To do this we con-
sider a scenario where the only departure from the baseline parameter values is that the
documented-undocumented elasticity is set at               d   = 20, which is the lowest value subject
to the constraint requiring that elasticities of substitution increase (weakly) as we move up
the CES levels and compare workers that are increasingly more similar in terms of skills.
Because this assumption is relatively extreme, we view the resulting loss of removal to be
unrealistically large.
       The results are presented in Table 10. Columns 1 and 2 reproduce the long-run e↵ects
of removal reported earlier (scenario 0). Columns 3 and 4 (scenario 1) collect the results
that we obtain we we set         d   = 20, leaving all parameters as in the baseline scenario. The
overall long-run loss of removal is now $478 billion, about 6% higher than in scenario 0.
This is intuitive given that, generally, lowering the elasticity of substitution makes inputs
less replaceable. The important take-away is that despite the fairly substantial reduction
in the elasticity, the overall estimate of the long-run e↵ects of removal is fairly close to the
value in scenario 0.

7.2.2      High substitution between natives and immigrants

One of the main di↵erences between the results in Borjas (2003) and Ottaviano and Peri
(2012) lies in the value for the elasticity of substitution between natives and foreign-born
workers with the same education and potential experience. While the former study imposed
a value of infinity, the latter estimated this parameter and found it to be around 20, which
is the value we adopted in our calibration.
  25
     Note that we are still treating labor as an aggregate of many di↵erent types, as indicated by the less
than infinite elasticities of substitution. We are only assuming that if two groups in the same nest are equal
in size (in terms of employment or hours) their wages need to be equal as well.




                                                     20
       In order to assess the implications of this choice for our results, we now examine a
scenario where native and foreign-born workers are e↵ectively perfect substitutes of each
other. Specifically, the only di↵erence relative to the parameters in scenario 0 is that
the native-immigrant elasticity is now set at            n   = 1, 000. Since this is the highest value
consistent with the values assumed for the other elasticities and the monotonicity constraint,
we view the resulting estimate as a sort of lower bound.
       The results are collected in columns 5 and 6 (scenario 2) in Table 10. The overall loss
associated to the removal of unauthorized workers is $440 billion, less than 3% lower than in
scenario 0. Once again, the qualitative finding of a lower value is consistent with the intuition
that as elasticities of substitution increase, workers are more easily replaceable and therefore
the loss associated to removal of a subset of the workforce is reduced. More importantly,
this result shows that our main estimates are robust to considering substantially higher
values for the elasticity of substitution between native and immigrant workers.

7.2.3      No productivity di↵erences

We now assess the role played by heterogeneity in the type-productivity terms, a key ele-
ment in our approach. To gauge this point we compute counterfactuals where we force all
productivity terms ⇥j to be equal to one. As a result, while still considered as di↵erent
types of labor that are not perfectly substitutable, all worker types are now assumed to be
equally productive.26
       The results are reported in columns 7 and 8 in Table 10. What stands out in these
columns is that the losses from removal are now substantially larger than before for most
industries. In total the dollar amount associated to the removal of unauthorized workers is
$747 billion, which is 65 percent larger than our main estimates (scenario 0).
       The reason why removing productivity di↵erences between workers produces an overesti-
mate of the production e↵ect is that our calibration uncovered large productivity di↵erences
between documented and undocumented workers, as well as between foreign-born and U.S.-
born labor. Imposing a value of one for all relative productivity terms overestimates the
productivity and, therefore, the contribution to output of unauthorized workers.
  26
    Clearly, the resulting relative wage gaps in the model will typically not be consistent with the data on
relative wages and relative employment.




                                                    21
7.2.4      Summing up

In sum, the sensitivity tests just presented show that our main results are robust to a wide
range of values for the elasticities of substitution across labor types. We have also learned
that accounting for relative productivity di↵erences across labor types is crucial to obtain
an accurate quantitative assessment of the economic contribution of unauthorized workers.

7.3      Cumulative e↵ects

From a policy perspective it is interesting to produce cumulative e↵ects over a period of
several years. Naturally, doing this requires taking a stance about the speed of adjustment
of the capital stock at the industry level. As discussed earlier, following a reduction in the
workforce, industry capital-labor ratios will adjust downward. This adjustment is likely to
be gradual but can take place fairly rapidly if equipment can be reallocated easily to other
industries or countries.
      To fix ideas, we consider the following thought experiment. Suppose that in year T all
unauthorized workers are removed from the U.S. economy and let us compute the cumulative
e↵ects over the following decade. A lower bound estimate for this e↵ect can be obtained
by assuming that capital remains constant over the 10-year period. In this case there’s
an abundance of capital that limits the size of the income loss associated to the removal.
Likewise an upper bound estimate can be computed by assuming that already in year T
the capital stock has fully adjusted. In this case the loss of labor is accompanied by the
reduction in the stock of capital, maximizing the loss in terms of income and production.
We also consider two intermediate scenarios where capital adjustment occurs gradually and
takes 5 or 10 years, respectively, to complete.
      The first step in the calculation is to express our estimated income losses as a share
of overall GDP, including the public sector. In Table 9 we found that the income losses
amounted to $241 and $434.4 billion in the short and long runs, respectively. As a share
of baseline GDP, these losses were 1.4% and 2.6% in the short and long runs, respectively.
Next, we simulate the e↵ects of the removal of unauthorized workers in year T = 2017.
For our lower bound calculation, we obtain GDP projections for years 2017-2026 (from the
Congressional Budget Office) and apply an annual 1.4% loss.27 Likewise, the upper bound
calculation is produced by applying an annual 2.6% loss to projected GDP for each year
between 2017 and 2026. For the intermediate scenarios we linearly interpolate the annual
loss rates so that we reach the long-run loss rate of 2.6% in 5 and 10 years, respectively.
 27
      We use the current-price GDP projections produced by the CBO.


                                                  22
       Table 11 reports our findings. Column 1 reports the lower-bound calculation. Over
time the dollar amount of the income loss grows, reflecting the projected increase in GDP
over the period 2016-2027. The resulting cumulative loss over the decade is $3.36 trillion.
Column 4 reports the projected losses under the assumption that capital adjustment takes
place immediately on the year of the removal. In this case the cumulative loss over the
decade almost doubles to $6.06 trillion. Columns 2 and 3 provide the estimates assuming
that capital adjusts in 10 and 5 years, which amount to cumulative losses of $4.8 and $5.5
trillion, respectively.
       In conclusion, these calculations suggests that the 10-year cumulative loss associated to
the removal of authorized workers in year 2017 would probably be around $5 trillion. It is
worth noting though that a full analysis of the costs associated to such a policy would need
to take into account many other factors, such as the costs of implementing the deportation
and enforcing borders.

7.4      State-level estimates

The geographic distribution of the unauthorized population in the United States is highly
uneven. In California the unauthorized share in employment is 10.2%, twice the national
average of 4.9%.28 Thus the economic contribution of unauthorized workers will also vary
widely across states, with larger (relative) e↵ects in states with a higher share of unautho-
rized workers.
       Providing estimates at the state level poses a challenge in terms of data. When attempt-
ing to construct industry-education-experience cells at the state level, we found many cells
that were empty or populated by an extremely low number of observations. As a result we
chose to adopt a less demanding approach that pools together all industries. In addition
we calibrated type-productivities (⇥) at the national level (pooling also all industries) and
imposed those calibrated values on all states. In terms of our earlier notation, we now
calculate baseline levels for the labor aggregates at the state level as functions of state-level
workforce data (pooling all industries), and national level type-productivities and elasticities
of substitution, that is, L(Vs ; ⇥, ⌃) in our previous notation.
       Table 13 collects the results for the top-10 states with the highest unauthorized shares
in hours worked (and employment).29 In California, unauthorized workers make up 11
  28
     Nevada and Texas immediately follow California in the ranking by the unauthorized share in employment
with 8.7%. For the values for all states, see Table 12.
  29
     These states are California, Nevada, Texas, New Jersey, New York, Arizona, Florida, Georgia, Illinois
and Maryland.



                                                   23
percent of all hours worked. Removal of these workers would lead to a 4 percent drop in
private-sector output in the short-run. This loss would increase up to 7 percent once capital
adjusts to the reduced workforce. In dollar terms, the annual losses for California would be
$83 and $136 billion in the short and long runs, respectively. In dollar terms, the other two
states experiencing the largest losses are Texas and New York, with long-run annual losses
of $83 and $54 billion. Relative to baseline GDP, the annual long-run losses from removal
would range from 4 to 7 percent in the 10 states considered here.

7.5   The Gains from Legalization

Having estimated the economic contribution of unauthorized workers to the industries that
employ them, it is natural to move on to consider the gains from providing legal status to
these workers.
   Following the pioneer work of Chiswick (1978), several studies have attempted to esti-
mate the income gains from naturalization (for legal immigrants). Bratsberg et al. (2002)
found wage gains of about 5 percent associated to obtaining citizenship. More recently,
the analysis in Pastor and Scoggins (2012) concludes that naturalization appears to lead
to income gains of about 10 percent. A number of studies have considered the gains from
legalization. Kossoudji and Cobb-Clark (2002) analyzed the wage e↵ects of the 1986 IRCA
amnesty and found that the wage penalty for being unauthorized amounted to 14 to 24
percent. More recently, Lynch and Oakford (2013) have estimated that gaining legal status
and citizenship would allow unauthorized immigrants to earn 25% more within five years of
the reform, increasing U.S. GDP by $1.4 trillion cumulatively over a 10-year period. Lof-
strom et al. (2013) reported that legalization produced earnings gains of about 20 percent
to unauthorized workers in that obtained legal status in 2003-2004, measuring from their
first U.S. job to earnings one year after legalization.
   The findings in the literature are largely consistent with the results of our calibration,
which implied that the relative productivity of documented foreign-born workers is almost
30 percent higher than that of unauthorized workers. Our sample has not distinguished
between naturalized foreign-born individuals and legal immigrants who are not U.S. citizens.
Thus our documented foreign-born group (DFB) contains both groups. Accordingly, the
higher productivity relative to undocumented foreign-born workers reflects the returns of
both legalization and citizenship.
   We can think about legalization as allowing undocumented foreign-born (UFB) workers
to operate under the same conditions as documented immigrants (DFB). In our framework


                                              24
this can be simulated by assuming that UFB workers become undistinguishable from DFB
workers possessing the same education and potential experience. Namely, in the legalization
scenario we compute the foreign-born labor aggregate as:


                                                                     d
     f2 F B = C(DF Be,x + U F Be,x , 0|✓DF B ,
     L                                            d)
                                                          DF B
                                                       = ✓e,x    d       1
                                                                             (DF Be,x + U F Be,x ) .
        e,x                             e,x


for each education-experience cell.
    Because unauthorized workers are now endowed with the higher productivity of docu-
mented foreign-born workers (that may also have been naturalized), legalization entails an
increase in the overall amount of labor. As a result, our theoretical model will imply that in
the short-run there will be a shortage of capital, which will push up its marginal product.
Over time industries will invest more in physical capital to regain the desired capital-labor
ratio, which will provide an additional boost to production.
    Let us now turn to the quantitative assessment of the e↵ects of legalization, summarized
in Table 14. Columns 1 and 2 report the short-run results. Clearly, the relative increases
in industry output are fairly small (column 1), reaching 1% only for Construction and
Leisure and hospitality. Column 2 translates the results into dollar amounts. The total
short-run gains from legalization amount to $47 billion annually. Columns 3 and 4 report
the corresponding figures for the long-run analysis. The largest relative gains are now for
Construction, with roughly a 2 percent increase in production (column 3). In dollar terms
the largest long-run annual gains accrue to Construction, Manufacturing and Wholesale
and retail trade, with $12-13 billion each. The overall long-run annual gains total $81.5
billion.
    In conclusion, granting legal status to unauthorized workers would increase their an-
nual economic contribution substantially in several industries. In Leisure and hospitality,
Construction and Agriculture, the long-run contribution of these workers would increase
private-sector GDP by 1.1 to 1.9 percent. For the economy as a whole, the long-run gains
would amount to about 0.5 percent of private-sector GDP.


8    Caveats

Our analysis has assumed that the removal of unauthorized workers from a particular in-
dustry would not trigger compensating flows from the rest of the economy. While clearly
restrictive, we believe this assumption is not implausible for several reasons.



                                             25
    Even though our calculations were produced for each industry in isolation of the others,
the spirit of the analysis is to assess the e↵ects of a simultaneous removal of unauthorized
workers from all industries. Thus unauthorized workers from one industry would not be
able to o↵set the departure of unauthorized workers in another. Even though native workers
and legal immigrants could potentially relocate to those industries, this is also unlikely. The
reason is that once the stock of capital adjusts to the reduced size of the workforce in a
given industry, the marginal product of labor in the industry will go back to its baseline
level (prior to the removal). As a result, the incentives of native and legal immigrant
workers to move to that industry would not be di↵erent from the incentives they faced in
the baseline scenario. O↵setting labor flows could potentially happen during the transition,
while capital is undergoing adjustments, but in practice short-run wage rigidities and other
frictions would probably pose a substantial impediment to this short-lived adjustment.
    Besides the theoretical arguments just presented, it is also illuminating to examine em-
pirical studies that are relevant to the discussion of the potential labor supply responses by
natives. In the context of agriculture in North Carolina, Clemens (2013) provides evidence
that the supply of native employment appears to be unresponsive to foreign employment
in the short run, ostensibly because “natives prefer almost any labor market outcome ...
to carrying out manual harvest and planting labor.” The nature of farm work might be
special enough that this result may not generalize perfectly across industries. But given
that unauthorized workers are probably less substitutable with native workers than the
foreign-born population at large, we believe it is unlikely that our results are biased due to
omitting employment responses of natives.30


9     Conclusions

Our main goals have been to provide estimates of the economic contribution of unauthorized
foreign-born workers in terms of production, and to simulate the additional gains that could
be obtained from o↵ering a path to legal status to these workers. Methodologically, we
have conducted a calibration and simulation analysis at the industry (and state) level and
distinguished between short and long-run e↵ects. The key strength of our framework is that
  30
     Empirical work analyzing the broader e↵ects of immigration on the labor force participation and em-
ployment rates of natives suggests that the labor supply response of native workers is very small (e.g. Card
(2005)). Additionally, work by Cortes and Tessada (2011), Farre et al. (2011) and Furtado (2016) has shown
that low-skilled immigration increases the labor supply of highly skilled native women, by providing more
a↵ordable child and elderly care. Thus the removal of unauthorized workers may even reduce the labor
supply of some groups of native workers.




                                                    26
it is able to incorporate the richness of the data in terms of the skills, wages and industry
of employment of unauthorized workers. In terms of data we have relied on a confidential
version of the American Community Survey that includes an indicator for documentation
status (Center for Migration Studies (2014)).
   Our analysis yields two main conclusions. First, the economic contribution to U.S. GDP
of the current unauthorized workers is substantial, at approximately 3% of private-sector
GDP annually, which amounts to close to $ 5 trillion over a 10-year period. These aggregate
estimates mask large di↵erences across industries and states. Unauthorized workers may
be responsible for 8-9% of the value-added in Agriculture, Construction, and Leisure and
Hospitality. Naturally, the economic contribution of unauthorized workers is larger in states
where this workers account for a large share of employment. For instance, our estimates
imply that the economic contribution of unauthorized workers to the economy is California
is around 7 percent of private-sector GDP in the state.
   It is important to note that, compared to their shares in employment, the contribution of
unauthorized workers to production is relatively smaller. The reason is that unauthorized
workers are less skilled, on average, and appear to be less productive than natives and
legal immigrants with the same observable skills. This may be a reflection of their more
limited job opportunities. In fact, our findings suggest that this productivity penalty can
be mitigated in part through legalization. Specifically, our second main finding is that that
legalization would increase the productivity of undocumented workers, triggering further
investment by employers. Legalization would increase the economic contribution of the
unauthorized population by about 20%, to 3.6% of private-sector GDP.
   We hope our analysis will spur additional research on this important question. The
framework and methodology proposed here can be fruitfully extended in several directions
that may deliver additional insights and more precise quantitative estimates.




                                             27
References
Baker, Bryan C. and Nancy Rytina, “Estimates of the Unauthorized Immigrant Popu-
  lation Residing in the United States: January 2012,” 2013. Washington, DC: Of ce
  of Immigration Statistics, Policy Directorate, US Department of Homeland Security.
  http://www.dhs.gov/sites/default/ les/publications/ois ill pe 2012 2.pdf.
Borjas, George, “The Labor Demand Curve is Downward Sloping: Reexamining the Impact
  of Immigration on the Labor Market,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, November 2003,
  118 (4), 1335–1375.
Borjas, George J., “The Labor Supply of Undocumented Immigrants,” NBER Working
  Papers 22102, National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc March 2016.
Bratsberg, Bernt, James F. Ragan, and Zafar M. Nasir, “The E↵ect of Naturalization on
  Wage Growth: A Panel Study of Young Male Immigrants,” Journal of Labor Economics,
  July 2002, 20 (3), 568–597.
Card, David, “Is the New Immigration Really so Bad?,” Economic Journal, November 2005,
  115 (507), F300–F323.
Center for Migration Studies, “Estimates of the Unauthorized Population,” 2014. Dataset
  based on the augmented American Community Survey datafiles hosted by IPUMS (Inte-
  grated Public Use Microdata Series), 2010 to 2013.
Chiswick, Barry R, “The E↵ect of Americanization on the Earnings of Foreign-born Men,”
 Journal of Political Economy, October 1978, 86 (5), 897–921.
Clemens, Michael, “The E↵ect of Foreign Labor on Native Employment: A Job-Specific
  Approach and Application to North Carolina Farms,” Working Paper 326, Center for
  Global Development May 2013.
Cortes, Patricia and José Tessada, “Low-Skilled Immigration and the Labor Supply of
  Highly Skilled Women,” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, July 2011, 3
  (3), 88–123.
Elsby, Michael W. L., Bart Hobijn, and Ayşegül Şahin, “The Decline of the U.S. Labor
  Share,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, Fall 2013, 2, 1–52.
Farre, Lidia, Gonzalez Libertad, and Ortega Francesc, “Immigration, Family Responsibil-
  ities and the Labor Supply of Skilled Native Women,” The B.E. Journal of Economic
  Analysis & Policy, June 2011, 11 (1), 1–48.
Figura,    Andrew      and    David    Ratner,     “The     Labor    Share    of   In-
  come and Equilibrium Unemployment,”              FEDS Notes,       June 8 2015.
  https://www.federalreserve.gov/econresdata/notes/feds-notes/2015/labor-share-of-
  income-and-equilibrium-unemployment-20150608.html.
Furtado, Delia, “Fertility Responses of High-Skilled Native Women to Immigrant Inflows,”
  Demography, February 2016, 53 (1), 27–53.
Karabarbounis, Loukas and Brent Neiman, “The Global Decline of the Labor Share,” Quar-
 terly Journal of Economics, January 2014, 129 (1), 61–103.
Kossoudji, Sherrie A. and Deborah A. Cobb-Clark, “Coming out of the Shadows: Learn-
 ing about Legal Status and Wages from the Legalized Population,” Journal of Labor
 Economics, July 2002, 20 (3), 598–628.



                                          28
Lofstrom, Magnus, Laura Hill, and Joseph Hayes, “Wage And Mobility E↵ects Of Legaliza-
  tion: Evidence From The New Immigrant Survey,” Journal of Regional Science, 02 2013,
  53 (1), 171–197.
Lynch, Robert and Patric Oakford, “The Economic E↵ects of Granting Legal Status
  and Citizenship to Undocumented Immigrants,” March 20 2013. Center for American
  Progress.
Manacorda, Marco, Alan Manning, and Jonathan Wadsworth, “The Impact Of Immigra-
 tion On The Structure Of Wages: Theory And Evidence From Britain,” Journal of the
 European Economic Association, February 2012, 10 (1), 120–151.
Ottaviano, Gianmarco I. P. and Giovanni Peri, “Rethinking the E↵ect of Immigration on
  Wages,” Journal of the European Economic Association, February 2012, 10 (1), 152–197.
Passel, Je↵rey S. and D’Vera Cohn, “Unauthorized Immigrant Totals Rise in 7 States, Fall
  in 14: Decline in Those From Mexico Fuels Most State Decreases,” November 18 2014.
  Washington, D.C.: Pew Research Center.
   and , “Share of Unauthorized Immigrant Workers in Production, Construction Jobs
  Falls Since 2007: In States, Hospitality, Manufacturing and Construction are Top Indus-
  tries,” March 26 2015. Washington, D.C.: Pew Research Center.
   and Rebecca L. Clark, “Immigrants in New York: Their Legal Status, Incomes and
  Taxes,” 1998. Washington, DC: Urban Institute.
Pastor, Manuel and Justin Scoggins, “Citizen Gain: The Economic Benefits of Natural-
  ization for Immigrants and the Economy,” December 2012. Center for the Study of
  Immigrant Integration.
   and , “Estimating the Eligible-to-Naturalize Population,” March 8 2016. Center for
  the Study of Immigrant Integration.
Rivera-Batiz, Francisco L., “Undocumented workers in the labor market: An analysis of
  the earnings of legal and illegal Mexican immigrants in the United States,” Journal of
  Population Economics, 1999, 12 (1), 91–116.
Van Hook, Jennifer, James D. Bachmeier, Donna L. Co↵man, and Ofer Harel, “Can We Spin
  Straw Into Gold? An Evaluation of Immigrant Legal Status Imputation Approaches,”
  Demography, February 2015, 52 (1), 329–354.
Warren, Robert, “Democratizing Data about Unauthorized Residents in the United States:
 Estimates and Public-Use Data, 2010 to 2013,” Journal on Migration and Human Secu-
 rity, December 2014, 2 (4), 305–328.
   and John Robert Warren, “Unauthorized Immigration to the United States: Annual
  Estimates and Components of Change, by State, 1990 to 2010,” International Migration
  Review, Summer 2013, 47 (2), 296–329.




                                           29
                                  Table 1: Data summary

 Industry                            2013 GDP      Emp      FB/All UFB/All FB/All UFB/All
                                       Billions   Millions   Emp.      Emp.      Hours     Hours
 1. Agriculture, forestry, fish/hunt   225.44       1.99     0.30       0.18      0.29      0.17
 2. Mining                              441.05      0.85     0.09       0.03      0.09      0.03
 3. Construction                       619.87       8.84     0.24       0.13      0.23      0.12
 4. Manufacturing                      2024.65     15.06     0.19       0.06      0.19      0.06
 5. Wholesale and retail trade          1969.8     20.54      0.15      0.04      0.15      0.04
 6. Transportation and utilities        754.07      7.04     0.16       0.03      0.16      0.03
 7. Information                         793.82      3.01      0.12      0.02      0.12      0.02
 8. Financial activities               3295.46      9.42     0.13       0.02      0.13      0.02
 9. Professional and business svcs     1952.48     15.66      0.20      0.06      0.14      0.03
 10. Educational and health svcs       1373.22     33.15      0.14      0.02      0.14      0.02
 11. Leisure and hospitality           625.66       13.7     0.22       0.10      0.24      0.11
 12. Other Services                     363.09      7.16     0.22       0.08      0.23      0.08
 Total                                14,438.61    136.4     0.17       0.05      0.17      0.05
Notes: Statistics are averages across the 2011, 2012, and 2013 waves of the augmented American
Community Survey (ACS) files supplied by Center for Migration Studies (2014). Statistics are
drawn from the employment sample described in the text. The total in the last row refers to the
12 industries reported in the table. Overall GDP in 2013, including Government, amounted to
$16,549.23 billion.




                                             30
Table 2: Unauthorized immigrants by industry and origin, pooled CMS sample 2011–2013
                                                              Central
                                                             & South
 Employed unauthorized immigrants        Total    Mexico     America     Asia    Other
 All industries                      7,070,329 3,854,716 1,832,998 918,205 464,409
 1. Agriculture, forestry, fish/hunt   351,783    314,133      32,073   3,276    2,300
 2. Mining                              24,737     19,360       2,500   1,662    1,215
 3. Construction                     1,122,134    743,586     326,855  17,324   34,370
 4. Manufacturing                      889,081    517,764     194,227 124,878   52,212
 5. Wholesale and retail trade         853,261    414,951     229,925 141,155   67,230
 6. Transportation and utilities       218,234     86,304      72,225  27,301   32,404
 7. Information                         69,517     19,097      16,234  24,659    9,527
 8. Financial activities               196,158     58,161      55,491  59,990   22,516
 9. Professional and business svcs     985,278    495,845     255,094 171,247   63,092
 10. Educational and health svcs       505,259    126,156     154,197 133,814   91,092
 11. Leisure and hospitality         1,302,300    784,098     318,018 141,205   58,980
 12. Other services                    552,587    275,262     176,158  71,695   29,472

Notes: Statistics are averages across the 2011, 2012, and 2013 waves of the augmented
American Community Survey (ACS) files supplied by Center for Migration Studies (2014)
and described by Warren (2014). Statistics are drawn from the employment sample de-
scribed in the text.




                                         31
    Table 3: Weekly wages by industry and nativity, pooled CMS sample 2011-2013
                                                             Legal Unauthorized
   Average weekly wage                 Total U.S born immigrants      immigrants
   All industries                      1,016    1,039        1,050            581
   1. Agriculture, forestry, fish/hunt   594      734          491            378
   2. Mining                           1,460    1,460        1,638          1,093
   3. Construction                       880      962          803            510
   4. Manufacturing                    1,135    1,165        1,167            674
   5. Wholesale and retail trade         835      853          820            555
   6. Transportation and utilities     1,038    1,066          934            648
   7. Information                      1,346    1,323        1,546          1,303
   8. Financial activities             1,413    1,406        1,524          1,132
   9. Professional and business svcs 1,288      1,328        1,330            734
   10. Educational and health svcs       975      962        1,115            641
   11. Leisure and hospitality           547      568          574            402
   12. Other services                    722      769          608            464
   13. Public administration           1,170    1,163        1,255

Notes: Statistics are averages across the 2011, 2012, and 2013 waves of the augmented
American Community Survey (ACS) files supplied by Center for Migration Studies (2014)
and described by Warren (2014). Dollars are inflated to 2013 levels using the consumer
price index. Statistics are drawn from the wage sample described in the text.




                                         32
  Table 4: Average education by industry and nativity, pooled CMS sample 2011–2013
                                                               Legal Unauthorized
   Average years of education          Total U.S born immigrants      immigrants
   All industries                       13.7      13.9          13.3         10.6
   1. Agriculture, forestry, fish/hunt  11.2      12.7           8.0          7.7
   2. Mining                            13.0      13.1          13.0         11.0
   3. Construction                      12.1      12.7          11.0          9.3
   4. Manufacturing                     13.1      13.4          12.6         10.5
   5. Wholesale and retail trade        13.1      13.2          12.8         11.3
   6. Transportation and utilities      13.0      13.1          12.7         11.3
   7. Information                       14.5      14.4          15.0         14.5
   8. Financial activities              14.4      14.4          14.7         13.6
   9. Professional and business svcs    14.4      14.6          14.2         11.1
   10. Educational and health svcs      14.9      14.9          14.8         13.3
   11. Leisure and hospitality          12.5      12.9          11.7         10.2
   12. Other services                   13.0      13.4          11.9         10.4
   13. Public administration            14.5      14.5          14.9

Notes: Statistics are averages across the 2011, 2012, and 2013 waves of the augmented
American Community Survey (ACS) files supplied by Center for Migration Studies (2014)
and described by Warren (2014). Statistics are drawn from the employment sample de-
scribed in the text.




                                         33
Table 5: Average potential work experience by industry and nativity, pooled CMS sample
2011–2013
                                                               Legal Unauthorized
   Average years of experience         Total U.S born immigrants          immigrants
   All industries                       20.6       20.5         23.0            17.2
   1. Agriculture, forestry, fish/hunt  22.8       23.7         25.3            17.6
   2. Mining                            20.9       20.9         22.0            17.5
   3. Construction                      21.9       22.4         24.1            17.1
   4. Manufacturing                     23.0       23.0         24.8            18.5
   5. Wholesale and retail trade        19.0       18.7         22.6            16.5
   6. Transportation and utilities      24.2       24.2         25.0            18.5
   7. Information                       19.5       19.6         20.0            14.8
   8. Financial activities              21.6       21.7         21.7            15.6
   9. Professional and business svcs    20.6       20.8         21.4            16.9
   10. Educational and health svcs      21.1       21.0         22.7            17.8
   11. Leisure and hospitality          14.2       12.8         22.1            15.7
   12. Other services                   22.1       21.8         25.3            19.4
   13. Public administration            22.6       22.5         23.2

Notes: Statistics are averages across the 2011, 2012, and 2013 waves of the augmented
American Community Survey (ACS) files supplied by Center for Migration Studies (2014)
and described by Warren (2014). Statistics are drawn from the employment sample de-
scribed in the text. Years of potential work experience are calculated from age and years of
education as described in the text.




                                            34
  Table 6: Relative Productivities: Agriculture, Construction and Leisure & Hospitality

                     Agric.   Cons.   L&H     Avg12   Agric.   Cons.   L&H     Avg12

                      N at     N at    N at    N at    DF B     DF B    DF B    DF B
        edu    exp   ✓e,x     ✓e,x    ✓e,x    ✓e,x    ✓e,x     ✓e,x    ✓e,x    ✓e,x

         1      1    0.99     1.13    0.74     0.96   1.03     0.90    0.82     0.94
         1      2    1.24     1.16    0.89     1.08   1.13     1.05    0.90     1.03
         1      3    1.14     1.16    0.87     1.13   0.98     1.10    1.02     1.13
         1      4    1.21     1.19    0.90     1.14   1.05     1.16    1.10     1.20
         1      5    1.18     1.29    0.92     1.17   1.00     1.20    1.09     1.22
         1      6    1.13     1.28    0.86     1.11   1.07     1.23    1.18     1.22
         1      7    1.34     1.16    0.95     1.21   1.26     1.31    1.21     1.28
         1      8    1.35     1.21    0.94     1.17   1.21     1.33    1.18     1.24

         2      1    1.44     1.28    1.00     1.20   0.98     1.10    0.95     1.05
         2      2    1.40     1.36    1.05     1.23   0.94     1.23    1.14     1.11
         2      3    1.43     1.42    1.03     1.26   1.23     1.34    1.14     1.19
         2      4    1.65     1.37    1.09     1.31   1.09     1.23    1.12     1.18
         2      5    1.46     1.33    1.06     1.26   1.19     1.48    1.19     1.27
         2      6    1.50     1.34    1.14     1.28   1.24     1.32    1.25     1.29
         2      7    1.56     1.32    1.10     1.29   1.36     1.39    1.19     1.31
         2      8    1.36     1.29    1.19     1.22   1.18     1.18    1.28     1.26

         3      1    1.55     1.25    1.05     1.28   0.92     1.10    1.01     1.04
         3      2    1.63     1.35    1.12     1.26   0.74     1.27    1.14     1.11
         3      3    1.35     1.34    1.07     1.22   1.46     1.45    1.25     1.27
         3      4    1.66     1.38    1.20     1.25   1.29     1.29    1.44     1.26
         3      5    1.71     1.37    1.18     1.26   1.07     1.46    1.38     1.27
         3      6    1.37     1.27    1.15     1.27   1.95     1.57    1.43     1.49
         3      7    0.69     1.34    1.06     1.18   3.20     1.60    1.47     1.71
         3      8    1.21     1.30    0.98     1.22   2.08     1.40    1.43     1.48

         4      1    1.69     1.24    1.14    1.15    1.21     1.48    1.05    1.16
         4      2    1.67     1.45    1.27    1.18    1.15     1.32    1.32    1.11
         4      3    1.46     1.39    1.28    1.16    2.46     1.20    1.49    1.28
         4      4    1.12     1.44    1.43    1.16    1.51     1.79    1.52    1.34
         4      5    1.82     1.36    1.58    1.27    1.61     1.65    1.48    1.36
         4      6    1.61     1.45    1.70    1.31    2.34     1.73    1.81    1.57
         4      7    1.72     1.37    1.52    1.34    2.40     1.94    2.06    1.53
         4      8    1.57     1.30    1.56    1.28    1.14     1.74    1.85    1.67
        Avg.         1.41     1.31    1.12    1.21    1.39     1.36    1.28    1.27

         N at is the productivity of native labor relative to foreign-born labor within the
Note: ✓e,x
                                  DF B is the productivity of documented foreign-born labor
same education-experience cell. ✓e,x
relative to undocumented labor within the same education-experience cell. The last row
reports simple averages of each column. Columns 4 and 8 report simple averages of all 12
industries columns.


                                              35
                      Table 7: Relative Productivities by Education

                                       No degree   HS grad.   Some College    College grad.
                                          ✓1          ✓2          ✓3               ✓4
 1. Agriculture, forestry, fish/hunt       1         1.67        1.63             2.63
 2. Mining                                 1         1.50        1.48             2.39
 3. Construction                           1         1.91        1.96             2.42
 4. Manufacturing                          1         2.13        2.52             4.76
 5. Wholesale and retail trade             1         2.24        2.47             4.41
 6. Transportation and utilities           1         2.15        2.22             2.84
 7. Information                            1         3.18        4.45             7.78
 8. Financial activities                   1         2.85        3.96             9.48
 9. Professional and business svcs         1         2.15        3.11             8.03
 10. Educational and health svcs           1         2.06        3.04             7.07
 11. Leisure and hospitality               1         1.76        2.00             3.46
 12. Other Services                        1         1.91        1.99             2.84
 Simple average                            1         2.12        2.57             4.84
 GDP-weighted average                      1         2.31        2.96             6.21

Note: All productivity terms are relative to the productivity of high-school dropouts in the
same industry.


                    Table 8: Labor shares across industries, 2011-2013
                                                2011 2012 2013 Average
           Private industries (1-12)           0.532 0.535 0.533       0.533
           All non-defense industries (1-13)   0.572 0.571 0.569       0.571
           1. Agriculture, forestry, fish/hunt 0.208 0.258 0.217       0.228
           2. Mining                           0.224 0.244 0.234       0.234
           3. Construction                     0.647 0.636 0.634       0.639
           4. Manufacturing                    0.484 0.483 0.479       0.482
           5. Wholesale and retail trade       0.653 0.641 0.636       0.643
           6. Transportation and utilities     0.521 0.533 0.533       0.529
           7. Information                      0.381 0.392 0.382       0.385
           8. Financial activities             0.257 0.252 0.252       0.254
           9. Professional and business svcs 0.728 0.738 0.752         0.739
           10. Educational and health svcs     0.855 0.863 0.867       0.862
           11. Leisure and hospitality         0.705 0.709 0.702       0.706
           12. Other services                  0.751 0.748 0.755       0.751
           13. Public administration           0.792 0.785 0.783       0.787

Notes: We construct labor shares as compensation of employees divided by value added less
taxes on production and imports less subsidies, per Figura and Ratner (2015). Underlying
statistics are from the Bureau of Economic Analysis.


                                             36
                                                            Table 9: Baseline Results

                                                   1              2           3              4          5          6          7
                                                              Emp. SR    Hours SR       Hours SR    Emp. LR   Hours LR   Hours LR
                                               GDP 2013
         1. Agriculture, forestry, fish/hunt     225.44        0.979      0.980             -4.6     0.910      0.914       -19.4
                                                               Ye /Y       Ye /Y         Ye Y        Ye /Y      Ye /Y     Ye Y

         2. Mining                               441.05        0.993      0.993             -2.9     0.971      0.972       -12.3
         3. Construction                         619.87        0.948      0.950            -30.9     0.920      0.923       -47.6
         4. Manufacturing                       2024.65        0.981      0.982            -35.8     0.962      0.964       -73.8
         5. Wholesale and retail trade           1969.8        0.979      0.979            -41.8     0.968      0.967       -64.9
         6. Transportation and utilities         754.07        0.988      0.988             -9.3     0.977      0.977       -17.5
         7. Information                          793.82        0.992      0.992             -6.7     0.978      0.978       -17.5
         8. Financial activities                3295.46        0.996      0.996            -13.7     0.983      0.984       -54.3




37
         9. Professional and business svcs      1952.48        0.973      0.986            -26.7     0.963      0.982       -36.1
         10. Educational and health svcs        1373.22        0.989      0.989            -14.7     0.988      0.988       -17.0
         11. Leisure and hospitality             625.66        0.944      0.938            -38.5     0.922      0.914       -53.6
         12. Other Services                      363.09        0.959      0.958            -15.4     0.945      0.944       -20.4
         Total                                 14438.61                   0.983           -241.0                0.970      -434.4
                                                $ Billion                               $ Billion                        $ Billion

     Notes: Column 1 reports the actual industry GDP in year 2013. Columns 2-4 report the short-run results. Columns 2 and 3

     and the latter uses hours worked. Column 4 reports the dollar value of the short-run e↵ects on industry GDP based on the
     report the ratio of the counterfactual industry GDP (Ye ) to the baseline value (Y ). The former measures labor using employment

     hours worked measurement. Columns 5-7 are analogous to columns 2-4 but refer to the long-run e↵ects. The short and long-run
     percent changes in the Sum row are calculated by dividing the dollar amounts ($241.0 and $434.4) by private-sector GDP in 2013
     ($14,438.6 billion.)
                                                     Table 10: Robustness. Long-run e↵ects

      Scenario                                   0             0             1            1             2             2           3         3

       e                                         3             3              3             3            3             3          3         3
       x                                         6             6              6             6            6             6          6         6
       n                                         20            20            20            20          1000          1000        20        20
       d                                       1000          1000            20            20          1000          1000       1000      1000
      ⇥                                     calibration   calibration   calibration   calibration   calibration   calibration    1         1




                                                           Billions $                 Billions $                  Billions $            Billions $
                                               Ye /Y        Ye Y           Ye /Y       Ye Y           Ye /Y        Ye Y         Ye /Y    Ye Y


      1. Agriculture, forestry, fish/hunt      0.91          -19.4         0.91          -20.5         0.91          -20.5      0.82      -40.6




38
      2. Mining                                0.97          -12.3         0.97          -13.5         0.97          -12.7      0.97      -13.2
      3. Construction                          0.92          -47.6         0.92          -50.7         0.92          -48.6      0.86      -86.8
      4. Manufacturing                         0.96          -73.8         0.96          -81.2         0.96          -74.7      0.93     -141.7
      5. Wholesale and retail trade            0.97          -64.9         0.96          -71.7         0.97          -65.4      0.95      -98.5
      6. Transportation and utilities          0.98          -17.5         0.97          -19.6         0.98          -17.7      0.96      -30.2
      7. Information                           0.98          -17.5         0.98          -19.7         0.98          -17.6      0.97      -23.8
      8. Financial activities                  0.98          -54.3         0.98          -61.6         0.98          -54.4      0.97      -98.9
      9. Professional and business svcs        0.98          -36.1         0.98          -40.7         0.98          -36.2      0.96      -78.1
      10. Educational and health svcs          0.99          -17.0         0.99          -19.6         0.99          -17.0      0.98      -27.5
      11. Leisure and hospitality              0.91          -53.6         0.91          -57.1         0.91          -54.4      0.88      -75.1
      12. Other Services                       0.94          -20.4         0.94          -22.1         0.94          -20.7      0.91      -32.7
      Total                                    0.97         -434.4         0.97         -478.2         0.97         -440.0      0.95     -747.0

     Notes: In the baseline scenario (0) the elasticities of substitution are ( e , x , n , d ) = (3, 6, 20, 20) and the type productivities
     are those obtained in the calibration. Columns 1 and 2 report the long-run e↵ects for scenario 0. Relative to the baseline,
     scenario 1 assumes a low elasticity of substitution between documented and undocumented foreign-born workers, and the results
     are reported in columns 3 and 4. Relative to baseline, scenario 2 assumes a high elasticity of substitution between native and
     foreign-born workers, and the results are reported in columns 5 and 6. Relative to baseline, scenario 3 assumes that all type
     productivities equal one, and the results are reported in columns 7 and 8. The relative values in the totals row are computed on
     the basis of the corresponding total dollar amount and private-industry GPD in year 2013.
                          Table 11: Projected losses 2017-2026

                                      1            2           3            4
          Capital adjustment        None       10 years     5 years    Immediate
          2017                      279.1        279.1       279.1        503.1
          2018                      291.1        317.1       349.5        524.7
          2019                      302.4        356.3       423.7        545.0
          2020                      314.0        398.0       503.0        566.0
          2021                      326.8        443.3       589.0        589.0
          2022                      340.3        492.0       613.4        613.4
          2023                      354.3        543.9       638.6        638.6
          2024                      368.9        599.1       664.9        664.9
          2025                      384.1        658.1       692.4        692.4
          2026                      400.1        721.1       721.1        721.1
          Cumulative 2017-2026     3,361.0      4,807.9     5,474.6      6,058.1
                                  $ Billion    $ Billion   $ Billion    $ Billion


Notes: Column 1 assumes that capital remains constant at the 2016 level, and the annual
GDP loss is 1.4%. Column 4 assumes that capital fully adjusts by 2017, and the annual
GDP loss is 2.6%. Columns 2 and 3 assume that capital fully adjusts in 10 and 5 years,
respectively. The short and long-run GDP losses are calculated by dividing the annual
dollar loss by the overall GDP in the baseline year, taking into account the 12 private-
sector industries and the public sector.




                                          39
Table 12: Employment by state of residence, nativity and documentation status, 2011–2013
           Emp         Pct              Pct               Emp         Pct             Pct
              in   foreign      Pct   Mex &                  in   foreign     Pct   Mex &
  State    000’s     born    undoc    undoc     State     000’s     born    undoc   undoc
  AL       2,000       4.8      2.1      1.5    MT          476       1.9     0.2      0.0
  AK         354       9.1      1.4      0.1    NE          963       7.4     2.8      1.8
  AZ       2,752      17.1      5.5      4.7    NV        1,240      25.9     8.7      6.1
  AR       1,246       6.5      2.7      1.9    NH          691       6.4     0.9      0.1
  CA      16,888      35.4     10.2      6.9    NJ        4,225      28.0     7.4      1.5
  CO       2,562      12.1      4.2      3.3    NM          873      12.6     4.5      4.0
  CT       1,768      17.4      4.6      0.8    NY        9,142      28.1     6.2      1.4
  DE         423      11.5      3.2      1.5    NC        4,293      10.7     4.9      3.1
  DC         324      18.2      3.5      0.2    ND          379       2.8     0.3      0.0
  FL       8,321      25.2      5.6      1.4    OH        5,297       4.8     1.0      0.4
  GA       4,291      13.7      5.3      3.1    OK        1,709       7.8     3.5      2.8
  HI         645      22.8      3.8      0.2    OR        1,751      13.2     4.4      3.5
  ID         707       8.0      3.1      2.7    PA        5,938       7.4     1.5      0.4
  IL       6,034      18.1      5.8      4.1    RI          517      15.8     3.6      0.3
  IN       2,997       5.8      2.1      1.4    SC        2,027       6.7     2.8      1.8
  IA       1,556       5.6      1.8      1.0    SD          424       3.1     0.8      0.3
  KS       1,395       8.5      3.3      2.3    TN        2,830       6.5     2.5      1.5
  KY       1,865       4.4      1.3      0.8    TX       11,817      21.8     8.7      6.5
  LA       2,000       5.4      1.9      0.8    UT        1,302      11.4     4.5      3.3
  ME         643       3.5      0.2      0.0    VT          327       4.6     0.6      0.1
  MD       2,960      18.7      5.4      0.6    VA        3,946      15.6     4.5      0.8
  MA       3,342      18.4      3.0      0.1    WA        3,202      17.2     4.9      3.1
  MI       4,279       7.3      1.3      0.5    WV          755       1.7     0.2      0.1
  MN       2,792       8.8      2.1      1.0    WI        2,839       5.6     1.8      1.4
  MS       1,195       3.0      1.1      0.6    WY          292       3.3     1.2      1.0
  MO       2,774       5.0      1.3      0.6    USA     143,369      16.9     4.9      2.7

Notes: Statistics are averages across the 2011, 2012, and 2013 waves of the augmented
American Community Survey (ACS) files supplied by Center for Migration Studies (2014)
and described by Warren (2014). They are drawn from the employment sample described
in the text.




                                               40
 Table 13: The E↵ects of Removal at the state level (annual loss). All industries pooled.

                    1          2          3             4          5             6         7
                             Hours      Hours      Short run   Short run    Long run    Long run
 State         GDP 2013      FB/All    UFB/All       Ye /Y      Ye Y          Ye /Y      Ye Y

 California      1938.4       0.36       0.11         0.96        -82.7        0.93       -135.8
 Nevada           112.8       0.27       0.09         0.96         -4.1        0.94         -6.7
 Texas           1398.4       0.23       0.09         0.96        -50.5        0.94        -83.1
 New Jersey       474.8       0.29       0.08         0.97        -16.3        0.94        -26.8
 New York        1168.2       0.29       0.06         0.97        -33.0        0.95        -54.6
 Arizona          235.4       0.18       0.06         0.98         -5.8        0.96         -9.7
 Florida          696.4       0.26       0.06         0.97        -17.6        0.96        -29.1
 Georgia          392.1       0.14       0.06         0.98         -9.2        0.96        -15.2
 Illinois         640.7       0.19       0.06         0.97        -17.2        0.96        -28.5
 Maryland         264.1       0.20       0.06         0.97         -7.1        0.96        -11.7

 USA            14438.6       0.18       0.05         0.98       -241.0        0.97      -434.4
                $ Billion                                       $ Billion               $ Billion


Notes: Columns 1-3 report data for baseline year 2013. Columns 4-5 report short-run
estimates of removal. Columns 6-7 report long-run estimates of removal. The elasticities of
substitution used in the calibration are the same as in the baseline for the national results.
The type-productivity terms are calculated on the basis of national data with all industries
pooled and imposed on all states. The bottom row (USA) reproduces the country-wide
main results from Table 9.




                                             41
                                  Table 14: Legalization

                                          Short run   Short run    Long run   Long run
                                                      Billions $              Billions $
                                            Ye /Y      Ye Y         Ye /Y      Ye Y

    1. Agriculture, forestry, fish/hunt     1.003        0.6        1.011        2.5
    2. Mining                               1.001        0.6        1.006        2.5
    3. Construction                         1.012        7.7        1.019       12.1
    4. Manufacturing                        1.003        6.4        1.007       13.3
    5. Wholesale and retail trade           1.004        7.9        1.006       12.3
    6. Transportation and utilities         1.003        2.0        1.005        3.8
    7. Information                          1.001        0.6        1.002       1.7
    8. Financial activities                 1.001        1.9        1.002        7.5
    9. Professional and business svcs       1.003        5.5        1.004        7.5
    10. Educational and health svcs         1.004        5.8        1.005        6.7
    11. Leisure and hospitality             1.011        6.6        1.015        9.3
    12. Other Services                      1.005        1.7        1.006        2.2

    Total                                   1.003       47.2        1.006       81.5


Notes: Columns 1 and 2 report the ratio of the short-run counterfactual GDP after legal-
ization to actual GDP in the industry in 2013, measuring the workforce in terms of hours
worked. Columns 3 and 4 are analogous but the numerator refers to the long-run counter-
factual. The relative values in the totals row are computed on the basis of the dollar gains
and GDP in the baseline year.




                                             42
         Figure 1: CES Nesting Labor Aggregate



Characteristics:
0



                   No             High           Some           College
1: Education       Degree         School         College        Degree




2: Experience
                   [1-5] [6-10] [11-15] [16-20] [21-25] [26-30] [31-35] [36-40]




3: U.S. Foreign born                  Natives             Foreign-born




4: Documented
                                     Documented        Undocumented




Notes: Adapted from Ottaviano and Peri (2012).




                                43
