NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

MACRO RISKS AND THE TERM STRUCTURE OF INTEREST RATES
Geert Bekaert
Eric Engstrom
Andrey Ermolov
Working Paper 22839
http://www.nber.org/papers/w22839

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 2016

Authors thank seminar participants at Baruch College, Bilkent University, University of British
Columbia, Bundesbank, City University of London, Duke, Fordham, University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign, Imperial College, Oxford, Riksbank, Sabanci Business School, Tulane, and
University of North Carolina at Chapel-Hill and conference participants at 2015 Federal Reserve
Bank of San Francisco and Bank of Canada Conference on Fixed Income Markets, 2016 NBER
Summer Institute, and 2016 Society of Financial Econometrics Meeting for useful comments. All
errors are the sole responsibility of the authors. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the Federal Reserve System, its Board of
Governors, or staff, nor those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2016 by Geert Bekaert, Eric Engstrom, and Andrey Ermolov. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Macro Risks and the Term Structure of Interest Rates
Geert Bekaert, Eric Engstrom, and Andrey Ermolov
NBER Working Paper No. 22839
November 2016
JEL No. E31,E32,E43,E44,G12,G13
ABSTRACT
We extract aggregate supply and aggregate demand shocks for the US economy from
macroeconomic data on inflation, real GDP growth, core inflation and the unemployment gap.
We first use unconditional non-Gaussian features in the data to achieve identification of these
structural shocks while imposing minimal economic assumptions. We find that recessions in the
1970s and 1980s are better characterized as driven by supply shocks while later recessions were
driven primarily by demand shocks. The Great Recession exhibited large negative shocks to both
demand and supply. We then use conditional (time-varying) non-Gaussian features of the
structural shocks to estimate "macro risk factors" for supply and demand shocks that drive
"bad" (negatively skewed) and "good" (positively skewed) variation for supply and demand
shocks. The Great Moderation, a general decline in the volatility of many macroeconomic time
series since the 1980s, is mostly accounted for by a reduction in the good demand variance risk
factor. In contrast, the risk factors driving bad variance for both supply and demand shocks,
which account for most recessions, show no secular decline. Finally, we find that macro risks
significantly contribute to the variation in yields, bond risk premiums and the term premium.
While overall bond risk premiums are counter-cyclical, an increase in bad demand variance is
associated with lower risk premiums on bonds.
Geert Bekaert
Graduate School of Business
Columbia University
3022 Broadway, 411 Uris Hall
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
gb241@columbia.edu

Andrey Ermolov
Fordham University
45 Columbus Avenue (Martino Hall) room 623A
New York, NY 10023
aermolov1@fordham.edu

Eric Engstrom
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
Washington DC 20551
eric.engstrom@frb.gov

1

Introduction

Distinguishing supply shocks from demands shocks has long been an empirical goal of
macroeconomics (e.g., Shapiro and Watson, 1988, Blanchard and Quah, 1989, or Gali, 1992),
in part because the appropriate monetary and fiscal policy responses may be quite different
for adverse demand versus supply shocks. In the field of asset pricing, supply shocks may
prompt quite different responses in nominal bond prices than do demand shocks. It follows
that variation in the magnitude of supply versus demand shocks may have important effects
on the risk profile of nominal bonds and other asset prices.
We extract aggregate supply and demand shocks for the US economy from data on inflation,
real GDP growth, core inflation and the unemployment gap. We begin by defining aggregate
supply shocks as shocks that move inflation and real activity in the opposite direction.
Similarly, demand shocks are defined as innovations that move inflation and real activity in
the same direction. This identification scheme is motivated by Blanchard (1989), who finds
empirically that the joint behavior of output, unemployment, prices, wages and nominal
money in the U.S. is consistent with this structure.
Defining supply and demand shocks as above presents an identification problem. We resolve
this issue without further economic assumptions, but instead using a novel approach exploiting unconditional higher-order moments in the data, which we show to be highly statistically
significant. Despite this economically agnostic approach, we show that the structural shocks
that we identify exhibit some intuitive properties. For example, in a classic paper, Blanchard
and Quah (1989) use a vector-autoregressive dynamic structure to identify “demand-like”
shocks as shocks that affect output temporarily, whereas supply disturbances have a permanent effect on output, with neither having a long-run effect on the unemployment rate.
The shocks that we estimate also exhibit these dynamic properties even though we do not
impose them.
Next, we define macro risks as the state variables that govern the time-varying variance,
skewness and higher-order moments of supply and demand shocks. To model the time variation in these risk factors, we use the Bad Environment-Good Environment model (Bekaert
and Engstrom, 2016), which we motivate by showing that it fits the data well relative
to extant models, and because it offers a straightforward economic interpretation. In the
model, the macro risk factors drive “good-type” (positively skewed) and “bad-type” (neg1

atively skewed) variance of the structural demand and supply shocks. As the good-type
variance increases, the distribution for the shock becomes more positively skewed. Increases
in bad-type variance may pull skewness into negative territory.
The time variation in the macro risk factors allows for the covariance between inflation and
real activity to potentially change through time. Theoretically, the sign and magnitude of
this covariance are important determinants of the risk premium for nominal bonds (see Fama,
1981; Piazzesi and Swanson, 2008; Campbell, Sunderam and Viceira, 2016). When supply
(demand) shocks dominate, real activity and inflation are negatively (positively) correlated,
and bonds are a poor (good) hedge against macroeconomic fluctuations, presumably leading
to relatively higher (lower) nominal term and risk premiums.
Our key results for macroeconomic data are as follows. First, we find that the prevalence
of supply shocks was high during the 1970s and again during the Great Recession. In
contrast macroeconomic variation in the 1980s and 1990s, particularly during recessions,
was more strongly dominated by demand shocks. Second, our analysis suggests that the
Great Moderation - a reduction in the volatility of many macroeconomic variables since the
mid-1980s - is attributed largely to a decrease in good-type demand variance. Meanwhile,
the bad-type variance risk factors for both supply and demand shocks have not experienced
any secular decline. As a result the frequency and severity of recessions, which are associated
with elevated bad-type volatility, have not changed much over our sample. These results offer
a refinement to the work of Jurado, Ludvigson and Ng (2015), who find a strong countercyclical component to aggregate volatility.1 Third, we offer a characterization of the Great
Recession of 2008-2009. Some researchers suggest that the Great Recession of 2008-2009 was
accompanied by a rather large negative aggregate demand shock (see, e.g., Bils, Klenow,
and Malin, 2012, or Mian and Sufi, 2014), but there is little consensus on this issue (see,
e.g., Ireland, 2011, or Mulligan, 2012, arguing for the importance of supply shocks). We find
that negative demand and supply shocks contributed approximately equally to the Great
Recession.
We also make contributions to the empirical asset pricing literature. Although many asset
pricing paradigms (e.g., habit of Buraschi and Jiltsov, 2007, long-run risk of Bansal and
Schaliastovich, 2013, or rare disasters of Gabaix, 2012) predict that the bond risk premium
1

In particular, our macro uncertainty measures have a structural “demand” versus “supply” interpreta-

tion and generate different higher order (> 2) moments depending on being primarily “good” or “bad”.

2

should be a function of expected second and higher order moments of macroeconomic fundamentals, the vast majority of the empirical literature has surprisingly focused on explaining
expected bond returns with the expectations of the level of macroeconomic variables or,
even more simply, actual realized macroeconomic data (see, e.g., Ludvigson and Ng, 2009).
Notable exceptions are Wright (2011) and Bansal and Shaliastovich (2013). Wright (2011)
links term premiums to inflation uncertainty, whereas Bansal and Shaliastovich (2013) link
bond risk premiums to consumption and inflation volatility. Compared to these papers,
our contribution is twofold. First, we show the importance of decomposing macroeconomic
variation into components due to the variance of supply and demand shocks, and into the
good and bad types of variance. We find that the time-variation in the macro risk factors for
supply and demand implies that the covariance between inflation and real activity changes
through time and switches sign. Our analysis links this time-variation to bond risk premiums by showing that demand (supply) variance negatively (positively) predicts bond excess
returns. In particular, we show that while overall the expected excess bond returns are
counter-cyclical, an increase in demand (supply) variance is associated with lower (higher)
expected returns. Second, we quantify the relative importance of first and higher order
macroeconomic moments for key term structure variables.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. In section 2, we describe how we
theoretically identify aggregate supply and aggregate demand shocks and how we model
macro risk factors. Section 3 describes the econometric methodology that we use to extract
the structural shocks and the macro risk factors. In Section 4, we provide empirical estimates
for the US economy from 1959 to 2015 and a structural interpretation of the macro data
using our identification scheme. In Section 5, we link the macro risk factors to term structure
data. We also assess whether they have predictive power for excess bond returns and explain
term premium behavior. A final section summarizes our key results and sets out an agenda
for future research.

3

2
2.1

Modeling Macro-Risks
Aggregate supply and demand shocks in a simplified model

Consider a bivariate system in real GDP Growth (gt ) and inflation (πt ):
gt = Et−1 [gt ] + ugt ,

(1)

πt = Et−1 [πt ] + uπt ,
where Et−1 denotes the conditional expectation operator. In a first departure from standard
macroeconomic modeling, the shocks to output growth and inflation are a function of two
structural shocks, ust and udt :
uπt = −σπs ust + σπd udt ,
ugt = σgs ust + σgd udt ,

(2)

σπs > 0, σπd > 0, σgs > 0, σgd > 0,
Cov(udt , ust ) = 0, V ar(udt ) = V ar(ust ) = 1.
The first fundamental economic shock, ust , is an aggregate supply shock, defined so that it
moves GDP growth and inflation in opposite directions, as happens, for instance, in episodes
of stagflation. The second fundamental shock, udt , is an aggregate demand shock, defined
so that it moves GDP growth and inflation in the same direction as would be the case
in a typical economic boom or recession. Supply and demand shocks are assumed to be
uncorrelated.
Note that the sample covariance matrix of the shocks from the bivariate system in (1) only
yields three unique moments, but we need to identify four coefficients in equation (2) to
extract the supply and demand shocks. Hence, absent additional assumptions, a system
with Gaussian shocks would be underidentified. Fortunately, it has been well established
that macroeconomic data exhibit substantial non-Gaussian features (see, e.g., Evans and
Wachtel (1993) for inflation, and Hamilton (1989) for GDP growth). Our second departure
from standard macroeconomic modeling is to assume that the demand and supply shocks are
potentially non-Gaussian in that they may have non-zero unconditional skewness and excess
kurtosis. For example, there are four available unconditional skewness and co-skewness
moments for GDP growth and inflation. These four moments, in conjunction with the three
4

available second moments, could in principle be used to identify the four σπ/g,s/d parameters
(and two requisite unconditional skewness coefficients for the supply and demand shocks).
If the variance of demand and supply shocks is time-varying, the model also implies that
the conditional variance between inflation and GDP growth shocks is time-varying and can
switch signs:
Covt−1 [ugt , uπt ] = −σπs σgs V art−1 ust + σπd σgd V art−1 udt ,

(3)

where the subscripts on the Cov and V ar operators denote that they may vary over time.
Thus, when demand shocks dominate the covariance is positive but when supply shocks
dominate it is negative.
The main advantage of the supply and demand shocks definition above is that it carries minimal theoretical restrictions (only a sign restriction)2 . However, these supply and demand
shocks definitions do not necessarily correspond to demand and supply shocks in, say, a New
Keynesian framework (see e.g. Woodford, 2003) or identified VARs in the Sims tradition
(Sims, 1980).3 The classic Blanchard and Quah (1989) paper famously identifies “demand
like” shocks as those that affect output only temporarily whereas supply disturbances have
a permanent effect on output, with neither having a long run effect on unemployment rate.
However, Blanchard (1989) notes that these short- and long-run effects of supply and demand shocks are consistent with responses to shocks in the context of standard Keynesian
models. For instance, supply shocks include productivity shocks which tend to have a longer
run effect on output. We reverse the identification strategy here, by first exploiting the sign
restrictions to identify the shocks, and then verifying their long-run impact on inflation and
real activity in subsequent analysis. Furthermore, in this paper we abstract from further economic interpretation of demand and supply shocks and their sources. Such analysis would
be of great economic interest, but would require an advanced general equilibrium model
which tends to be highly stylized and can not accommodate meaningful time variation in
higher order moments (see, e.g., van Binsbergen et.al., 2012).
2

The idea to impose a minimal set of sign restrictions to achieve identification is reminiscent of Uhlig’s

(2005) identification scheme for monetary policy shocks.
3
Furthermore, in some models the “supply” shocks might move real activity and inflation in the same
direction: see, for instance, news shocks in Cochrane (1994).

5

2.2

Modeling Macro Risks

We define macro risk factors as determinants of the second and higher-order moments
of supply and demand shocks. We parameterize the distribution of supply and demand
shocks using a model that accommodates conditionally non-Gaussian distributions, the Bad
Environment-Good Environment (BEGE) model (Bekaert and Engstrom, 2016).

2.2.1

Bad Environment - Good Environment Model

Following a BEGE structure, demand and supply shocks are component models of two
independent distributions:
s
s
ust = σps ωp,t
− σns ωn,t
,

udt

=

d
σpd ωp,t

−

(4)

d
σnd ωn,t
,

where t is a time index, and σps , σns , σpd , and σnd are positive constants. We use the notation:
d
ωp,t
∼ Γ̃(pdt , 1),
d
ωn,t
∼ Γ̃(ndt , 1),
s
ωp,t

∼

(5)

Γ̃(pst , 1),

s
ωn,t
∼ Γ̃(nst , 1),
d
follows a centered gamma distribution with shape parameter pdt and a
to denote that ωp,t
d
unit scale parameter. The corresponding probability density function, φ(ωp,t
), is given by:
d
φ(ωp,t+1
)=

1
d
d
d
(ωp,t+1
+ pdt )pt −1 exp(−ωp,t+1
− pdt ),
d
Γ(pt )

d
for ωp,t+1
> −pdt ; with Γ(·) representing the gamma function. Similar definitions apply to
d
s
s
ωn,t+1
, ωp,t+1
, and ωn,t+1
. Unlike the standard gamma distribution, the centered gamma

distribution has mean zero. For such distribution, the shape parameter represents the
volatility of the random variable.
d
The top panel of Figure 1 illustrates that the probability density function of σpd ωp,t
(the

“good” component of the demand shock) is bounded from the left and has a right tail.
d
Similarly, the middle panel of Figure 1 shows that the probability density function of −σnd ωn,t

(the “bad” component) is bounded from the right and has a left tail. Finally, the bottom
panel of Figure 1 plots the component model of these two components which has both tails.
6

The components of ust have the same distributional properties. Hence, we define a “good”
(“bad”) shape parameter as one associated with a ωp (ωn )-shock.
The good (pdt , pst ) and bad (ndt , nst ) shape parameters of our macro shocks are assumed to
vary through time in an autoregressive fashion as in Gourieroux and Jasiak (2006):
d
pdt = p̄d (1 − φdp ) + φdp pdt−1 + σpd ωp,t
,
s
pst = p̄d (1 − φsp ) + φsp pst−1 + σps ωp,t
,

ndt

d

= n̄ (1 −

φdn )

+

φdn ndt−1

+

(6)

d
σnd ωn,t
,

s
nst = s̄d (1 − φsn ) + φsn pst−1 + σns ωn,t
.

s
d
shocks, and those shocks
shocks drive up GDP growth, as do the ωp,t
Note that positive ωp,t

are associated with an increase in both pdt and pst . We call this “good volatility” because
d
it induces more positive skewness in GDP growth. Conversely, positive realizations of ωn,t
s
and ωn,t
shocks drive down GDP growth and they are associated with an increase in “bad”

volatility and more negative skewness. This explains the “BEGE” moniker.
Using the demand shock as an example, Figure 2 illustrates possible conditional distributions
of demand shocks which could arise as a result of the time variation in shape parameters
in equation (6). In particular, the probability density function in the top panel of Figure
2 characterizes the situation where good volatility is relatively large and the component
distribution has a pronounced right tail, while the probability density function in the bottom
panel of Figure 2 corresponds to the case where bad volatility is relatively large and the
component distribution exhibits a pronounced left tail.

2.2.2

Conditional Moments under the Bad Environment-Good Environment
Model

d
d
s
s
At this point, we have set out an economy with 4 shocks (ωp,t
, ωn,t
, ωp,t
, and ωn,t
) and 4

state variables, which we collect in Xtmr = [pst , nst , pdt , ndt ]0 . These 4 state variables summarize
the macroeconomic risks in the economy. Using the properties of the centered gamma

7

distribution, we have, for example:
Et−1 [ust ] = 0,
Et−1 [(ust )2 ] = (σps )2 pst + (σns )2 nst ,
Et−1 [(ust )3 ]

=

2(σps )3 pst

−

(7)

2(σns )3 nst ,

Et−1 [(ust )4 ] − 3(Et−1 [(ust )2 ])2 = 6(σps )4 pst + 6(σns )4 nst .
And analogously for udt .
Thus, the BEGE structure implies that the conditional variance of inflation and output
varies through time, with the time-variation potentially coming from either demand or
supply shocks, and either bad or good volatility. In addition, the distribution of inflation
and output shocks is conditionally non-Gaussian, with time variation in the higher order
moments driven by variation in Xtmr .

2.3

The Full Model

A model with only two macroeconomic variables such as the one presented above would be
too narrow for our purposes and our estimates of supply and demand shocks are based on a
more extensive model of the macroeconomy. First, we consider a four variable macro model,
rather than a two variable system, adding core inflation and the unemployment gap. Core
inflation, which strips out components of overall inflation that are particularly volatile such
as energy and food prices, is, of course, a variable that is closely followed by monetary policy
makers. Core inflation has been shown to be useful in forecasting future inflation. Ajello,
Benzoni and Chyhruk (2012) in fact claim that adding core inflation to a macro system
results in inflation forecasts that are as accurate as forecasts based on survey data (see
Ang, Bekaert and Wei, 2007, for more on the accuracy of survey based inflation forecasts).
This is relevant, because we use quarterly data starting in 1959 and thus cannot easily
use survey forecasts (for instance, the quarterly Survey of Professional Forecasters started
in 1969). Analogously, for many practitioners, the unemployment rate gap is preferred to
GDP growth as an indicator of economic activity. Moreover, as Bauer and Rudebusch (2016)
demonstrate, this variable is in fact little correlated with GDP growth and contains useful
alternative information about real economic activity.
We collect the 4 macro variables in the vector Xt . Because we want to identify shocks to
8

these four variables, it is important that we specify their conditional means carefully. Bond
yields have well-established predictive power for economic variables (see Harvey, 1988, and
many others, for the predictive ability of the term spread for GDP growth, for example)
prompting us to add yields to the information set. Therefore, we collect the one-quarter
and 10-year Treasury yield data in the vector Zt .
We use a VARMA model to extract AS/AD shocks from Xt :
Φ(L)Xt = BZt−1 + θ(L)ut ,

(8)

Where Φ(L) and θ(L) are vector polynomials in the lag operator. Furthermore:
ut = Σum
t + Ωet

(9)

d
s
where um
t = [ut , ut ], the structural shocks, and Σ is a 4x2 matrix containing the exposures

of macroeconomic shocks to AS/AD shocks. The vector et represents shocks uncorrelated
with ut , with mean zero, unit variance and zero skewness and excess kurtosis and Ω is a
diagonal matrix. It is necessary to add these uncorrelated innovations to the macro series
to avoid having a singularity in their covariance matrix. We assume that these orthogonal
shocks have zero skewness and excess kurtosis mostly for convenience, but this assumption
also aids in the identification of the supply and demand shocks; we assume all the excess
skewness and kurtosis among the macro variables arises solely from the structural shocks.
Note that these shocks may represent important shocks, not modelled in our framework,
such as monetary policy shocks, stressed, e.g., in Campbell, Pflueger and Viceira (2015).

3

Identifying Macro Risks in the US economy

While there are multiple ways to estimate the system in equations (2), (4), (6), (8), and (9),
the presence of the gamma distributed shocks makes the exercise nontrivial. We therefore
split the problem into three manageable steps. First, we use standard techniques to estimate
the VARMA(p,q) model and determine its order. Second, we filter the demand and supply
shocks from the system in equation (9) by estimating a GMM system that includes higherorder unconditional moments of the macroeconomic variables. The use of higher-order
moments is essential to achieve identification in our framework. Third, once the demand
and supply shocks are filtered, we can estimate univariate BEGE systems on supply and
9

demand shocks (exploiting the identifying assumption that they are independent) using
approximate maximum likelihood as in Bates (2006).4 We begin by describing the data we
use.

3.1

Data

The data are quarterly from 1959:Q2 to 2015:Q2 (225 quarters). Potentially, we could
have included data back to 1947:Q1 (the starting date for GDP data). The later start
date is chosen to exclude a period when there was higher measurement error in the GDP
data (Bureau of Economic Analysis, 1993). Moreover, US long-term rates were pegged by
the Federal Reserve prior to the Treasury Accord of 1951. For inflation (core inflation)
we use 100 times log changes in the headline CPI index (CPI excluding food and energy)
measured for the last month of each quarter, from the Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS).
Real GDP growth is 100 times the log difference in real GDP (in chained 2009 dollars) from
the Bureau of Economic Analysis. The unemployment rate gap is the difference between the
unemployment rate (in percent) from the last month of each quarter from the BLS, and the
estimated level of the natural rate of unemployment published by the Congressional Budget
Office.
Interest rate data consists of yields, prices and returns for nominal U.S. Treasury securities.
For maturities of length 1 quarter and 1, 2, 3, 4 and 5 years, estimated yields for zero-coupon
securities are taken from the Fama-Bliss (1987) data set (part of the CRSP). For yields of
maturity 10 years, data from 1959:Q2 through 1971:Q1 are from the McCullough-Kwon
(1993) data set. From 1971:Q1-2015:Q2, data for 10-year yields are from Gürkaynak, Sack,
and Wright (2010). Yields at maturities other than those discussed above are estimated
by linear interpolation. We use continuously compounded yields, expressed as annualized
percentages.
4

A disadvantage of using a multi-step estimation process is that statistical inference is complicated by

the fact that all steps after the first one use pre-estimated coefficients or filtered variables that are subject to
sampling error. To account for these errors, we also execute the entire multi-step estimation process using
bootstrapped data. The bootstrap procedure is described in Appendix A.

10

3.2

Estimating the VARMA (p, q) model

To estimate the time series model for Xt , including inflation, real GDP growth, core inflation,
and the unemployment rate gap, we first de-mean the variables. We choose among a variety
of time series models, in particular VAR(1), VAR(2), VARMA(1,1), VARMA(1,2), and
VARMA(2,1), using standard information criteria. All models were estimated two ways,
excluding and including the instruments Zt−1 (including 1-quarter and 10-year nominal
Treasury yields). Models were estimated by quasi-ML (using a Gaussian likelihood function).
Because some of these models are heavily parameterized (the highest-order ones have over
50 parameters), we employ a two-step procedure to help ensure that we identify a global
maximum of the likelihood functions. In a first step, we obtain starting values using a
recursive-OLS procedure. Following Hannan and Rissanen (1982), we first estimate by OLS
a vector-autoregression with a large number of lags. We use 6 lags, but that choice does
not appear material for the results. We then recover the estimated residuals from this step,
ût . These residuals serve as a “plug-in” estimator of lagged shocks for the VARMA model,
and then we estimate the VARMA by OLS. This step is repeated until all of the estimated
parameters of the VARMA and all of the estimated residuals converge, which we define as
changing by less than 1e-6. In a second step, we use the parameter estimates from Step 1
as starting values for estimation by QML.
Model selection criteria are reported in Table 1. We use the standard Bayesian information
criterion (BIC), but the Akaike information criterion (AIC) is modified to correct for small
sample biases (Sugiura, 1978; Burnham and Anderson, 2004). The AIC model identifies
the VARMA (1,1) model, including the yield instruments as optimal. The BIC criterion
identifies the VARMA (1,1) model without instruments as optimal, but the VARMA (1,1)
model with instruments is identified by the BIC as having the second best score and we use
this model.

3.3

Identifying supply and demand shocks

The VARMA model delivers time series observations on ut . Theoretically, it is possible
to estimate the system defined by equations (2), (4), (6), (8), and (9) in one step, but
computationally this is a very tall order. There are 4 unobserved state variables (the Xtmr
11

vector) which have non-Gaussian innovations. However, note that if we can identify the
coefficients in Σ in equation (9), we can filter the supply and demand shocks from the
original macro shocks ut . With these structural shocks in hand, we can estimate univariate
BEGE systems on each of demand and supply shocks separately.
We use information in 2nd , 3rd and 4th order unconditional moments of the shocks to the
macroeconomic variables to identify loadings on supply and demand shocks. Specifically, we
calculate 48 statistics starting from the four macroeconomic shocks. These are the unconditional standard deviations (4), correlations (6), univariate (scaled) skewness and excess
kurtosis (8), selected co-skewness (12), and selected co-excess kurtosis measures (18). To
calculate the covariance matrix of the sampling error for these statistics, we use a block
bootstrapping routine. Specifically, we sample, with replacement, blocks of length 20 quarters of the 4 variable - vector of macroeconomic shocks, to build up a synthetic sample of
length equal to that of our data. We calculate the same set of 2nd , 3rd , and 4th order statistics for each of 10,000 synthetic samples. We then calculate the covariance matrix of these
statistics across bootstrap samples. Inspecting this sample covariance matrix, we found that
the sampling errors for some statistics are highly correlated, leading to ill-conditioning of
the covariance matrix. To estimate a better-conditioned covariance matrix, we calculated a
“shrinkage estimator” (Ledoit and Wolff, 2003), using a linear combination of the full covariance matrix (weight 0.95) and a diagonal version which zeros out the off-diagonal elements
(weight 0.05). Our results are not sensitive to perturbations in this weighting scheme. We
acknowledge that this covariance matrix estimator does not reflect sampling error associated
with the VARMA parameters that were used to identify the macroeconomic shocks, which
may lead to inefficiency of our estimates. We then estimate the loadings of the macroeconomic shocks onto the supply and demand shocks using Classical Minimum Distance (CMD
henceforth) optimization (see, e.g., Wooldridge, 2002, pp. 445-446). The CMD estimation
uses the inverse of the bootstrapped covariance matrix described above as the weighting
matrix.
Table 2 reports the higher-order moments we use in the estimation. Not surprisingly, all
volatility statistics are statistically significantly different from zero, but so are the coefficients
of excess kurtosis. However, among the skewness coefficients, only the positive skewness of
shocks to the unemployment gap is statistically significant and only one of 12 co-skewness
coefficients is significant. The symmetric co-kurtosis measures (those involving terms such as
12

x21 x22 ) are all significantly different from zero and 6 out of 12 “asymmetric” (those involving
terms such as x31 x2 ) co-kurtosis measures are statistically significant as well. The p-value
for the joint significance of all the 3rd and 4th order moments is < 0.0001.
We next use the information in these higher order moments to identify the loadings on our
supply and demand shocks. We estimate a total of 13 parameters using our 48 estimated
statistics. These can be grouped into three sets:
• The loadings of four macro shocks onto supply and demand shocks (8 parameters) in
the matrix Σ in (9), imposing the sign restrictions described above.
• The share of variation of the macro shocks that comes from idiosyncratic variation or
measurement error, that is the matrix Ω in (9)). We assume this share is constant
across the four variables (1 parameter). We do this to impose a prior that all 4 series
contribute (jointly) to demand and supply shocks. If we do not impose this restriction,
the system tends to drive the variance of idiosyncratic factors to zero for the less noisy
macro series, in which case the noisier macro series (such as real GDP growth) do not
contribute much to the identification of supply and demand shocks.
• The skewness and kurtosis of the supply and demand shocks (4 parameters). Note
that we do not assume a parametric model for the distribution of supply and demand
shocks at this stage: we simply estimate their skewness/kurtosis coefficients as free
parameters.
Table 2 shows that our CMD estimation does not miss any individual moment by more than
2 standard errors. The test of the overidentifying restrictions does reject at the 5 percent
level (p-value of 4.81%), showing that higher order moments indeed have statistical “bite”.
In Table 3, Panel A, we report the supply and demand loadings for the various macro
variables. These are generally quite precisely estimated. Our estimates suggest that supply
and demand contribute roughly equally to the variance of inflation. GDP growth and the
unemployment gap load a little more heavily onto demand shocks than on supply shocks,
with is also true for core inflation. We estimate the share of idiosyncratic variation for the
four series to be relatively high at 47 percent. These sources of variation may represent
measurement error in the macroeconomic data (see, e.g., Wilcox, 1992), but they may also
represent unmodeled structural variation.
13

Based on these loadings, we invert the supply and demand shocks from the macro shocks
using a Kalman filter assuming that the shocks et in equation (9) are i.i.d. Gaussian. Even
when shocks are not Gaussian, the Kalman filter is still best in terms of root-mean-square
error among all linear filters. The Kalman gain formula is:
K = Σ0 (ΣΣ0 + ΩΩ0 )−1 ,

(10)

where Σ is the 4x2 loading of the macro shocks onto the supply and demand factors, and Ω
is a diagonal 4x4 matrix of loadings onto the idiosyncratic shocks as in equation (9). Table
3, Panel B, reports Kalman gain coefficients, which are all of the intuitive sign.
In Panel C of Table 3, we show a variance decomposition illustrating how much of the
demand/supply shock variance is accounted for by the 4 macro variables. That is, we
compute, for example,

Cov(udt ,Kd,π πt )
,
V ar(udt )

where Kd,π is the Kalman gain coefficient on inflation

for the demand shock. By construction, these variables add up to one. The results show that
the 4 different series contribute about equally to the structural shocks, with the real activity
variables contributing slightly more to demand shocks, and inflation shocks contributing a
bit more to the identification of supply shocks.
Finally, in Panel D of Table 3, we report the skewness and kurtosis of the filtered supply
and demand shocks. Both shocks are leptokurtic but the demand shock is negatively skewed
whereas the supply shock has slight positive skewness. The departure from the Gaussian
distribution of the demand shocks is clearly more pronounced than that of the supply shock.
Yet, a standard Jarque-Bera test rejects the null of normality at the 1 percent level for both
shocks.

3.4

Estimating Macro Risk Factors

Note that the identification scheme for structural shocks described above is completely
model-free, making our methodology applicable with any statistical model which can accommodate non-Gaussian features of the data. Given the structural shocks, we are left to
identify the BEGE model parameters. We use an estimation and filtering apparatus due
to Bates (2006). The methodology is similar in spirit to that of the Kalman filter, but the
Bates routine is able to accommodate non-Gaussian shocks. The details of the estimation
are in Appendix C.
14

3.4.1

Parameter Estimates

Using standard information criteria, we found that our full model with two latent variables
driving the time variation in second and higher order moments was too rich for our time
series of filtered shocks. For the supply shock, the good volatility process does not show
substantial time variation and the good environment shock is essentially Gaussian featuring
a high shape parameter of the corresponding gamma distribution. We therefore imposed
the good environment process for supply to be Gaussian with a constant unit variance.
Note that the unconditional variances of the demand and supply shocks are restricted to be
1, which reduces the number of parameters to estimate by 1 and the supply shock BEGE
s
, and the share of the good
process therefore requires only 4 free parameters: σns , φsn , σnn

variance p̄s .
For the demand shock, we find evidence for time variation in both good and bad variance,
but the unconditional mean of the good volatility process becomes very high, indicating
that the good volatility shocks were often nearly Gaussian.5 However, it is not always
high, sometimes becoming low enough to indicate a nontrivial degree of conditional nonGaussianity. Moreover, a Gaussian stochastic volatility model for the pdt process is rejected
by the data. Nevertheless, this situation resulted in an identification problem for the BEGE
model, as the unconditional mean of pdt , was poorly identified.6 We therefore restricted it
to be 100, a restriction which is not rejected by the data.
The parameter estimates for the BEGE model are reported in Table 4. The table reports the
various parameter estimates including the unconditional values of the pt and nt variables,
which determine the extent of non-Gaussianity in the shock distributions. For the demand
shocks, unconditionally, the good demand variable is nearly Gaussian by construction, but
the bad environment variable is very non-Gaussian. In particular, its unconditional skewness
is

√2 ,
n̄d

or 3.21 and its kurtosis is

6
n̄d

or 15.45. The bad environment shape parameter is also

far less persistent than the good environment variable, therefore capturing rather short-lived
5

Recall that the macro risk factors also have an interpretation as the time-varying shape parameters of

a model with gamma-distributed shocks. As shape parameters grow large, gamma distributions approach a
Gaussian distribution.
6
This identification problem likely arises because when its shape parameter becomes over 10, the gamma
distribution becomes very close to Gaussian. Further increases in the shape parameter do not substantially
change the shape of the distribution.

15

recessionary bursts (0.79 versus 0.96 autocorrelation). For the supply shock, we imposed the
distribution of the good environment shock to be Gaussian. The supply bad-environment
distribution is relatively more Gaussian compared to the demand shock with the unconditional mean of the shape parameter equal to 1.07. This implies unconditional skewness of
1.94 and kurtosis of 5.63. The shock has similar persistence to the bad environment demand
shock, suggesting that supply driven recessions may have similar duration to demand driven
recessions.7

3.4.2

Model Comparision

We tested the performance of the BEGE model to examine whether it fits the estimated
supply and demand shocks as well as more well-known models that also feature time-varying
second- and higher-order moments. Specifically, we looked at the performance of the BEGE
model relative to regime-switching models of the Hamilton (1989)-type, and a model of
Gaussian stochastic volatility. To evaluate the relative performance of the models, we used
standard BIC and AIC (with the usual small sample correction) criteria.8 These results are
presented in Table 5. As shown in the top panel, for the supply shock, the BEGE model
performs better than the stochastic volatility model but worse than the regime switching
models using either criterion. For demand shocks, as reported in the middle panel, the BEGE
model outperforms both other models on both criteria. When examining the performance
jointly across supply and demand shocks, the BEGE model outperforms the other two
models. We conclude that the BEGE model generally performs well in this competition.

4

Macro Risks in the US Economy

Having estimated macroeconomic dynamics, we can now use our model as a lense to interpret the history of key U.S. macroeconomic data over the 1959-2015 period. We begin by
7

The astute reader will notice that five parameters are reported for the supply process, but there are

only four independent parameters required for the estimation. However, the parameters p̄s and n̄s can be
expressed as functions of the four model parameters. Their standard errors are calculated using the delta
method. A similar method was used for the demand BEGE model.
8
Because the BEGE and the Gaussian stochastic volatility models are estimated using approximate
maximum likelihood as in Bates (2006), the comparison of these models to the regime switching models,
which is estimated using exact maximum likelihood, is only informal.

16

characterizing the long-run effects of supply and demand shocks; we subsequently analyze
the nature of recessions within our framework, followed by examining the time series and
cyclical behavior of the macro risk factors themselves.

4.1

Impulse responses to aggregate supply and demand shocks

Our identification of supply and demand shocks utilizes a set of minimal linear sign restrictions and information in higher order moments. These sign restrictions are present in other
classic papers as well, such as Gali (1992) and Shapiro and Watson (1988) but are typically
accompanied by a set of additional economic restrictions (e.g., that demand shocks have
no long run effect on the level of GDP as in the classic Blanchard and Quah (1989) paper)
which we do not need. In this section, we characterize the long run effects of the structural
shocks using standard impulse response analysis.
For the purposes of calculating impulse response functions for the macro data, we must model
the joint evolution of the yield instruments with the macro series (because we allow yields to
forecast the macro variables, having found strong evidence for such dynamics). For our main
estimation, we therefore estimate a VARMA (1,1) using all six variables (the four macro
variables plus the 1-quarter and 10-year yields), which represents a slight generalization of
our main model of the macroeconomic time series because it allows lagged shocks for yields
to additionally affect the conditional mean of the macroeconomic series. To compute the
response of the four macroeconomic series at various horizons to the supply and demand
shocks, we need the contemporaneous response of all the variables to supply and demand
shocks. For the four macroeconomic series, these responses are the elements of the Σ matrix
in equation (9). For the two yield variables, we extract the time series for reduced-form
shocks from the VARMA (1,1)-estimation and simply regress these shocks onto the filtered
supply and demand shocks. We stack these loadings together with the Σ matrix into a 6x2
matrix, Σ2 . Then the responses of the six endogenous variables to the two structural shocks,
supply and demand, of unit size at horizon h, are given by the expression:
IR(h) = Ah−1 (A + B)Σ2 ,

(11)

where A and B are the AR and MA matrices from the VARMA-model, respectively. Note
that the standard error for the impulse response coefficients must account not only for the
estimation of the VARMA(1,1) parameters but also for the error incurred in identifying
17

supply and demand shocks, which involves the higher order moments of VARMA residuals.
To this end, we use a bootstrap procedure, which is described in detail in Appendix A. As a
robustness check, in Appendix B we also calculate “model-free” impulse responses following
Jorda (2005).
Table 6 contains the results, with the effects of demand (supply) shocks on the left (right)
(recall that these shocks have unit variance by construction). The effects are consistent
with the standard Keynesian interpretation. Demand shocks have large short run effects
on real GDP growth (with the initial shock being 0.40 percent) but their cumulative effect
on output is small (0.17 percent) and insignificantly different from zero. Supply shocks
generate smaller short run GDP growth effects but their cumulative effect is 0.65 percent
which is significantly different from zero. Demand and supply shocks have similar but
opposite effects on the price level, with the cumulative effects close to +1 percent (-0.80
percent) in the case of demand (supply) shocks, but these effects are imprecisely measured.
In sum, our identification scheme yields shocks whose long-run effects are consistent with a
well-established macroeconomic literature.

4.2

Characterizing recessions using aggregate supply and demand
shocks

Our identification of supply and demand shocks allows us to characterize recessions as either
supply or demand driven (or a combination of both). Figure 3 graphs the filtered demand
and supply shocks with NBER recessions shaded: it is apparent that many recessions are
accompanied by a negative supply shock, but this appears more prevalent in the seventies.
A large negative demand shock is very apparent for the Great Recession, but the recessions
in the early eighties were also accompanied by large negative demand shocks.
Table 7 quantifies the visual impression by simply adding up the (net) demand and supply
shocks over the recession period (that is, positive and negative shocks can cancel each other
out). The 1969-70 and 1973-75 recessions did not feature strongly negative demand shocks
but the other recessions did, with the 1981-82 and Great Recession featuring the largest
negative demand shocks. All recessions featured negative supply shocks, with the largest
negative shocks occurring in the 1974-1975 recession and the Great Recession. For the 198182 recession, the cumulative supply effect is effectively zero however. On a relative basis, the
18

first four recessions were predominantly supply driven whereas three of last four were more
demand driven (the exception being the 1990-91 recession). For the first five recessions, these
results are broadly consistent with Gali’s (1992) results, who also characterizes the 1973-75
recession as mostly supply driven and the 1981-82 recession as mostly demand driven. Our
results for the Great Recession assign a perhaps surprisingly large role to supply shocks, but
this is not inconsistent with the results in Ireland (2011) or Mulligan (2012), for example.
At the same time, recent work by Bils, Klenow and Malin (2012) and Mian and Sufi (2014)
using micro data stresses lower aggregate demand as the main cause of the steep drop in
employment during the Great Recession.
The Great Recession of 2008-2009 stimulated much research on the effects of macroeconomic
uncertainty on the economy (see, e.g., Ludvigson, Ma, and Ng, 2016; Carriero, Clark and
Marcellino, 2016). The BEGE structure implies that shocks to supply and demand are
correlated with changes in the macroeconomic risk factors. For example, the bad volatility
demand shock is perfectly conditionally correlated with the bad demand shock (see equations
(4) and (6)), so that uncertainty shocks affect the levels of macroeconomic variables by
assumption. We therefore also investigate the behavior of the macroeconomic risk factors
during recessions. Our model implies that the total conditional variance of demand and
supply shocks are the sum of the good and bad components. These are plotted in Figure 4.
The good demand variance (see Panel A) was relatively high in the 70s and the early 80s,
and then decreased to low levels consistent with the Great Moderation (a further discussion
of the Great Moderation is below). The bad demand variance shows much less pronounced
low frequency variation but peaks in the recessions of 1960, the early eighties, 2001 and the
recent Great Recession. It also shows short-lived peaks in the late sixties and twice in the
decade between 2000 and the beginning of the Great Recession.
Panel B of Figure 4 performs the same exercise for supply variances. The level of good
variance is time-invariant at a relatively low level. The bad supply variance appears higher
in the stagflationary episodes of the 1970s, but closer inspection reveals that it peaks in
all recessions with the exception of the 2001 recession. Its increase in the Great Recession
is extreme, starting towards the end of the period and exceeding its unconditional average
level of 0.52 until 2012Q1.9
9

Campbell, Pflueger, and Viceira (2015) suggest that supply shock volatility decreases after 1980 but its

decrease may have been masked by changes in monetary policy, at least until 2000.

19

Panel C of Figure 4 plots together the conditional variances of demand and supply shocks.
Given that both supply and demand shocks have unit variance, the graph immediately gives
a sense of which variance dominates. Supply variance tends to spike higher in recessions
than demand variance does. The only secular decline that one might associate with the
Great Moderation appears to come from the demand side.
One novel feature of our model is that it accommodates and provides estimates of the
non-Gaussian features of the shocks. In particular, in environments dominated by elevated
levels of bad supply variance, we would expect high-inflation scares and positive inflation
skewness, whereas in aggregate demand environments, we may witness negative inflation
skewness (deflation scares). For the real activity variables, recessions, being riskier macro
environments, should be naturally accompanied by negative skewness for real GDP growth
and positive skewness for the unemployment gap. Figure 5 graphs the (scaled) conditional
skewness for our 4 macro variables. For real GDP growth and the unemployment gap, it is
indeed the case that in recessions, there generally is a local trough in the skewness of GDP
growth and a local peak in the skewness of the unemployment rate gap. The movements are
largest in the recent Great Recession. For the inflation variables, we see positive spikes in
conditional skewness in the first 4 recessions and the 1990 recession. However, in the recessions of 1980 and 2001, we witnessed negative skewness and in the Great Recession, there
are large movements in skewness from positive to negative and back to positive, consistent
with this period witnessing both large supply and demand shocks.

4.3

Time variation in conditional macro variances and the Great
Moderation

Because our model generates time variation in the conditional variance of the macro variables, it can potentially inform the debate on the Great Moderation. The literature has
mostly focused on output volatility and puts a “break point” for output volatility in the
first quarter of 1984 (see McConnell and Perez-Quiros, 2000; Stock, Watson, Gali and Hall,
2002). For inflation, Baele et. al. (2015) suggest a later date, the first quarter of 1990.
Whereas most of the discussion in the literature has tried to attribute the decreased volatility to either good luck or improvements in monetary policy (see e.g. Cogley and Sargent,
2005; Benati and Surico, 2009; Sims and Zha, 2006, and Baele et. al., 2015, and the refer20

ences therein), our model offers an alternative perspective. First, there is no visual evidence
of a break in supply variances at all. However, supply variances peak in recessions and so
the recession-intensive 70s and 80s naturally feature higher supply variances than the period
thereafter. While it is possible that monetary policy lowered the incidence of recessions, it
is not obvious how monetary policy would stave off the volatility associated with supply
shocks, and indeed does not appear to have done so in the 1990 and recent Great Recession.
Second, for the demand variance, it is obvious that the more benign “good” variance process
shows a distinct break in the mid-eighties, but the more pernicious “bad” variance continues to peak in recessions as it did before. This result is reminiscent of a recent finding in
Gadea, Gomez Loscos and Prez-Quiros (2014), who, after examining a very long historical
period, also conclude that declines in output volatility are associated with expansionary not
recessionary periods.
We next test more formally whether inflation and real GDP growth have seen declines in
volatility such as that suggested by the Great Moderation, and if so, whether changes in
good demand variance, bad demand variance, or bad supply variance explain the shift.
Table 8 reports simple dummy regressions for inflation (Panel A) and GDP growth (Panel
B). The first three columns report the constant and slope of a regression of the conditional
variance of either inflation or GDP growth on a constant and a dummy. We use conservative
standard errors correcting for heteroscedasticity and serial correlation using 40 Newey-West
lags, but we do not account for sampling error in the filtered macro risk factors.
The rest of the table then splits up the conditional variance in their demand and supply
components, and the demand variance into its good and bad demand components. To
facilitate comparisons with the literature, we focus mainly on changes in volatility from and
initial period spanning 1959 to 1990 compared to the later period spanning from 1990 to
2000. For inflation, there is strong evidence of a decrease in variance after 1990, with the
variance decreasing by about 1/5 of its magnitude before the break and the break being
statistically significant at the 5 percent level. The additional tests reveal that the break is
entirely due to a decrease in good demand variance. In other words, the Great Moderation
may not imply smaller inflation volatility in future recessions. In Panel B of Table 7, the
same analysis is performed for real GDP growth volatility. Similarly, the break point indeed
is associated with the GDP variance decreasing by about 20 percent of its pre-break value,
but the change is only significant at the 10 percent level. Here the decomposition analysis
21

produces less clear results. We find a significant contribution from a reduction in bad
supply variance, likely associated with the reduced incidence of recessions since 1980, but
the (insignificant) reduction in demand variance is economically larger. While both good
and bad demand variances contributed to the decrease, only the decrease in the volatility of
good demand is economically meaningful, and the variance reductions are not statistically
significant.
Lengthening our sample period to the present could increase the power of our tests, and also
enables us to address a more recent question: “Is the Great Moderation over?” Baele et. al.
(2015) use a macro-regime switching model suggesting that the Great Moderation for both
inflation and output has ended, even before (for inflation) or just with the onset (for output)
of the Great Recession. However, Gadea, Gomez Loscos and Prez-Quiros (2015) argue, based
on a pure statistical analysis of GDP growth volatility, that the Great Moderation is alive
and well, despite the Great Recession experience. To test these claims using our estimates
of the conditional variance of inflation and output, we examine ending the sample in the
fourth quarter of 2006 (just before the Great Recession) or the final quarter in 2015 (using
the full sample).
For inflation, when the data from the Great Recession are ignored, the Great Moderation
result and its decomposition we documented before is maintained and becomes statistically
stronger. However, when we extend the sample to the end of 2015, the decline in the inflation
variance weakens and becomes statistically insignificant. It is still the case though that the
(good) demand variances become significantly lower post 1990. This suggests that if more
non-recession data accumulate, we may well find that the Great Moderation for inflation
holds up.
For real GDP growth, extending the sample to 2006 strengthens the Great Moderation
evidence statistically somewhat, with now the demand variance also decreasing significantly
at the 10% level. Yet, the evidence against constant overall and demand variances remains
rather weak. The significant supply variance decline result is robust however. When we
extend the sample to the end of 2015, the GDP variance overall decreases but the result is
weaker economically than in McConnell and Perez-Quiros (2000) and Stock, Watson, Gali
and Hall (2002), and not statistically significant. We no longer find evidence that the supply
variance has changed, but still find the (good) demand variance to be lower than before.

22

We conclude that there is some evidence that the “good” demand variance has decreased
over time, but there is no strong evidence that either “bad” demand variances or supply
variances have declined. Our analysis of the structural sources of recessions suggest that
we therefore should not expect them to be less variable in the future than they were in the
past.

4.4

Conditional Covariances between Macroeconomic Time Series

From the perspective of theoretical asset pricing, an important implication of our structural
framework regards the covariance between inflation and real activity. From Equation 3, it is
evident that in an environment where demand (supply) variances dominate, the conditional
covariance between inflation and real activity is positive (negative). To the extent that
variances are persistent, changes in this covariance may have important ramifications for
term and bond return premiums, which we examine in Section V. Surprisingly, to our
knowledge, sign-switching correlations have so far only been documented for consumption
growth and aggregate inflation (Hasseltoft and Burkhardt, 2012, Song, 2014, and Ermolov,
2015).
Figure 6 graphs the conditional covariance between, respectively, inflation and real GDP
growth and also between core inflation and the unemployment gap (where the aforementioned signs are reversed). Overall, the covariance is mostly positive (roughly 70 percent
of the time), which is driven by the important contribution of (good) demand variances
to all macro variables. Yet, there are frequent sign changes, mostly associated with large
supply shocks during recessions, especially in the early part of the sample period. Early in
the Great Recession, demand shocks generate a local peak in the covariance but subsequent
large supply shocks then bring the covariance down. A covariance of near zero can in fact
hide some strong structural sources of comovement. To see this more clearly, we also show
the (bad) supply and (good and bad) demand covariance components of the total covariance.
For example, the near-zero correlation between real GDP and inflation from 2000 up to the
onset of the Great Recession is the sum of a sizable positive covariance driven by good and
bad demand shocks and a sizable negative covariance riven by bad supply shocks. In the
Great Recession, the conditional bad variance of both kinds of shocks shoots up, with the
23

bad demand shock first ratcheting the covariance upwards, and bad supply variance later
bringing it in negative territory.

5

Macro Risks and the Term Structure

In this section, we explore the interaction of macro factors with the term structure of interest
rates. In the preceding sections, we have identified three novel macro-risk factors (pdt , ndt , and
nst ). These variables can be interpreted as “good” or “bad” conditional volatilities of demand
and supply shocks, but their time variation also changes the entire conditional distribution
of these shocks. For comparison with the existing literature on explaining bond yields and
returns using macro data, we also examine the performance of “level” macro factors, which
include expected inflation, expected core inflation and expected real GDP growth (We use
the previously described VARMA(1,1) system to compute these expectations). We also use
the unemployment gap as a macro level factor. Thus there are a total of 7 macro-factors we
consider.
We address three questions. First, we ask whether macroeconomic factors help explain
the yield curve. Second, we investigate the predictive power of our new macro risk factors
for bond excess returns. Finally, we also explore how the macro risk factors affect term
premiums.

5.1

Macro Risks and the Yield Curve

We start by computing the classic yield curve financial factors. The “level” factor is the
equally weighted average of all yields (from the one year to the 10 year maturity); the
“slope” factor is the difference between the 10 year yield and one quarter yield; and finally,
the “curvature” factor subtracts twice the two-year rate from the sum of the one quarter rate
and the 10 year yield. Taken together, these three factors span the overwhelming majority of
variation in yields at all maturities. Thus, to operationalize our test of whether macro factors
explain yields, we test whether the macro factors explain variation in these three factors.
To assess whether macro factors are important determinants of these three financial factors,
Table 9 reports R2 statistics from regressions of the financial factors onto macro factors.
Panel A reports results regarding the macro level factors and the macro risk factors. First,
24

the explanatory power of the macro level factors alone for the financial factors is substantial,
with the adjusted R2 ’s exceeding 70, 55, and 30 percent respectively for the level, slope, and
curvature factors. Second, the macro risks contribute in a statistically significant fashion to
the level and curvature factors10 , boosting the R2 ’s by about 6 percentage points in both
cases. As a robustness check, in Panel B we check whether the boost in explanatory power
due to the macro risk factors survives the inclusion of a second set of level macro factors in
the regression, those constructed by Ang and Piazzesi (2003). The increase in R2 ’s due to
the macro risk factors is essentially unaffected.

5.2

Macro Risks and Bond Return Predictability

The literature on bond return predictability is voluminous, but mostly focuses on using
information extracted from the yield curve to predict future holding period returns (e.g.
Cochrane and Piazzesi, 2005). Ludvigson and Ng (2009) find that “real” and “inflation”
factors, extracted from a large number of macroeconomic time series, have significant forecasting power for future excess returns on nominal bonds. Moreover, this forecastability is
above and beyond the predictive power contained in forward rates and yield spreads. Also,
the bond risk premia implied by these regressions have a marked countercyclical component.
Bansal and Shaliastovich (2013) show that consumption growth and inflation volatility predict excess bond returns. Cieslak and Pavola (2015) uncover short-lived predictability in
bond returns by controlling for a persistent component in inflation expectations. Barillas (2011) shows that the predictability due to macro factors for excess bond returns is
economically significant.
In Table 10, we explore the link between future bond returns and our macro factors. We focus
on excess one-quarter holding period returns relative to the one quarter yield. This avoids
the use of overlapping data which can spuriously increase R2 ’s in predictability regressions
(see, e.g., Fama and French, 1988). Nonetheless, all standard errors are computed using
40 Newey-West (1987) lags. R2 ’s produced by the financial factors alone are significantly
boosted by including both macro level factors and macro risk factors. For maturities from 1
to 10 years, the R2 ’s from regressions including only financial factors are around 7 percent.
The R2 ’s increase to between 16 and 22 percent when macro level factors are included, and
10

We use the bootstrap test of Bauer and Hamilton (2016) to determine statistical significance.

25

increase by an additional 2 to 4 percentage points when macro risk factors are included.
These increases in explanatory power are statistically significant.
To delve into the economic mechanism by which macro risks forecast future bond returns,
Table 11 presents the coefficients from forecasting regressions that include both level macro
and macro risk factors.11 Individually, there are few significant coefficients. Of the macro
level factors, expected core inflation enters with a negative sign and is highly statistically significant for all maturities, while expected aggregate inflation enters with a positive significant
coefficient of similar magnitude. The significance of expected inflation in such regressions is
consistent with the results of Cieslak and Pavola (2015) (but their regression also includes
yields). Of the macro risk factors, the bad demand variance has a negative significant coefficient and the bad supply variance a positive (albeit insignificant) coefficient. Therefore,
consistent with intuition, being in a risky (that is volatile) demand environment, where
bonds are good hedges against general macroeconomic risks, reduces the risk premium on
bonds, and the reverse is true in the case of a supply environment. The effect of bad demand
variance is economically large: for example, for the 5 year maturity a one standard deviation
increase in the bad demand factor decreases the expected annualized excess bond return by
3.03 percentage points. The corresponding coefficients increase with bond maturity. The
coefficient on the “good” demand risk factor is positive but insignificantly different from
zero.12
Given that previous studies have considered macroeconomic “level” and “risk” factors in
isolation and that factors measuring macroeconomic risk have received scant attention in
such investigations, the relative predictive power of risk factors is of interest. Table 11
indicates that the adjusted R2 from macro level factors alone in excess return regressions
drops from 18 percent at the two year horizon to 15 percent for the 10 year bond. However,
the contribution of macro risks to the R2 increases with bond maturity, both statistically
and economically, such that the total adjusted R2 stays around 20 percent for all maturities.
11

Including financial factors (level, slope, and curvature) in the regressions does not materially change

any of the results.
12
To further elaborate on the risk premium intuition, we also added the contemporaneous demand and
supply shocks (udt+1 and ust+1 ) to the bond return regressions. In unreported results, we find that the supply
shocks carry positive but non-significant coefficients and the demand shocks carry negative coefficients that
are significant at the 1% level and become larger in magnitude with maturity. That is, realized bond excess
returns are high if a negative demand shock occurred during the holding period.

26

Ludvigson and Ng (2009) found the bond risk premiums implied by their predictive regressions, which included both yield variables and macro-factors, to be counter-cyclical. It is
not difficult to obtain counter-cyclical real bond risk premiums in economic models, e.g., in
habit models with counter-cyclical prices of risk (see, e.g., Wachter, 2006). Our framework
suggests that not all recessions are equal in this respect. Our predictive regressions indicate
that risk premiums are, everything else equal, lower when the macro-environment is primarily demand driven. To check on the cyclicality of bond risk premiums that are implied by
our regressions, we use the fitted values of the predictive regressions13 as an estimate of the
risk premium and regress it on a NBER dummy, the ratio of the aggregate demand variance,
including the good and bad variances, to the corresponding aggregate supply variance, and
the interaction of the two. We rescale the demand/supply ratio variable to have a standard
deviation of one. Table 12 reports the results. First, coefficients on the NBER dummy are
positive and increase with maturity. Economically, the effect is rather large: an NBER recession increases the annualized expected excess return on a 10-year bond on average by 5.64
percentage points. However, the coefficients are not statistically significantly different from
zero, so we find only weak statistical evidence of counter-cyclical risk premiums. Second,
the demand/supply ratio is indeed negatively associated with risk premiums, and especially
so in recessions for the 5 and 10 year bonds. Again, these effects are economically large for
the longer maturities, but not statistically significant. For example, for the 10 year bond, if
the demand/supply ratio were to increase by 1 standard deviation, the annualized bond risk
premium would not increase by 5.64 percentage points, but only by 2.82 (5.64-0.73-2.09)
percentage points. Of course, it is important to recall that supply variances spike up as well
in most recessions.

5.3

Macro Risks and Term Premiums

As we indicated before, most of the literature examining the link between the macroeconomy
and bond risk premiums has focused on macro level factors.14 One important exception is
13

Including financial factors (level, slope, and curvature) to construct the expected excess bond returns

does not materially change any of the results.
14
An exception is Wachter (2006), where the risk premium depends on the surplus ratio, essentially a
weighted average of past consumption shocks. However, the more recent theoretical literature (e.g., Buraschi
and Jiltsov, 2007; Gabaix 2012; Bansal and Shaliastovich, 2013) suggests that focusing on second and higher
order moments is more logical.

27

Wright (2011), who does not examine excess holding period returns, but an important and
closely related component of bond yields, the term premium. Wright shows that term
premiums are countercyclical and strongly affected by inflation uncertainty in a panel of
countries.15 We compute term premiums for the 5 year and 10 year maturity as the yield
for each maturity minus the average of expected future short-term rates over the life of the
bond. To measure the expected average short yield, we employ survey forecasts from the
Blue Chip survey. Due to the limited availability of survey data, the sample we use for
this exercise spans only 1983Q4-2015Q2 for the 5 year bond and 1986Q2-2015Q2 for the 10
year bond. We then regress the computed term premium on contemporaneous level macro
factors and macro risk factors.
Results from this exercise are reported in Table 13. They are similar to the results in Table
11 on excess holding period returns. Expected core inflation, expected inflation and expected
GDP growth significantly affect term premiums with the same signs as in the excess holding
period return regressions. Moreover, the bad demand variance risk factor negatively and
significantly affects the term premium, consistent with the idea that in such an environment
bonds act as a good hedge. The adjusted R2 is 69 percent for the 5 year and 67 percent for
the 10 year bond. However, only for the 10-year term premium do the macro risk factors
add significantly to the explanatory power of the macro level variables.
In Table 14, we examine the cyclicality of the term premiums. In line with Wright (2011) and
Bauer, Rudebusch, and Wu (2014), we find that the term premium significantly increases
in recessions, by 1.13 percent (0.77 percent) for the 5-year (10-year) bond. These numbers
are economically significant and statistically significant at the 1 percent level. Surprisingly,
we also find that the term premium is higher in demand environments, for the 5 year bond
by about 0.5 percentage point (and significantly so), but the effect is not significant and
smaller for the 10 year bond. However, the interaction effect with the NBER dummy has the
expected negative sign and is significantly different from zero at the 1 percent significance
level. The demand environment effects are large; a one standard deviation increase in the
demand/supply variance ratio decreases the term premium by about 1 percentage point for
the 5 year bond in a recession and about

2
3

percentage point for the 10-year bond. Therefore,

“demand effects” of this magnitude render the usual counter-cyclical term premium increase
15

Bauer, Rudebusch, and Wu (2014) re-examine Wright’s empirical evidence correcting for small sample

bias in the VAR he runs to compute the term premium, but his main empirical conclusions remain robust.

28

in recessions economically (and statistically) insignificant.

6

Conclusion

In this article, we provide three main contributions. First, we develop a new identification methodology to decompose macroeconomic shocks into “demand” shocks which move
inflation and GDP growth in the same direction and “supply shocks” which move inflation and GDP growth in opposite directions. The identification relies on non-Gaussianities
in the macro data. We find aggregate demand shocks to be distinctly negatively skewed
and leptokurtic, whereas supply shocks unconditionally show little skewness but are also
leptokurtic. Despite this alternative identification, the long-run effects of the aggregate demand and supply shocks conform to standard intuition as in the seminal work of Blanchard
and Quah (1989). Investigating the various recessions in our sample, we find the four recessions in the 1960s and 1970s to be predominantly supply driven, whereas of the last four,
three were more demand driven (the exception being the 1990-91 recession). The Great
Recession featured both large negative demand and supply shocks.
Second, we develop a new dynamic model for real economic activity and inflation, where the
shocks are drawn from a Bad Environment - Good Environment model, which accommodates
time-varying non-Gaussian features with “good” and “bad” volatility. We extract three
macro-risk factors, bad and good volatilities for the aggregate demand shocks, and bad
supply volatility (the good supply volatility is found to be time-invariant). Until about the
mid-seventies conditional supply variances appear to dominate macroeconomic volatility,
while afterwards demand variances are mostly relatively more important. However, supply
shocks variances invariably peak in recessions. The “good” demand variance has decreased
over time, but there is no strong evidence that either “bad” demand variances or supply
variances have declined. Importantly, recessions continue to be accompanied by temporarily
high bad demand and supply variances. We also provide new insights about the Great
Moderation in that it appears to reflect primarily a decline in good demand variance. Finally,
we find that the conditional correlation between inflation and real activity varies through
time and regularly switches sign, as the relative importance of demand and supply risk
factors varies over time.
Third, we link the macro factors extracted from the dynamic macro model, expected GDP
29

growth, the unemployment gap, and expected (core) inflation and the macro risk variables
represented by the conditional variances (shape parameters) of the demand and supply
shocks, to the term structure. The macro variables explain 78 percent of the variation in
the levels of yields. While the contribution of the macro risk factors to this R2 is modest,
it is nonetheless statistically significant. When we run predictive regressions of excess bond
returns onto the macro variables, the R2 is around 20 percent. Again, the contribution of
the macro risk factors is statistically significant and increases with maturity. We find that
increases in the bad aggregate demand variance significantly reduce bond risk premiums
and also term premiums.
It would be useful to be elucidate how variation in risk premiums is accounted for by the
various macro risk factors and decompose risk premiums into real and inflation components.
To accomplish this, a term structure model is necessary. In future work, we plan to build a
term structure model in which the macro variables (level and risk factors) feature as state
variables. Despite the non-Gaussianities in their dynamics, the BEGE structure has the
advantage that bond prices nonetheless remain affine in the state variables.

30

References
Ajello, Andrea, Luca Benzoni, and Olena Chyruk, 2012, Core and “Crust”: Consumer Prices and
the Term Structure of Interest Rates, Working paper, Federal Reserve Board and Federal Reserve
Bank of Chicago.
Ang, Andrew, Geert Bekaert, and Min Wei, 2007, Do Macro Variables, Asset Markets, or Surveys
Forecast Inflation Better?, Journal of Monetary Economics, 4, 2007, pp. 1163-1212
Ang, Andrew, and Monika Piazzesi, 2003, A No-Arbitrage Vector Autoregression of Term Structure
Dynamics with Macroeconomic and Latent Variables, Journal of Monetary Economics, 50, 74587.
Baele, Lieven, Geert Bekaert, Seonghoon Cho, Koen Inghelbrecht and Antonion Moreno, 2015,
Macroeconomic Regimes, Journal of Monetary Economics, 70, pp. 51-71.
Bansal, Ravi, and Ivan Shaliastovich, 2013, A Long-run Risks Explanation of Predictability Puzzles
in Bond and Currency Markets, Review of Financial Studies, 26, pp. 1-33.
Barillas, Francisco, 2011, Can We Exploit Predictability in Bond Markets?, Working paper, Emory
University.
Bates, David, 2006, Maximum Likelihood Estimation of Latent Affine Processes, Review of Financial Studies, 19, pp. 909-965.
Bauer, Michael, Glenn Rudebusch, and Jing Wu, 2014, Term Premia and Inflation Uncertainty:
Empirical Evidence from an International Panel Dataset: Comment, American Economic Review,
pp. 323-337.
Bauer, Michael, and James Hamilton, 2016, Robust Bond Risk Premia, Working paper, Federal
Reserve Bank of San Francisco and University of California San Diego.
Bekaert, Geert, Eric Engstrom, and Yuhang Xing, 2009, Risk, Uncertainty, and Asset Prices,
Journal of Financial Economics, 91, pp. 59-82.
Bekaert, Geert, and Eric Engstrom, 2016, Asset Return Dynamics under Bad Environment-Good
Environment Fundamentals, Journal of Political Economy, forthcoming.
Benati, Luca, and Paulo Surico, 2009, VAR Analysis and the Great Moderation, American Economic Review, 99, pp. 1636-1652.
Bils, Mark, Peter Klenow, and Benjamin Malin, 2012, Reset Price Inflation and the Impact of
Monetary Policy Shocks, American Economic Review, 102, pp. 2798-2825.

31

van Binsbergen, Jules, Jesus Fernandez-Villaverde, Ralph Koijen, and Juan Rubio-Ramirez, 2012,
The Term Structure of Interest Rates in a DSGE Model with Recursive Preferences, Journal of
Monetary Economics, 59, pp. 634-648.
Blanchard, Olivier, 1989, A Traditional Interpretation of Macroeconomic Fluctuations, American
Economic Review, 79, pp. 1146-1164.
Blanchard, Olivier, and Danny Quah, 1989, The Dynamic Effects of Aggregate Demand and Supply
Disturbances, American Economic Review, 79, pp. 655-673.
Bureau of Economic Analysis, 1993, Reliability and Accuracy of the Quarterly Estimates of GDP,
Survey of Consumer Business, October 1993.
Buraschi, Andrea, and Alexei Jiltsov, 2007, Habit Formation and Macroeconomic Models of the
Term Structure of Interest Rates, Journal of Finance, 66, pp. 3009-3063.
Burnham, Kenneth, and David Anderson, 2004, Multimodel Inference Understanding AIC and
BIC in Model Selection, Sociological Methods & Research, 33, pp. 261-304.
Campbell, John, Carolin Pflueger, and Luis Viceira, 2015, Monetary Policy Drivers of Bond and
Equity Risks, Working paper, Harvard University and University of British Columbia.
Campbell, John, Adi Sunderam, and Luis Viceira, 2016, Inflation Bets or Deflation Hedges? The
Changing Risks of Nominal Bond, Critical Finance Review, forthcoming.
Carriero, Andrea, Todd Clark, and Massimiliano Marcellino, 2016, Measuring Macroeconomic
Uncertainty and its Impact on the Economy, Working paper, University of London, Federal Reserve
Bank of Cleveland, and Bocconi University.
Cieslak, Anna, and Pavol Povala, 2015, Expected returns in Treasury bonds, Review of Financial
Studies, 28, pp. 2859-2901.
Cochrane, John, 1994, Shocks, Journal of Monetary Economics, 41, pp. 295-364.
Cochrane, John, and Monika Piazzesi, 2005, Bond risk premia, American Economic Review, 95,138160.
Dolores Gadea, Maria, Ana Gomes Loscos and Gabriel Perez-Quiros, 2015, The Great Moderation
in Historical Perspective: Is It That Great?, Working paper, Bank of Spain.
Dolores Gadea, Maria, Ana Gomes Loscos and Gabriel Perez-Quiros, 2014, The Two Greatest.
Great Recession vs. Great Moderation, Working paper, Bank of Spain.
Ermolov, Andrey, 2015, Time-varying Risk of Nominal Bonds: How Important Are Macroeconomic

32

Shocks, Working paper, Fordham University.
Evans, Martin, and Paul Wachtel, 1993, Were Price Changes during the Great Depression Anticipated?: Evidence from Nominal Interest Rates, Journal of Monetary Economics, 32, pp. 3-34.
Fama, Eugene, 1981, Stock Returns, Real Activity, Inflation, and Money, American Economic
Review, 71, pp. 545-565.
Gabaix, Xavier, Variable Rare Disasters: An Exactly Solved Framework for Ten Puzzles in MacroFinance, Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2012, 127, pp. 645-700.
Gadea, Maria, Ana Gomes Loscos and Gabriel Perez-Quiros, 2014, The Two Greatest. Great
Recession vs. Great Moderation, Working paper, Bank of Spain.
Gadea, Maria, Ana Gomes Loscos and Gabriel Perez-Quiros, 2015, The Great Moderation in
Historical Perspective: Is It That Great?, Working paper, Bank of Spain.
Gali, Jordi, 1992, How Well Does the IS-LM Model Fit Postwar U.S. Data?, Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 107, pp. 709-738.
Gourieroux, Christian, and Joann Jasiak, 2006, Autoregressive Gamma Processes, Journal of Forecasting, 25, pp. 129-152.
Gürkaynak, Refet, Brian Sack, and Jonathan Wright, 2010, The U.S. Treasury Yield Curve: 1961
to the Present, Working paper, Federal Reserve Board.
Hamilton, James, 1989, A New Approach to the Economic Analysis of Nonstationary Time Series
and the Business Cycle, Econometrica, 57, pp. 357-384.
Hannan, Edward, and Jorma Rissanen, 1982, Recursive Estimation of Mixed AutoregressiveMoving Average Order, Biometrika, 69, pp. 81-94.
Harvey, Campbell, 1988, The Real Term Structure and Consumption Growth, Journal of Financial
Economics, 22, pp. 305-333.
Hasseltoft, Henrik and Dominic Burkhardt, 2012, Understanding Asset Correlations, Working
paper, University of Zurich and Swiss Finance Institute.
Ireland, Peter, 2011, A New Keynesian Perspecitve on the Great Recession, Journal of Money,
Credit and Banking, 43, pp. 31-54.
Jorda, Oscar, 2005, Estimation and Inference of Impulse Responses by Local Projections, American
Economic Review, 95, pp. 161-182.
Jurado, Kyle, Sydney Ludvigson, and Serena Ng, 2015, Measuring Uncertainty, American Eco-

33

nomic Review, 105, pp. 1177-1216.
Ledoit, Olivier, and Michael Wolf, 2003, Improved estimation of the covariance matrix of stock
returns with an application to portfolio selection, Journal of Empirical Finance, 10, pp. 603-621.
Ludvigson, Sydney, and Serena Ng, 2009, Macro Factors in Bond Risk Premia, Review of Financial
Studies, 22, pp. 5027-5067.
Ludvigson, Sydney, Sai Ma, and Serena Ng, 2016, Uncertainty and Business Cycles: Exogenous
Impulse or Endogenous Response?, Working paper, New York University and Columbia University.
McConnell, Margaret, and Gabriel Perez-Quiros, 2000, Output Fluctuations in the United States:
What Has Changed since the Early 1980’s?, American Economic Review, pp. 1464-1476.
Mian, Atif, and Amir Sufi, 2014, What Explains the 2007-2009 Drop in Employment?, Econometrica, 82, pp. 2197-2223.
Mulligan, Casey, 2012, The Redistribution Recession: How Labor Market Distortions Contracted
the Economy, Oxford University Press.
Newey, Whitney K., and Kenneth D. West, 1987, A Simple, Positive Semi-Definite, Heteroskedasticity and Autocorrelation Consistent Covariance Matrix, Econometrica, 55, 703-08.
Piazzesi, Monika, and Eric Swanson, 2008, Futures Prices as Risk-adjusted Forecasts of Monetary
Policy, Journal of Monetary Economics, pp. 677-691.
Song, Dongho, 2014, Bond Market Exposures to Macroeconomic and Monetary Policy Risks, Working paper, Boston College.
Shapiro, Matthew, and Mark Watson, 1988, Sources of Business Cylcle Fluctuations, NBER
Macroeconomics Annual, 3, pp. 111-156.
Stock, James, and Mark Watson with comments by Jordi Gali and Robert Hall, 2002, Has the
Business Cycle Changed and Why?, NBER Macroeconomics Annual, 17, pp. 159-230.
Sims, Christopher, 1980, Macroeconomics and Reality, Econometrica, 48, pp. 1-48.
Sims, Christopher, and Tao Zha, 2006, Were There Regime Switches in U.S. Monetary Policy?,
American Economic Review, 96, pp. 54-81.
Sugiura, Nariaki, 1978, Further Analysts of the Data by Akaike’ s Information Criterion and the
Finite Corrections, 1, pp. 13-26.
Uhlig, Harald, 2005, What Are the Effects of Monetary Policy on Output? Results from an
Agnostic Identification Procedure, Journal of Monetary Economics, 52, pp. 381-419.

34

Wilcox, David, 1992, The Construction of U.S. Consumption Data: Some Facts and Their Implications for Empirical Work, 82, pp. 922-941.
Woodford, Michael, 2003, Interest and Prices: Foundations of a Theory of Monetary Policy, Princeton University Press.
Wooldridge, Jeffrey, 2002, Econometric Analysis of Cross Section and Panel Data, MIT Press.
Wright, Jonathan, 2011, Term Premia and Inflation Uncertainty: Empirical Evidence from an
International Panel Dataset, American Economic Review, pp. 1514-1534.

35

Appendix A - Bootstrapping standard errors for the
impulse responses
The VARMA parameters and the resulting reduced-form shocks are estimated with error,
and so are the higher-order moments of the reduced-form shocks (and their covariance
matrix). These sources of error affect the distribution of the sampling error of the loadings
of the endogenous variables onto supply and demand shocks, the time series estimates of
the supply and demand shocks, and the impulse response functions. To account for all of
these sources of error, we use a bootstrapping routine.
We begin by sampling, with replacement, the reduced-form shocks from the estimated
VARMA model. We assemble synthetic samples using 22 randomly chosen blocks of length
20 quarters. This results in synthetic samples of approximately the same length as our data
(220 for bootstraps, 225 for the data). We use these shocks and the estimated VARMA
parameters to build up synthetic samples of the endogenous variables. Note that we do
not need any estimates of the covariance matrix of shocks to do this. Beginning from these
synthetic samples, we follow the same procedures for each bootstrap sample that we do for
the actual sample to calculate all the statistics of interest:
• Estimate VARMA(1,1) parameters on the synthetic sample. Here we deviate from the
procedure used on the actual data by only estimating the VARMA by recursive-OLS
and skipping the “second stage” quasi-maximum likelihood estimation, because the
quasi-maximum likelihood estimation step is very time consuming.
• Estimate higher-order moments of the reduced form shocks and their covariance matrix
• Estimate loadings of the macro variables onto supply and demand using the GMM
procedure on the higher order moments
• Invert supply and demand shocks suing the Kalman filter procedure
• Estimate the loadings of the yield variables onto the supply and demand shocks by
OLS
• Estimate the impulse responses

36

Appendix B - Model-free Impulse Responses to Aggregate Demand and Supply Shocks
Following Jorda (2005), we calculate the model-free impulse responses using OLS regressions
of the form:
Yt+h = β0 + β1 Yt−1 + β2 ûreduced
+ β3 ûsupply
+ β4 ûdemand
+ t+h ,
t−1
t−1
t−1
where ûreduced are the residuals from the VARMA, and ûsupply and ûdemand are the inverted
supply and demand shocks. Standard errors are computed as described in Appendix A.
The results are as follows:
Cumulative (20 Quarters) Responses

Real GDP level

Price level

Demand shock

Supply shock

0.56%

0.75%

(0.35%)

(0.40%)

1.44%

-0.67%

(0.53%)

(0.52%)

37

Appendix C - Maximum likelihood estimation of demand and supply shock dynamics
We restrict attention to the demand shock estimation, as the supply shock estimation is
identical. The system to estimate is:
d
d
udt+1 = σpd ωp,t+1
− σnd ωn,t+1
,
d
∼ Γ(pdt , 1) − pdt ,
ωp,t+1
d
ωn,t+1
∼ Γ(ndt , 1) − ndt ,

(12)

d
d
,
ωp,t+1
pdt+1 = p̄d + ρdp (pdt − p̄d ) + σpp
d
d
ndt+1 = n̄d + ρdn (ndt − n̄d ) + σnn
ωn,t+1
,

where only the time series of demand shock realizations, {udt }Tt=1 is observed.
The following notation is defined:
Utd ≡ {ud1 , ..., udt } is the sequence of observations up to time t.
d

F (iφ, iψ 1 , iψ 2 |Utd ) ≡ E(eiφut+1 +iψ

1 pd +iψ 2 nd
t+1
t+1

|Utd ) is the next period’s joint conditional char-

acteristic function of the observation and the state variables.
Gt|s (iψ 1 , iψ 2 ) ≡ E(eiψ

1 pd +iψ 2 nd
t
t

|Usd ) is the characteristic function of the time t state variables

conditioned on observing data up to time s.
The estimation procedure is an application of Bates (2006)’s algorithm for the component
model of two gamma distributed variables and consists of the time 0 initialization and 3 steps
repeated for each observation in {udt }Tt=1 . At time 0, the characteristic function of the state
variables G0|0 (iψ 1 , iψ 2 ) is initialized. The distribution of pd0 and nd0 is approximated with
gamma distributions. Note that the unconditional mean and variance of pdt are E(pdt ) =
p̄d and V ar(pdt ) =

2
σpp
p̄d ,
1−ρd2
p

respectively. The approximation by the gamma distribution

with the shape parameter k0 and the scale parameter σ0p is done by matching the first
two unconditional moments. Using the properties of the gamma distribution, k0p =
and θ0p =

V ar(pdt )
.
E(pdt )

E 2 pdt
V ar(pdt )

Thus, pd0 is assumed to follow Γ(k0p , θ0p ) and nd0 is assumed to follow

Γ(k0n , θ0n ), where k0n and θ0n are computed in the same way. Using the properties of the
p

p

expectations of the gamma variables, G0|0 (iψ 1 , iψ 2 ) = e−k0 ln(1−θ0 iψ

1 )−k n
0

ln(1−θ0n iψ 2 )

. Given

G0|0 (iψ 1 , iψ 2 ), computing the likelihood of UTd is performed by repeating the steps 1-3 below
for all subsequent values of t.
38

Step 1. Computing the next period’s joint conditional characteristic function of the observation and the state variables:
d

d

d

d

F (iΦ, iψ 1 , iψ 2 |Utd ) = E(E(eiΦ(σp ωp,t+1 −σn ωn,t+1 )+iψ
= E(eiψ
= eiψ

1

d
d
d d
2
d
d
d
d
d
(p̄d +ρd
p pt +σpp ωp,t+1 )+iψ (n̄ (1−ρn )+ρn nt +σnn ωn,t+1 )

|Utd )

1 d

2 d
d
1 d
d
1 d
d
1 d
d
2 d
d
2 d
d
2 d
d
p̄ (1−ρd
p )+iψ n̄ (1−ρn )+(iψ ρp −ln(1−iΦσp −iψ σpp )−iΦσp −iψ σpp )pt +(iψ ρn −ln(1+iΦσn −iψ σnn )+iΦσn −iψ σnn )nt

2 d
d
p̄ (1−ρd
p )+iψ n̄ (1−ρn )

1 d

|Utd )

d
d
d
d
d
d
).
− iψ 2 σnn
) + iΦσn
− iψ 2 σnn
, iψ 2 ρdn − ln(1 + iΦσn
) − iΦσpd − iψ 1 σpp
Gt|t (iψ 1 ρdp − ln(1 − iΦσpd − iψ 1 σpp

Step 2. Evaluating the conditional likelihood of the time t + 1 observation:
Z ∞
1
d
d
d
p(ut+1 |Ut ) =
F (iΦ, 0, 0|Utd )e−iΦut+1 )dΦ,
2π −∞
where the function F is defined in step 1 and the integral is evaluated numerically.
Step 3. Computing the conditional characteristic function for the next period, Gt+1|t+1 (iψ 1 , iψ 2 ):
1

2

Gt+1|t+1 (iψ , iψ ) =

1
2π

R∞
−∞

d

F (iΦ, iψ 1 , iψ 2 |Utd )e−iΦut+1 dΦ
p(udt+1 |Utd )

.

As above, the function Gt+1|t+1 (iψ 1 , iψ 2 ) is also approximated with the gamma distribution
via matching the first two moments of the distribution. The moments are obtained by taking
the first and second partial derivatives of the joint characteristic function:
Z ∞
1
d
d
Et+1 pt+1 =
Fψ1 (iΦ, 0, 0|Utd )e−iΦut+1 dΦ,
d
d
2πp(ut+1 |Ut ) −∞
Z ∞
1
d
2
d
Fψ1 ψ1 (iΦ, 0, 0|Utd )e−iΦut+1 dΦ − Et+1
pdt+1 ,
V art+1 pt+1 =
d
d
2πp(ut+1 |Ut ) −∞
Z ∞
1
d
d
Et+1 nt+1 =
Fψ2 (iΦ, 0, 0|Utd )e−iΦut+1 dΦ,
d
d
2πp(ut+1 |Ut ) −∞
Z ∞
1
d
d
2
V art+1 nt+1 =
Fψ2 ψ2 (iΦ, 0, 0|Utd )e−iΦut+1 dΦ − Et+1
ndt+1 ,
d
d
2πp(ut+1 |Ut ) −∞
where Fψi denotes the derivative of F with respect to ψ i . The expressions inside the integral
are obtained in closed form by derivating the function F (iΦ, iψ 1 , iψ 2 |Utd ) in step 1, and
integrals are evaluated numerically. Using the properties of the gamma distribution, the
p
=
values of the shape and the scale parameters are kt+1

2 pd
Et+1
t+1
V art+1 pdt+1

p
and θt+1
=

V art+1 pdt+1
,
Et+1 pdt+1

n
n
respectively. The expressions for kt+1
and θt+1
are similar.

The total likelihood of the time series is the sum of individual likelihoods from step 2:
P
L(YT ) = ln p(ud1 |k0p , θ0p ) + Tt=2 ln p(udt+1 |Utd ).

39

Appendix D - Additional Results on Explanatory Power
of Macro Risks
Explanatory Power (Adjusted R2 ) of Macro Risk Factors for Yield Curve Factors over Realizations of Macroeconomic Time
Series. The sample is quarterly from 1959Q2 to 2015Q2. Macro level factors are real GDP growth, aggregate and core inflation,
and unemployment gap. Financial factors are level, slope, and curvature factors. Level factor is the average over 1-10 year
yields. Slope factor is 10 year yield minus 1 quarter yields. The curvature factor is 10 year yield plus 1 quarter yield minus
2 times 2 year yield. The increase in adjusted R2 significance, which is always tested over the specification in the previous
row, is Bauer-Hamilton (2016) adjusted significance using 5000 bootstrap runs. The asterisks, *, **, and *** correspond to
statistical significance at the 10, 5, and 1 percent levels, respectively.
Realizations of Macroeconomic Level Factors and Macro Risks

Realizations of macroeconomic level factors
Realizations of macroeconomic time series+macro risks

Level

Slope

Curvature

0.4849

0.5148

0.2009

0.6140***

0.5334*

0.2667**

Explanatory Power (Adjusted R2 ) of Macro Risk Factors for Quarterly Excess Bond Returns over Other Macroeconomic Level
and Financial Factors. The sample is quarterly from 1959Q2 to 2015Q2. Ang-Piazzesi factors are lag 1 Ang and Piazzesi
(2003) real and nominal factors. Macro level factors are expected real GDP growth, expected aggregate and core inflation,
and unemployment gap. Financial factors are level, slope, and curvature factors. Level factor is the average over 1-10 year
yields. Slope factor is 10 year yield minus 1 quarter yields. The curvature factor is 10 year yield plus 1 quarter yield minus
2 times 2 year yield. The increase in adjusted R2 significance, which is tested over the specification in the previous row, is
Bauer-Hamilton (2016) adjusted significance using 5000 bootstrap runs. The asterisks, *, **, and *** correspond to statistical
significance at the 10, 5, and 1 percent levels, respectively.
Panel A: Ang-Piazzesi (2003) factors
Predictors

1 year bond

2 year bond

5 year bond

10 year bond

0.0320

0.0339

0.0166

0.0068

Ang-Piazzesi factors + macro level factors

0.1559***

0.1800***

0.1576***

0.1515***

Ang-Piazzesi factors + macro level factors + macro risks

0.1848**

0.2157**

0.1932**

0.1928**

Ang-Piazzesi factors

Panel B: Ang-Piazzesi (2003) and yield curve factors

3 financial factors

1 year bond

2 year bond

5 year bond

10 year bond

0.0715

0.0681

0.0716

0.075

3 financial factors + Ang-Piazzesi

0.1066**

0.0995**

0.0754

0.0689

3 financial factors + Ang-Piazzesi+ macro level factors

0.2053***

0.2133***

0.1738***

0.1594***

3 financial factors+Ang-Piazzesi+macro level factors + macro risks

0.2355**

0.2482**

0.2037**

0.1916**

40

Figure 1 – Components of Bad Environment - Good Environment Distribution.

41

Figure 2 – Time-varying Shape Parameters of Bad Environment - Good Environment Distribution.

42

Figure 3 – Filtered Quarterly Demand and Supply Shocks. Shading corresponds to NBER
Recessions.

43

Figure 4 – Filtered Quarterly Demand and Supply Variances. Shading corresponds to NBER
Recessions.

44

Figure 5 – Quarterly Conditional Skewness of Macroeconomic Variables. Shading corresponds to NBER Recessions.

45

Figure 6 – Quarterly Conditional Covariance between Macroeconomic Variables. Shading
corresponds to NBER Recessions.

46

Table 1 – Model Selection for Expectations of Macro Variables. The sample is quarterly
1959Q2 to 2015Q2. Macro variables are real GDP growth, aggregate and core inflations,
and unemployment gap. VAR and VARMA always include these 4 variables. Yields are 1
quarter and 10 year US Treasury yields. AIC and BIC are Akaike and Bayesian information
criteria, respectively. The models are sorted by AIC.

Model

number of parameters

loglikelihood

AIC

BIC

VARMA(1,1)+yields

50

-433.7

979.5

1207.1

VARMA(1,2)+yields

66

-420.9

995.2

1290.1

VARMA(1,2)

58

-434.1

1000.6

1262.2

VARMA(2,1)+yields

66

-423.8

1001.1

1296.0

VARMA(1,1)

42

-457.2

1007.0

1199.8

VARMA(2,1)

58

-437.5

1007.4

1269.0

VAR(2)+yields

50

-458.2

1028.6

1256.1

VAR(2)

42

-473.6

1039.7

1232.5

VAR(1)+yields

34

-503.3

1080.2

1237.6

VAR(1)

26

-521.3

1097.8

1219.2

47

Table 2 – Higher Order Moments of Macroeconomic Shocks Used for Classical Minimum Distance Estimation. ugt , uπt , uπt core , and uut are the shocks to real GDP growth, aggregate inflation, core inflation and
unemployment gap, respectively. The data is quarterly from 1959Q2 to 2015Q2. The covariance matrix for
moments is calculated via a block-bootstrap with a block length of 20 quarters using a shrinkage technique
that places 95 percent weight on the full bootstrapped covariance matrix, and a 5 percent weight on a matrix
composed of only the diagonal elements of the covariance matrix. Asterisks, *, **, and **** correspond to
statistical significance of individual moments at the 10, 5, and 1 percent levels, respectively.
Volatility

data
standard error
fitted

g

uπ
t

core

uu
t

uπ
t

ut

0.5430***

0.7503***

0.3103***

0.2560***

(0.0834)

(0.0709)

(0.0457)

(0.0185)

0.5008

0.7267

0.3395

0.2614

Skewness
g

uπ
t

core

uu
t

uπ
t

ut

data

-1.2632

0.1275

0.1866

0.6860***

standard error

(0.9124)

(0.3064)

(0.4598)

(0.2372)

fitted

-0.2328

-0.3188

-0.2804

0.3576

Excess Kurtosis

data
standard error
fitted

g

uπ
t

core

uπ
t

ut

10.3646**

1.6505**

2.3854**

1.9179***

uu
t

(5.1438)

(0.7314)

(1.1802)

(0.6808)

0.4552

0.8090

0.6070

0.9314

Correlations
g

data
standard error
fitted

uπ
t ut

π
uπ
t ut

core

u
uπ
t ut

g

ut uπ
t

core

g

ut uu
t

uπ
t

core

uu
t

0.0505

0.4879***

-0.0602

-0.0116

-0.5763***

-0.0097

(0.0983)

(0.0658)

(0.0584)

(0.1206)

(0.0478)

(0.1060)

0.0766

0.5487

-0.1040

0.1175

-0.5496

-0.1446

Co-skewness
g

2
(uπ
t ) ut

2 π
(uπ
t ) ut

core

g

2 u
(uπ
t ) ut

(ut )2 uπ
t

g

(ut )2 uπ
t

core

g

(ut )2 uu
t

data

-0.7728

-0.2339

0.7322*

-0.2404

-0.1860

0.1877

standard error

(0.4328)

(0.3097)

(0.4016)

(0.1780)

(0.1912)

(0.3358)

fitted

-0.2316

-0.2474

0.2416

-0.2982

-0.3185

2 π
(uu
t ) ut

2
(uu
t ) ut

(uπ
t
data

core 2 π
) ut

(uπ
t

core 2 g
) ut

(uπ
t

core 2 u
) ut

g

0.3314
2 π
(uu
t ) ut

core

0.0814

-0.1920

0.0847

-0.1989

-0.4535

-0.0265

standard error

(0.3184)

(0.1459)

(0.2143)

(0.1384)

(0.3097)

(0.2290)

fitted

-0.2632

-0.2721

0.2833

-0.3172

-0.3443

-0.3392

Excess Co-kurtosis
g

2
2
(uπ
t ) (ut )

2
π
(uπ
t ) (ut

core 2

)

2
u 2
(uπ
t ) (ut )

g

(ut )2 uπ
t

core 2

)

g

2
(ut )2 (uu
t)

(uπ
t

core 2

2
) (uu
t)

data

1.7346*

0.6331*

1.2858*

0.7458**

1.1438**

0.7440**

standard error

(1.0385)

(0.3624)

(0.7526)

(0.3166)

(0.5808)

(0.2958)

0.5978

0.5879

0.6107

0.5973

0.6246

3 u
(uπ
t ) ut

(ut )3 uπ
t

fitted

g

3
(uπ
t ) ut

data
standard error
fitted

3 π
(uπ
t ) ut

core

g

g

(ut )3 uπ
t

core

0.6100
g

(ut )3 uπ
t

core

4.1478

1.6103

-3.6442*

0.6476*

0.2348

-1.0978**

(2.6028)

(1.0459)

(2.0561)

(0.3878)

(0.4592)

(0.5212)

0.2481

0.5882

-0.2705

0.2811

0.2803

3 π
(uu
t ) ut

3
(uu
t ) ut

(uπ
t

core 3 π
) ut

(uπ
t

core 3 g
) ut

(uπ
t

core 3 u
) ut

g

-0.6164
3 π
(uu
t ) ut

core

data

1.1992*

-0.1287

-0.6296*

0.1202

-1.3911**

0.1151

standard error

(0.6307)

(0.4176)

(0.3684)

(0.2634)

(0.6803)

(0.5523)

fitted

0.5877

0.2458

-0.2681

-0.3491

-0.6336

-0.3483

J-stat

49.99**

pval

(0.0482)

48

Table 3 – Loadings of Macroeconomic Shocks on Demand and Supply Shocks. The coefficients are from Classical Minimum Distance estimation matching unconditional higher order
moments of 4 macroeconomic shocks time series: real GDP growth (ugt ), aggregate (uπt ) and
core inflation (uπt core ) and unemployment gap (uut ). Standard errors in parentheses account
for sampling error in the higher-order moments and the VARMA(1,1) parameters.
Panel A: Loadings of Macro Shocks Onto Supply and Demand
Shock
uπt
ugt
uπt core
uut

idiosyncratic variance share

Supply loading

Demand Loading

-0.2319

0.2618

(0.0625)

(0.0625)

0.3352

0.4015

(0.0975)

(0.1585)

-0.1587

0.1787

(0.0434)

(0.0529)

-0.1125

-0.1464

(0.0216)

(0.0464)

0.4702
(0.0752)

Panel B: Kalman Gain of Macro Shocks for Supply and Demand
Shock

uπt

ugt

uπt core

uut

Supply

-0.7389

0.4837

-1.083

-1.3036

(0.1934)

(0.1054)

(0.2070)

(0.2489)

0.6597

0.4578

0.9642

-1.3393

(0.2143)

(0.1021)

(0.2991)

(0.2170)

Demand

Panel C: Variance Decomposition of Demand and Supply Shocks
Shock

uπt

ugt

uπt core

uut

Supply

26.28%

24.87%

26.36%

22.49%

Demand

23.83%

25.36%

23.77%

27.05%

Panel D: Unconditional moments of supply and demand

Supply

Demand

Skewness

Excess kurtosis

0.4210

3.2861

(0.6769)

(1.7520)

-1.5941

4.6540

(0.7807)

(2.2930)

49

Table 4 – Model Comparision for Aggregate Demand and Aggregate Supply Shocks. AIC
refers to Akaike information criterion and BIC refers to Bayesian information criterion. The
models are sorted by AIC. Regime-switching model refers to the 2 state regime-switching
model. For both supply and demand shocks, it is the best regime-switching model in terms
of AIC and BIC among 1 state, 2 state, 3 state, and 4 state models. BEGE is the n-tail
only BEGE for supply and full BEGE with n- and p-tails for demand. These are the best
BEGE models in terms of AIC and BIC.
Panel A: Supply Shock
Model

Log-likelihood

Number of parameters

AIC

BIC

Regime-switching

-296.70

5

603.36

620.35

BEGE

-300.37

4

608.74

622.33

Gaussian stochastic volatility

-303.87

3

613.74

623.93

Panel B: Demand Shock
Model

Log-likelihood

Number of parameters

AIC

BIC

BEGE

-282.19

6

572.38

585.97

Regime-switching

-286.58

5

583.16

600.15

Gaussian stochastic volatility

-306.70

3

619.40

629.59

Panel C: Supply and Demand Shocks
Log-likelihood

Number of parameters

AIC

BIC

BEGE

-582.56

10

1185.12

1226.03

Regime-switching

-583.28

10

1186.56

1227.47

Gaussian stochastic volatility

-610.57

6

1233.14

1257.69

50

Table 5 – Bad Environment - Good Environment Parameter Estimates for Demand and
Supply Processes. Parameter estimates are obtained using Bates (2006) approximate maximum likelihood methodology. Standard errors in parentheses are approximate maximum
likelihood asymptotic standard errors. As demand and supply shocks are assumed to have
variances exactly equal to 1, parameters p̄s and n̄s can be solved as functions of other model
parameters, and their standard errors are calculated using the delta method.

p̄

n̄

σp

σn

ρp

Supply shock

Demand shock

0.5289

100

(0.1127)

–

1.0663

0.3883

(1.4523)

(0.2085)

–

0.0803

–

(0.0051)

0.6647

0.9565

(0.4081)

(0.2593)

–

0.9636
(0.0193)

ρn

σpp

0.7895

0.7880

(0.0830)

(0.2608)

–

2.0129
(0.6282)

σnn

1.0296

0.1889

(0.5154)

(0.2593)

51

Table 6 – VARMA(1,1) Impulse Responses of Real GDP and Aggregate Price Level to One
Standard Deviation Demand and Supply Shocks. The cumulative impulse responses include
the quarter 0 (where the shocks happened) responses. Standard errors in parentheses are
bootstrap standard errors.
Panel A: Contemporaneous (Quarter 0) Responses

Real GDP level

Price level

Demand shock

Supply shock

0.40%

0.34%

(0.16%)

(0.10%)

0.26%

-0.23%

(0.06%)

(0.06%)

Panel B: Cumulative (20 Quarters) Responses

Real GDP level

Price level

Demand shock

Supply shock

0.17%

0.65%

(0.28%)

(0.25%)

0.97%

-0.80%

(0.53%)

(0.43%)

52

Table 7 – Decomposition of Real GDP Growth during NBER Recessions into Demand and
Supply Components. Aggregate demand component of the GDP growth is computed as
σgd multiplied by the sum of aggregate demand shocks over the period of the recession.
Aggregate supply component of the GDP growth is computed as σgs multiplied by the sum
of aggregate supply shocks over the period of the recession.
NBER Recession

GDP growth: Demand component

GDP growth: Supply Component

1960Q2-1961Q1

-1.04%

-1.20%

1969Q4-1970Q4

-0.06%

-1.16%

1973Q4-1975Q1

1.55%

-2.54%

1980Q1-1980Q2

-0.64%

-1.14%

1981Q3-1982Q4

-3.41%

-0.09%

1990Q3-1991Q1

-0.55%

-1.07%

2001Q1-2001Q4

-1.26%

-0.86%

2008Q1-2009Q2

-2.77%

-2.69%

53

Table 8 – Decomposing Great Moderation into Changes in Demand and Supply Volatility. Coefficients
in Panel A are OLS regression coefficients from regressing the dependent variable on a constant equal to
1 and a dummy variable which is 0 before 1990Q4 and 1 between 1991Q1 and 2000Q4 for the sample
of 1959Q2-2000Q4 (specification Dummy-2000), 0 before 1990Q4 and 1 between 1991Q1 and 2006Q4 for
the sample of 1959Q2-2006Q4 (specification Dummy-2006) , and 0 before 1990Q4 and 1 between 1991Q1
and 2015Q2 for the sample of 1959Q2-2015Q2 (specification Dummy-2015). Coefficients in Panel B are
OLS regression coefficients from regressing the dependent variable on a constant equal to 1 and a dummy
variable which is 0 before 1983Q4 and 1 between 1984Q1 and 2000Q4 for the sample of 1959Q2-2000Q4
(specification Dummy-2000), 0 before 1983Q4 and 1 between 1984Q1 and 2006Q4 for the sample of 1959Q22006Q4 (specification Dummy-2006), and 0 before 1983Q4 and 1 between 1984Q1 and 2015Q2 for the
sample of 1959Q2-2015Q2 (specification Dummy-2015). Standard errors in parentheses are Newey-West
(1987) standard errors computed with 40 lags. The standard errors for the constant are from the regression
using only data up to 2000Q4. The standard errors for the constant for samples spanning until 2006Q4
and 2015Q2 are slightly different, but these differences are economically and statistically negligible. The
asterisks, *, **, and *** correspond to statistical significance at the 10, 5, and 1 percent levels, respectively.
Panel A: Aggregate Inflation
Dependent variable

Constant

Dummy-2000

Dummy-2006

Dummy-2015

Aggregate Volatility

0.2460***

-0.0514**

-0.0510***

-0.0345

(0.0183)

(0.0206)

(0.0193)

(0.0223)

Supply volatility

0.0551***

-0.0111

-0.0109*

0.0023

(0.0056)

(0.0074)

(0.0065)

(0.0114)

Demand volatility

0.0823***

-0.0403**

-0.0401***

-0.0368**

(0.0150)

(0.0157)

(0.0153)

(0.0153)

Good demand volatility

0.0587***

-0.0374***

-0.0410***

-0.0401***

(0.0140)

(0.0149)

(0.0149)

(0.0144)

Bad demand volatility

0.0237***

-0.0028

0.0008

0.0033

(0.0019)

(0.0020)

(0.0031)

(0.0035)

Dummy-2015

Panel B: Real GDP Growth
Dependent variable

Constant

Dummy-2000

Dummy-2006

Aggregate volatility

0.5585***

-0.0932*

-0.1009*

-0.0786

(0.0512)

(0.0536)

(0.0516)

(0.0542)

Supply volatility

0.1221***

-0.0320**

-0.0312**

-0.0085

(0.0126)

(0.0134)

(0.0130)

(0.0219)

Demand volatility

0.1936***

-0.0612

-0.0698*

-0.0700*

(0.0413)

(0.0424)

(0.0407)

(0.0395)

Good demand volatility

0.1371***

-0.0549

-0.0695*

-0.0749*

(0.0388)

(0.0418)

(0.0410)

(0.0390)

Bad demand volatility

0.0565***

-0.0063

-0.0003

0.0049

(0.0059)

(0.0056)

(0.0082)

(0.0094)

54

Table 9 – Explanatory Power (Adjusted R2 ) of Macro Risk Factors for Yield Curve Factors.
The sample is quarterly from 1959Q2 to 2015Q2. Ang-Piazzesi factors are lag 1 Ang and
Piazzesi (2003) real and nominal factors. Macro level factors are expected real GDP growth,
expected aggregate and core inflation, and unemployment gap. Financial factors are level,
slope, and curvature factors. Level factor is the average over 1-10 year yields. Slope factor is
10 year yield minus 1 quarter yields. The curvature factor is 10 year yield plus 1 quarter yield
minus 2 times 2 year yield. The increase in adjusted R2 significance, which is always tested
over the specification in the previous row, is Bauer-Hamilton (2016) adjusted significance
using 5000 bootstrap runs. The asterisks, *, **, and *** correspond to statistical significance
at the 10, 5, and 1 percent levels, respectively.
Panel A: Macro Level Factors and Macro Risks

Macro level factors
Macro level factors + macro risks

Level

Slope

Curvature

0.7155

0.5818

0.2795

0.7755***

0.5892

0.3343**

Panel B: Ang-Piazzesi Factors, Macro Level Factors, and Macro Risks
Level

Slope

Curvature

0.1784

0.2432

0.0928

Ang-Piazzesi (2003) factors + macro level factors

0.7296***

0.5843***

0.3085***

Ang-Piazzesi (2003) factors + macro level factors + macro risks

0.7775***

0.6027

0.3429**

Ang-Piazzesi (2003) factors

55

Table 10 – Explanatory Power (Adjusted R2 ) of Macro Risk Factors for Quarterly Excess
Bond Returns over Macro Level and Financial Factors. The sample is quarterly from 1959Q2
to 2015Q2. Ang-Piazzesi factors are lag 1 Ang and Piazzesi (2003) real and nominal factors.
Macro level factors are expected real GDP growth, expected aggregate and core inflation,
and unemployment gap. Financial factors are level, slope, and curvature factors. Level
factor is the average over 1-10 year yields. Slope factor is 10 year yield minus 1 quarter
yields. The curvature factor is 10 year yield plus 1 quarter yield minus 2 times 2 year
yield. The increase in adjusted R2 significance, which is tested over the specification in
the previous row, is Bauer-Hamilton (2016) adjusted significance using 5000 bootstrap runs.
The asterisks, *, **, and *** correspond to statistical significance at the 10, 5, and 1 percent
levels, respectively.
1 year bond

2 year bond

5 year bond

10 year bond

0.0715

0.0681

0.0716

0.0750

0.2109***

0.2178***

0.1788***

0.1591***

0.2301*

0.2424**

0.2085**

0.1988**

3 financial factors
3 financial factors + macro level factors
3 financial factors + macro level factors + macro risks

56

Table 11 – Explanatory Power (Adjusted R2 ) of Macro Factors for Quarterly Excess Bond
Returns. The sample is quarterly from 1959Q2 to 2015Q2. The excess returns are annualized
1 quarter holding period returns on zero coupon US Treasuries. Macro risks (pdt , ndt , and nst )
are scaled to have unit variance. Standard errors in parentheses are Newey-West standard
errors with 40 lags. The increase in adjusted R2 significance is Bauer-Hamilton (2016)
adjusted significance using 5000 bootstrap runs. The asterisks, * , **, and *** correspond
to statistical significance at the 10, 5, and 1 percent levels, respectively.
1 year bond

2 year bond

5 year bond

10 year bond

0.9624***

2.6468***

6.7833**

14.2700**

(0.2943)

(0.8466)

(3.0182)

(6.0308)

6.8551***

15.4054***

30.2019***

49.9707***

(1.5998)

(2.7506)

(3.7516)

(6.2916)

-7.8497***

-17.2407***

-34.9451***

-57.7668***

(1.5207)

(2.6357)

(4.0636)

(7.6564)

0.4143

0.9182

1.9110

3.8141

(0.8104)

(1.4089)

(2.0339)

(2.8579)

0.0392

0.2961

0.7349

1.5665

(0.0751)

(0.1795)

(0.6481)

(1.3377)

0.2943

0.5264

1.0352

1.1977

(0.1946)

(0.4577)

(1.3542)

(2.7203)

-0.5017***

-1.1972***

-3.0267***

-6.1206***

(0.1363)

(0.2394)

(0.6591)

(1.2606)

0.1002

0.1912

0.4010

0.7555

(0.2041)

(0.4058)

(0.7319)

(1.0865)

Adjusted R2 without macro risks

0.1577

0.1814

0.1604

0.1479

Adjusted R2 with macro risks

0.1793*

0.2097**

0.1990**

0.2001***

constant

core
Et πt+1

Et πt+1

Et gt+1

ugapt

pdt
ndt
nst

57

Table 12 – Cyclicality of Expected Excess Bond Returns. The sample is quarterly 1959Q22015Q2. The dependent variable is the expected annualized quarterly excess return computed from the OLS regressions of realized annualized quarterly excess returns on 4 macro
level factors (expected aggregate and core inflations, expected real GDP growth, and unemployment gap) and 3 macro risks (good and bad demand variance and bad supply variance). NBER recession is a dummy equal to 1 if there is a recession in that quarter.
Demand/supply-ratio is the ratio of aggregate demand variance (good+bad) to aggregate
supply variance (good+bad). Demand/supply-ratio is scaled to have the standard deviation
of 1. Standard errors are Newey-West standard errors computed with 40 lags.
1 year bond

5 year bond

10 year bond

0.1914

1.5795

3.3505

(0.4076)

(1.9782)

(3.3727)

0.8691

3.6316

5.6361

(0.6250)

(2.8888)

(4.9554)

-0.0172

-0.2478

-0.7336

(0.2463)

(1.1384)

(1.9008)

-0.1979

-1.0040

-2.0924

(0.3114)

(1.4453)

(2.4745)

0.0297

0.0239

0.0236

constant

NBER-dummy

demand/supply-ratio

NBER-dummy×demand/supply-ratio

Adjusted R2

58

Table 13 – Explanatory Power (Adjusted R2 ) of Macro Factors for Term Premiums. The
dependent variable is annualized term premium computed as the observed US Treasury
long yield minus the expected 1 quarter US Treasury yield over the life of the long yield.
Expected average short yield is from Blue Chip survey and are available semi-annually.
The sample is 1983Q4-2015Q2 for 5 year bond and 1986Q2-2015Q2 for 10 year bond. The
standard deviation of each macro risk factor (pdt , ndt , and nst ) is scaled to 1. Standard errors
in parentheses are Newey-West standard errors with 40 lags. The increase in adjusted R2
significance is Bauer-Hamilton (2016) significance using 5000 bootstrap runs. The asterisks,
* , **, and *** correspond to statistical significance at the 10, 5, and 1 percent levels,
respectively.
5 year bond

10 year bond

0.9548***

1.5578***

(0.2741)

(0.2195)

7.2809***

8.6933***

(0.8006)

(0.8701)

-5.3035***

-6.3997***

(0.8144)

(0.8616)

2.2232***

2.7737***

(0.2239)

(0.2196)

-0.0079

0.1799

(0.0863)

(0.1502)

-0.1211

0.0115

(0.1041)

(0.1353)

-0.1847***

-0.2247***

(0.0641)

(0.0502)

0.0657

0.0237

(0.0769)

(0.1343)

Adjusted R2 without macro risks

0.6823

0.6437

Adjusted R2 with macro risks

0.6933

0.6717**

constant

core
Et πt+1

Et πt+1

Et gt+1

ugapt

pdt
ndt
nst

59

Table 14 – Cyclicality of Term Premium. The dependent variable is annualized term premium computed as the observed US Treasury long yield minus the expected 1 quarter US
Treasury yield over the life of the long yield. Expected average short yield is from Blue
Chip survey and are available semi-annually. The sample is 1983Q4-2015Q2 for 5 year bond
and 1986Q2-2015Q2 for 10 year bond. NBER recession is a dummy equal to 1 if there is a
recession in that quarter. Demand/supply-ratio is the ratio of aggregate demand variance
(good+bad) to aggregate supply variance (good+bad). Demand/supply- ratio is scaled to
have the standard deviation of 1. Standard errors are Newey-West standard errors computed
with 40 lags. The asterisks, *, **, and *** correspond to statistical significance at the 10,
5, and 1 percent levels, respectively.

const

NBER-dummy

demand/supply-ratio

NBER-dummy*demand/supply-ratio

Adjusted R2

60

5 year bond

10 year bond

-0.5706

0.4615**

(0.3579)

(0.2020)

1.1325***

0.7727***

(0.2943)

(0.1533)

0.5209***

0.1744

(0.0674)

(0.1936)

-0.9655***

-0.6470***

(0.0916)

(0.1934)

0.2269

0.0272

