NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

MULTILATERAL TRADE BARGAINING AND DOMINANT STRATEGIES
Kyle Bagwell
Robert W. Staiger
Working Paper 22842
http://www.nber.org/papers/w22842

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 2016

We thank the NSF (Grant SES-1326940) for financial support. Bagwell thanks CASBS at
Stanford for support and hospitality. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do
not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w22842.ack
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2016 by Kyle Bagwell and Robert W. Staiger. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Multilateral Trade Bargaining and Dominant Strategies
Kyle Bagwell and Robert W. Staiger
NBER Working Paper No. 22842
November 2016
JEL No. D71,F02,F13
ABSTRACT
Motivated by GATT bargaining behavior and renegotiation rules, we construct a three-country,
two-good general-equilibrium model of trade and examine multilateral tariff bargaining under the
constraints of non-discrimination and multilateral reciprocity. We allow for a general family of
government preferences and identify bargaining outcomes that can be implemented using
dominant strategy proposals for all countries. In the implementation, tariff proposals are followed
by multilateral rebalancing, a sequence that is broadly consistent with observed patterns identified
by Bagwell, Staiger and Yurukoglu (2016) in the bargaining records for the GATT Torquay
Round. The resulting bargaining outcome is efficient relative to government preferences if and
only if the initial tariff vectors position the initial world price at its "politically optimal" level. In
symmetric settings, if the initial tariffs correspond to Nash tariffs, then the resulting bargaining
outcome is efficient and ensures greater-than-Nash trade volumes and welfares for all countries.
We also highlight relationships between our work and previous research that examines strategyproof rationing rules in other economic settings.

Kyle Bagwell
Department of Economics
Stanford University
Landau Economics Building
579 Serra Mall
Stanford, CA 94305-6072
and NBER
kbagwell@stanford.edu
Robert W. Staiger
Department of Economics
Dartmouth College
319 Silsby
Hanover, NH 03755
and NBER
rstaiger@dartmouth.edu

1

Introduction

Since 1947, the General Agreement on Tari¤s and Trade (GATT) and its successor organization, the World Trade Organization (WTO), have provided the multilateral forum for
bargaining over trade policy. The GATT was formed in 1947 among 23 original signatory
countries and sponsored eight multilateral rounds of trade-policy negotiations. The …nal
completed round, known as the Uruguay Round, resulted in the creation of the WTO
on January 1, 1995. The WTO currently has more than 160 member countries and has
struggled with its now-suspended Doha Round. But in combination, the GATT/WTO
rounds surely represent one of the most important episodes of bargaining in economic
history.
What accounts for the success of the GATT/WTO as a bargaining forum? We provide in this paper a stylized model of multilateral tari¤ bargaining that embodies key
institutional features of GATT/WTO practice. We argue that several of these features
dramatically simplify the bargaining environment, and in their presence we show that all
countries have dominant strategy proposals. We characterize the bargaining outcomes
that can be implemented under these proposals, show that the implementation sequence
of initial proposals followed by “multilateral rebalancing”mimics stylized facts associated
with GATT/WTO tari¤ bargaining, and describe conditions under which the bargaining
outcomes are e¢ cient.
The protocol for tari¤ negotiations in the GATT/WTO vary somewhat from round to
round but have important common features. First, the negotiations are a form of barter:
each government makes commitments (o¤ers “concessions”) on its own import tari¤s in
exchange for reciprocal commitments from its trading partners. Second, the negotiations
are undertaken in the context of speci…c rules and norms. Under the principle of nondiscrimination as enshrined in GATT Article I, the tari¤ commitment that a country
makes with respect to any given import good must be extended to all GATT/WTO
countries.1 Tari¤s thus must satisfy a “most-favored nation” or MFN rule. In addition,
reciprocity rules and norms shape the pattern of negotiation.
A primary expression of GATT rules concerning reciprocity is found in GATT Article
XXVIII, which addresses rules for renegotiation. Under this article, after negotiations are
completed, a country retains the right to withdraw a tari¤ commitment and re-position an
import tari¤ at a higher level, with the understanding that its principal trading partners
are then allowed to behave in a reciprocal manner and withdraw “substantially equivalent concessions.” Thus, GATT rules ensure that a form of reciprocity is followed when
concessions are renegotiated, and this rule is of course known to participating countries
1
GATT rules also include important exceptions to the principle of non-discrimination; for example,
GATT Article XXIV provides conditions for the formation of preferential trading agreements.

1

at the time of negotiation.
In addition, when tari¤s are originally negotiated within a round, a reciprocity norm
shapes the expectations of negotiators and thus the negotiating outcome. Following Bagwell and Staiger (1999, 2002), we regard the principle of reciprocity as being satis…ed when
two countries exchange tari¤ reductions (or tari¤ increases, in the case of renegotiation)
such that each country experiences changes in the volume of its imports which are equivalent in magnitude to the changes in the volume of its exports, with the changes in trade
volumes valued at existing world prices. In GATT parlance, reciprocal tari¤ liberalization
then facilitates a “balance of concessions.”2 As Bagwell and Staiger (1999, 2002) show for
a two-good general equilibrium model of trade, when two countries make tari¤ changes
that satisfy the principle of reciprocity, the changes leave the world price that governs
trade between the two countries unaltered. In this way, reciprocity prevents countries
from manipulating their terms of trade and thereby neutralizes the fundamental source
of ine¢ ciency in non-cooperative tari¤ setting. Bagwell and Staiger (2005) show further
that, in a three-country, two-good general-equilibrium setting, if two countries negotiate
in a manner that satis…es both the principles of non-discrimination and reciprocity, then
the preservation of the terms-of-trade between the countries ensures as well the absence
of any third-party externality.
The notion of reciprocity studied by Bagwell and Staiger (1999, 2002, 2005) may be
understood as a form of bilateral reciprocity. We focus in this paper on a related but
distinct notion of multilateral reciprocity. In the three-country setting and under the
MFN rule, multilateral reciprocity can hold even if bilateral reciprocity fails. When a
set of tari¤ changes satis…es multilateral reciprocity, a given country can experience an
increase in imports from one trading partner that exceeds the magnitude of the increase
in exports to that partner provided that the country experiences an increase in exports
to the other trading partner that exceeds the magnitude of the increase in imports from
that second partner, with the imbalance in the exchange in one bilateral relationship
exactly o¤setting the imbalance in the exchange in the other. As Bagwell, Staiger and
Yurukoglu (2016) argue, under the MFN rule, multilateral reciprocity also serves to …x
the world price in the three-country model and thus likewise neutralizes the key source of
ine¢ ciency under non-cooperative tari¤ setting.
The important role of multilateral as opposed to bilateral reciprocity was emphasized
in early writings on GATT negotiations. The key point is that a bilateral exchange of tari¤
cuts is “multilateralized” under the MFN rule and may o¤er indirect bene…ts to other
parties, where such indirect gains can be more e¤ectively internalized in a multilateral
2
For further discussion of the principle of reciprocity in GATT/WTO and recent research related to
this topic, see Bagwell and Staiger (forthcoming).

2

bargaining forum.3 The following excerpt from an early GATT report o¤ers one example:
Multilateral tari¤ bargaining, as devised at the London Session of the Preparatory Committee in October 1946 and as worked out in practice at Geneva and
Annecy, is one of the most remarkable developments in economic relations
between nations that has occurred in our time. It has produced a technique
whereby governments, in determining the concessions they are prepared to offer, are able to take into account the indirect bene…ts they may expect to gain
as a result of simultaneous negotiations between other countries, and whereby
world tari¤s may be scaled down within a remarkably short time. (ICITO,
1949, p. 10)
Related points are also made by Curzon (1966, pp. 75-77).
Utilizing recently declassi…ed data from the GATT/WTO on tari¤ bargaining, Bagwell, Staiger and Yurukoglu (2016) study the pattern of tari¤ bargaining in the GATT
Torquay (1950-51) Round. Negotiations in this round took a “request-o¤er”form, whereby
the initial proposal of a country consisted of the tari¤ cuts it requested from its trading
partner and the tari¤ cuts it o¤ered in exchange. For our purposes here, we highlight three
key …ndings from their study. First, the numbers of back-and-forth o¤ers and counter offers in any bargain were relatively small. Second, once the initial proposals were on the
table, the focus of bargaining narrowed to each country’s own-tari¤-cut o¤ers. Countries
responded to imbalances in the outstanding o¤ers by adjusting their own o¤ers rather
than by adjusting their requests. Third, adjustments in o¤ers typically took a simple and
striking form. O¤ers for given import goods were rarely deepened as the round progressed,
suggesting an absence of strategic screening behavior along this dimension.4 Instead, when
adjustments in o¤ers did occur, the adjustment typically involved a country reducing the
depth of its o¤er.5 A potential interpretation of this pattern is that a country would
propose for a given import good the tari¤ that generated its preferred trade volume for
a …xed terms of trade, with the expectation that any subsequent “rebalancing” of o¤ers
necessary for multilateral reciprocity would arise later in the round after all o¤ers had
been recorded and might entail a reduction in the depth of its o¤er.
3

Note that, according to the …ndings of Bagwell and Staiger (2005) just described, bilateral tari¤ cuts
under the MFN rule o¤er potential indirect bene…ts to third parties only when those cuts fail to satisfy
bilateral reciprocity (i.e., only when those cuts on their own would change world prices).
4
Strategic screening occurs, for instance, in theoretical models with one-sided uncertainty in which
the uniformed party makes all the o¤ers (e.g., Gul, Sonnenschein and Wilson, 1986)
5
A country could reduce the depth of its o¤er on the intensive margin (by reducing the magnitude
of its tari¤ cut on a given import good) or on the extensive margin (by reducing the range of import
goods in a bargain). In the Torquay Round, rebalancing typically occurred on the extensive margin. In
the model that we develop here, each country has one import good, and so we focus on intensive-margin
adjustments.

3

In this paper, motivated by GATT bargaining behavior and renegotiation rules, we
construct a general-equilibrium model of trade and examine multilateral tari¤ bargaining under the constraints of non-discrimination and multilateral reciprocity. The model
has two goods and three countries, corresponding to a home country and two foreign
countries, where the foreign countries trade only with the home country. We allow for a
general family of government preferences, construct a simple bargaining game and identify
bargaining outcomes that can be implemented using dominant strategy proposals for all
countries. The resulting bargaining outcome is e¢ cient relative to government preferences
if and only if the initial tari¤ vectors position the initial world price at its “politically
optimal” level.6 In symmetric settings, if the initial tari¤s correspond to Nash tari¤s,
then the resulting bargaining outcome also ensures greater-than-Nash trade volumes and
welfares for all countries.
To establish these results, we develop a bargaining game inspired by the request-o¤er
structure that we described above in the context of the Torquay Round, a structure
that has been commonly used across the GATT/WTO tari¤ bargaining rounds.7 In this
game, countries simultaneously make proposals concerning their own tari¤s (their “offers”) and the tari¤s of their trading partners (their “requests”). For each country, we
require that any proposed change in tari¤s satis…es the principles of non-discrimination
and multilateral reciprocity. We capture GATT Article XXVIII renegotiation provisions
in a short-hand way, by assuming also that the bargaining outcome must respect “voluntary exchange,” in the speci…c sense that no country is ever forced to accept a trade
volume in excess of that implied by its proposal. A key issue is that the proposals may
disagree and thus be imbalanced, with one side of the market seeking greater trade volume than the other. To address this issue, we construct a mechanism that maps tari¤
proposals into assigned tari¤s. When the proposals “agree,” as we de…ne that term, the
mechanism assigns the corresponding tari¤ vector upon which all parties agree. If the
proposals disagree, the mechanism must introduce a rationing rule, since one side of the
market is short relative to the other. The rationing rule that we employ uses randomization and ensures that foreign countries subjected to rationing are treated in an ex ante
symmetric way. We construct a mechanism that maximizes the value of trade volume
while satisfying the constraints of non-discrimination, multilateral reciprocity and voluntary exchange. We then show that the mechanism so constructed results in dominant
6

The politically optimal tari¤s are the tari¤s that would be selected in the hypothetical situation in
which governments are not motivated by the terms-of-trade implications of their unilateral trade-policy
choices. The politically optimal world price is then the market-clearing world price that emerges when all
governments select their politically optimal policies. See Bagwell and Staiger (1999, 2002) and Section 5
below for further discussion.
7
With the exception of the Kennedy and Tokyo Rounds, which relied primarily on tari¤-cutting
formulas, all of the GATT rounds and the now-suspended WTO Doha Round have relied on request-o¤er
bargaining structures of the kind we describe here.

4

strategies for each country, and we characterize the outcomes that can be implemented
under dominant strategy proposals for each country.
In our model, dominant strategy proposals lead to assigned tari¤ vectors once adjustments are made that maintain multilateral reciprocity while not requiring any country
to import more than is implied by its proposal. This simple sequence - initial tari¤ proposals followed by multilateral rebalancing - is broadly consistent with observed patterns
identi…ed by Bagwell, Staiger and Yurukoglu (2016) in the bargaining records for the
GATT Torquay Round. As mentioned above, a notable feature of bargaining behavior
in this round is the lack of back-and-forth haggling over the levels of proposed tari¤s.
In addition, subsequent to the initial proposals our constructed mechanism orchestrates
multilateral rebalancing by placing primary emphasis on the own-tari¤ o¤ers in those proposals, much as did the narrowed focus of bargaining in the Torquay Round once initial
proposals were on the table. Also in line with the observed patterns from the Torquay
Round, multilateral rebalancing is achieved through reductions in the depths of o¤ers.8
Despite the importance of bargaining in GATT/WTO rounds, relatively little work has
formally examined multilateral tari¤ bargaining behavior. As mentioned above, Bagwell
and Staiger (1999, 2002, 2005) examine the purpose and design of trade agreements for a
related setting. As we discuss in further detail in Section 2, some of the key implications
of (bilateral) reciprocity and MFN that we utilize here are developed in their work. Our
theoretical work is most closely related to that in Bagwell and Staiger (1999). In a related
multi-country setting, Bagwell and Staiger (1999) study a tari¤ negotiation game in which
countries make proposals consistent with reciprocity. Under disagreement, they assume
that the assigned tari¤ vector maximizes the value of trade while not requiring any country
to import a volume in excess of that implied by its proposal. Their analysis is at one level
more general, since they also allow for discriminatory tari¤s.9 At other levels, however,
the model considered in this paper o¤ers several advantages.
In particular, Bagwell and Staiger (1999) assume that the home country proposes its
own tari¤ policy as well as trade shares from foreign countries, and they then use this
proposal and the reciprocity restriction to determine the home country’s implied proposals
for foreign tari¤s. Similarly, Bagwell and Staiger (1999) assume that each foreign country
proposes a tari¤ for itself, and they then use all foreign tari¤ proposals and the reciprocity
restriction to determine the implied proposal by foreign countries together for home tari¤s.
By contrast, the model that we present here relates more directly to the GATT requesto¤er tari¤ bargaining data, since we assume that each country directly proposes a tari¤ for
itself and for each of its trading partners. Rather than endow the home country with the
8
As previously noted, however, in our two-good model we are not able to include rebalancing that
takes the form of changes in the range of products that are included in the bargain.
9
Bagwell and Staiger (1999) …nd that discriminatory policies are incompatible with e¢ ciency for the
game that they analyze.

5

power to choose trade shares directly, we propose an explicit rationing rule for settings in
which one side of the market is short.10 Another key di¤erence is that the home country in
the Bagwell-Staiger (1999) model adopts best-response rather than dominant proposals,
whereas in the results featured here all countries adopt dominant strategy proposals. We
also show that one of Bagwell and Staiger’s (1999) main …ndings - that e¢ ciency can be
achieved if and only if the politically optimal MFN tari¤ vector is implemented - continues
to hold when we generalize their analysis so that all countries make direct tari¤ proposals
and use dominant strategy proposals.
Ludema’s (1991) work is also related. He o¤ers an interesting model of tari¤ bargaining under the MFN rule in a dynamic setting. His focus is on whether an MFN-e¢ cient
bargaining outcome is possible when countries can reject an outcome and continue bargaining in the event that a country attempts to free ride and withhold its own tari¤ cuts.
By comparison, our bargaining set up is essentially static, imposes the additional constraint of multilateral reciprocity and addresses associated rationing issues, and features
dominant strategy implementation.
Our work is also broadly related to previous research that examines strategy-proof
rationing rules in other economic settings. In our model, a rationing issue arises at the
given world price when the volume of trade proposed by the home country is lower than
that proposed by the foreign countries in aggregate. We then require a rationing rule that
is consistent with dominant strategy implementation. Our approach is to pick a foreign
country at random, assign to that country its proposed volume so long as its proposed
volume does not exceed the volume proposed by the home country, and then allocate any
remaining volume to the other foreign country. Each country has a preferred volume of
trade given the …xed world price, where preferences are single-peaked, and as noted no
country is ever forced to accept a trade volume in excess of that implied by its proposal.
A potentially attractive feature of this random priority rationing rule is that foreign
countries are treated in an ex ante symmetric way. However, asymmetric rationing rules
that use …xed (i.e., deterministic) priority schemes may also be attractive. For example,
in settings where one trading partner is a primary supplier, the GATT principal supplier
rule suggests that this partner receives priority. We consider such asymmetric rationing
rules in Section 7 and argue that our results are robust to this extension.
Strategy-proof rationing rules are also examined by Benassy (1982) in the context of an
analysis of …xed-price equilibria. Benassy assumes that each agent presents a preferred
net demand volume in a given market, and he then considers rationing schemes that
map from the set of net demand requests presented by all agents to actual transactions.
10
While we focus on a probabilistic rationing rule in our main analysis, we consider other rationing
rules in Section 7. As we discuss just below, one advantage of this approach is that we can relate our
analysis to the literature on strategy-proof social choice functions, which considers alternative rationing
rules that are compatible with dominant strategy implementation.

6

He emphasizes deterministic rationing rules that are strategy-proof, e¢ cient (in that
there are not both rationed demanders and suppliers in a given market), and respect
voluntary exchange (in that no agent can be forced to purchase more units than that
agent demands or sell more units than that agent supplies). One scheme considered by
Benassy that satis…es these properties is a priority or queuing scheme, where demanders
(or suppliers) are ordered in a pre-determined fashion. The setting that we consider is
similar in some respects; however, we focus on a barter environment and use a random
process to determine which foreign country is prioritized to be …rst in line. Given our
tari¤ bargaining setting, we also assume that each country proposes tari¤s for itself and
its trading partner(s), subject to the institutional constraints of non-discrimination and
multilateral reciprocity. The relevant transaction price in our model is the world price,
which is …xed under these institutional constraints.
Strategy-proof rationing rules are also used in the social choice literature that considers outcomes that can be implemented under dominant strategies when the domain
of possible preferences is restricted in various ways.11 By contrast, we adopt particular
tari¤ assignment rules that are motivated by GATT/WTO practice, show that those rules
are consistent with dominant strategy proposals, and consider the positive and normative
implications of the resulting bargaining outcomes. Despite these di¤erences, our analysis
of dominant strategy implementation and rationing rules has some interesting parallels
in the social choice literature, wherein a related allotment problem is concerned with rationing volumes across agents with single-peaked preferences in a …xed-price setting with
an exogenous total volume.12 In this context, the rationing rule that we employ when
the home country is on the short side of the market is closely related to that used in the
random priority mechanism.13 As we discuss further in Section 7, our …ndings also hold
for other rationing rules featured in research on the allotment problem, including asymmetric rules that used …xed priority schemes and a rule based on the “uniform allocation
rule.”14
The rest of the paper is organized into seven remaining sections, which respectively (i)
present the basic general-equilibrium trade model and its key properties, (ii) construct a
11

See Barbera (2011) for an excellent survey.
It is important to note that di¤erences exist as well. In the model considered here, the total volume that is allocated when the foreign countries are rationed is endogenously determined by the homecountry proposal, and the world price is …xed as a consequence of the institution-based constraints
(non-discrimination, multilateral reciprocity) that we impose on the proposal strategy space.
13
See Abdulkadiroglu and Sonmez (1998) and Bogomolnaia and Moulin (2001) for further discussion of
the random priority mechanism (which the former paper refers to as a random serial dictator mechanism),
as applied to settings in which indivisible objects are assigned to agents where each agent has use for
only one unit.
14
In the social choice literature, priority schemes and other asymmetric rationing approaches are considered by Barbera, Jackson and Neme (1997) and Moulin (2000), for example, while the uniform allocation
rule is analyzed by Sprumont (1991).
12

7

mechanism that maps tari¤ proposals satisfying MFN and multilateral reciprocity into assigned tari¤s, (iii) characterize dominant strategy proposals for each country, (iv) examine
the e¢ ciency properties of the resulting bargaining outcomes, (v) examine the resulting
bargaining outcomes when the initial tari¤s are Nash tari¤s, (vi) discuss extensions concerning multiple countries, private information, alternative rationing rules, and additional
constraints, and (vii) conclude.

2

Framework

We begin by presenting a general-equilibrium model of trade. The model has two goods
and three countries. After presenting the model, we specify a general family of preferences,
describe Nash tari¤s and consider notions of reciprocity in trade negotiations.
The Trade Model Three countries trade two goods, where the goods are normal in
consumption and produced in perfectly competitive markets under conditions of increasing
opportunity costs. The three countries are respectively referred to as the home country
(or home), foreign country 1 and foreign country 2. Throughout, we denote foreign
country variables with an asterisk. The home country imports good x from each of the
two foreign countries, and each foreign country imports good y from the home country.15
We assume that the foreign countries do not trade with one another.
Each country selects an ad valorem import tari¤. While the home country imports
from two countries, we assume that it uses an MFN tari¤ and thus does not discriminate
between imports from di¤erent foreign countries. With t > 1 denoting the home-country
ad valorem import tari¤ and t i > 1 denoting the ad valorem import tari¤ of foreign
country i, we may de…ne
1 + t > 0 and i 1 + t i > 0. We interpret > 1 as an
import tari¤ and similarly for i .
Our approach is to present the basic trade model under the assumption that the tari¤
vector ( ; 1 ; 2 ) is such that the home country and each foreign country exchange a
positive volume of trade. After describing the model under this assumption, we introduce
notation to de…ne the associated set of tari¤ vectors. Finally, we present an assumption under which we may extend the set of tari¤ vectors to include the possibility of a
prohibitive tari¤ for one foreign country.
To present the basic trade model, we let p
px =py denote the local price faced by
producers and consumers in the home country, and we similarly use p i pxi =pyi to denote
the local price in foreign country i; i = 1; 2; respectively. The world (i.e., untaxed) price
for trade between the home country and foreign country i is de…ned as pwi
pxi =py .
15

We assume throughout that trade policies never reverse the “natural” direction of trade; thus, the
home country never imports good y and the foreign countries never import good x.

8

The local price in the home country is determined from the world price as p = pwi .
Clearly, since the home country adopts an MFN tari¤ , a single world price must prevail:
pw
px =py . The local price in foreign country i is now determined as p i = pw = i ,
where the local price varies across foreign countries if they select di¤erent import tari¤s.
Observe next that pw represents foreign country i’s terms of trade and that the home
country’s terms of trade is similarly given by 1=pw . Finally, it is convenient to introduce
functional notation that summarizes the relationships between local and world prices:
p = pw p( ; pw ) > 0 and p i = pw = i p i ( i ; pw ) > 0.
In each country, the production levels of goods x and y are determined by the local
price. Let Qg = Qg (p) and Qgi = Qgi (p i ) denote production levels for good g, where
g = x; y, in the home country and in foreign country i, respectively. Consumption
in each country is determined by the local price in that country along with the world
price: Cg = Cg (p; pw ) and Cg i = Cg i (p i ; pw ) for g = x; y and i = 1; 2, respectively.
Within any country, the local price de…nes the trade-o¤ that confronts consumers and
also determines the level and distribution of factor income. Together, the local and world
prices also determine tari¤ revenue for the country, which we assume is distributed lump
sum to consumers.16 Hence, for each good in each country, consumption is determined
by the local price in that country along with the world price.
We now de…ne import and export volumes. For the home country, imports of good
x and exports of good y are respectively denoted as M (p; pw )
Cx (p; pw ) Qx (p) and
E(p; pw )
Qy (p) Cy (p; pw ). Similarly, for foreign country i, imports of good y and
exports of good x are respectively denoted as M i (p i ; pw ) Cy i (p i ; pw ) Qyi (p i ) and
E i (p i ; pw )
Qxi (p i ) Cxi (p i ; pw ). We assume that these functions are all twicecontinuously di¤erentiable given positive trade volumes.
For a given world price, we also assume that each country imports less of its import
good when the relative price of the import good rises in that country. Formally, for a given
world price, we assume that @M (p; pw )=p < 0 and that @M i (p i ; pw )=@p i > 0. We assume
further that, for a given world price, the import volume for a given country can be made
arbitrarily small as the tari¤ of that country is made su¢ ciently high. Formally, for any pw
and values M > 0 and M i > 0, we assume that there exists (M ) > 0 and i (M i ) > 0
such that M (p( ; pw ); pw ) < M for all > (M ) and M i (p i ( i ; pw ); pw ) < M i for
all i > i (M i ).17 Notice that this assumption does not imply for any country the
existence of a prohibitive tari¤ level that generates zero import volume.
Trade volumes are subjected to two market relationships. First, for any world price,
trade balance must be satis…ed in each country. For the home country, the trade-balance
16

See Bagwell and Staiger (1999, 2002) for further details concerning the determination of tari¤ revenue.
The role of this assumption is to ensure that we can always assign tari¤s to generate the import
values that arise in our constructed mechanism in Section 3.
17

9

condition is that, for any pw ,
pw M (p( ; pw ); pw ) = E(p( ; pw ); pw ):

(1)

Similarly, for foreign country i, the trade-balance condition is that, for any pw ,
M i (p i (

i

; pw ); pw ) = pw E i (p i (

i

; pw ); pw ):

(2)

The trade-balance conditions are budget constraints that are captured as restrictions on
the import and export functions in a given country.
The second relationship is market clearing. We thus de…ne the equilibrium world price,
w
pe ( ; 1 ; 2 ), as the unique value for pw that satis…es market clearing in good y :
E(p( ; pw ); pw ) = M 1 (p 1 (

1

; pw ); pw ) + M 2 (p 2 (

2

; pw ); pw ):

(3)

As is standard, market clearing for good x is implied by the two trade-balance conditions
along with the requirement of market clearing for good y.
Our presentation of the basic trade model assumes that the tari¤ vector is such that a
positive trade volume is exchanged between the home country and each foreign country.
We now introduce the notation to de…ne the set of tari¤ vectors for which trade volumes
are positive at the associated market-clearing world price:
f( ;

1

;

2

) 2 <3+ j M i (p i (

i

; pew ); pew ) > 0; i = 1; 2g:

Notice that, for ( ; 1 ; 2 ) 2 , we have from (1) and (3) that M (p( ; pew ); pew ) > 0 holds
as well. Thus, for ( ; 1 ; 2 ) 2 , the assumptions presented above for the basic trade
model all hold. We assume that is a non-empty set.
Our presentation to this point assumes positive trade volumes between the home
country and each foreign country, but our trade-balance and market-clearing conditions
above can also be used to capture limiting cases where one foreign country has no trade
volume.18 While we do not assume that prohibitive tari¤s exist as a general matter, we
do assume the existence of prohibitive tari¤s for individual foreign countries under one
speci…c scenario.
To formalize this assumption, suppose we start with some initial tari¤ vector ( 0 ; 01 ; 02 ) 2
and associated initial world price pw
pew ( 0 ; 01 ; 02 ): Suppose further that for some
0
foreign country i it is possible to satisfy the market-clearing condition (3) at the world
price pw
0 when the trade volume for foreign country j is set to zero; that is, suppose
18

Notice from (1) and (3) that if for foreign country 1, say, we have M 1 (p 1 (
pe = pew ( ; 1 ; 2 ), then we may still have that M (p( ,e
pw ); pew ) > 0 and M 2 (p 2 (
w

10

1
2

; pew ); pew ) = 0 for
; pew ); pew ) > 0:

w
i
i
i w
w
that there exists 1i such that E(p( 0 ; pw
0 ); p0 ) = M (p ( 1 ; p0 ); p0 ). For such initial
tari¤ vectors, our assumption is that there exists a lowest prohibitive tari¤ 1j > 0j for
w
j
j
j
w
foreign country j such that M j (p j ( 1j ; pw
; pw
0 ); p0 ) = 0 with M (p (
0 ); p0 ) > 0 for
all j 2 [ 0j ; 1j ).19 We then use + to denote the extension of the set
to include
2
1
limit-case tari¤ vectors, ( 0 ; 1 ; 1 ), that can be constructed in this way from some initial tari¤ vector ( 0 ; 01 ; 02 ) 2 . We also extend the de…nition of the market-clearing
ew ( 0 ; 11 ; 12 ) even
world price to include such limit-case vectors and thus write pw
0 = p
though one foreign country has no trade volume.
We turn now to our assumptions on market-clearing prices. Our maintained assumptions are that Metzler and Lerner paradoxes are ruled out; thus, for ( ; 1 ; 2 ) 2 , we
assume that

dp( ; pew )
dp i ( i ; pew )
> 0>
d
d i
w
1
2
w
@ pe ( ; ; )
@ pe ( ; 1 ; 2 )
< 0<
:
@
@ i

(4)

The world-price inequalities in (4) ensure that each country is large (i.e., that each country
can improve its terms of trade by raising its import tari¤).
Government Preferences Following Bagwell and Staiger (1999, 2002), we de…ne a
general family of government preferences. This family includes the traditional case in
which governments maximize national income but allows as well that governments may
have distributional concerns. Speci…cally, for a given vector of tari¤s, the home government welfare function is represented as W (p( ; pew ); pew ) while the welfare function for the
government of foreign country i is represented as W i (p i ( i ; pew ); pew ). For simplicity,
we refer to W as the welfare of the home country and to W i as the welfare of foreign
country i.
Our primary assumption on welfare functions is that, holding its local price …xed, each
government values an improvement in its terms of trade:
Wpew (p( ; pew ); pew ) < 0 < Wpewi (p i (

i

; pew ); pew )

(5)

for i = 1; 2 and for ( ; 1 ; 2 ) 2 .20 As Bagwell and Staiger (1999, 2002) discuss in
detail, the experiment considered here may be understood as corresponding to underlying
tari¤ changes whereby a government raises its own tari¤ while a trading partner reduces
19

In our analysis below, this assumption ensures that we can assign tari¤ vectors under which one
foreign country receives no trade volume.
20
For a given world price, we also impose an assumption that each country has single-peaked preferences
with respect to its own tari¤ (or local price). We postpone a formal statement of this assumption until
Section 4.

11

its tari¤, with the end result being that the government’s local price is unchanged while
its terms of trade improves. This assumption is satis…ed when governments maximize national income and also in the leading political-economy models of trade policy, as Bagwell
and Staiger (1999, 2002) discuss.
Nash Tari¤s In the absence of a trade agreement, we assume that governments would
each set their optimal unilateral policies, leading to a Nash equilibrium. To provide
additional context for our analysis, we de…ne and brie‡y characterize the Nash tari¤s.
The optimal or best-response tari¤s for the home country and foreign country i are
respectively de…ned by
@ pew
dp
+ Wpew
= 0
d
@
dp i
ew
i @p
Wp ii
+
W
= 0;
w
pe
d i
@ i
Wp

(6)

where i = 1; 2 and for simplicity we suppress notation for functional dependencies. A Nash
equilibrium is a tari¤ vector, ( N ; N1 ; N2 ) 2 , satisfying these three …rst-order conditions. We assume that a unique Nash equilibrium exists, and we refer to the associated
tari¤s as Nash tari¤s.21
Bagwell and Staiger (1999, 2002) show that the Nash tari¤s are ine¢ cient, where
e¢ ciency is measured relative to the preferences of governments (i.e., relative to the welfare
functions, W , W 1 and W 2 ). The key intuition is that each government is motivated in
part by the terms-of-trade implications of its trade-policy selection, and a terms-of-trade
gain for the home country is a terms-of-trade loss for the foreign countries. As Bagwell
and Staiger (1999, 2002) discuss, this means that starting from the Nash tari¤s each
government would gain from a small increase in its trade volume (i.e., a small decrease in
the relative price of its import good) if this could be achieved without altering its terms
of trade.
The formal argument is useful for our subsequent discussion and is as follows. Using
(4), (5) and (6), we may easily verify that Wp < 0 < Wp ii at the Nash tari¤s. Now
suppose that the home country and foreign country i exchange small reciprocal tari¤
cuts that preserve the terms of trade. Since p = pw and p i = pw = i , it then follows
that p falls and p i rises. With Wp < 0 < Wp ii at the Nash tari¤s, we thus conclude that
the home country and foreign country i both enjoy welfare gains from exchanging small
reciprocal tari¤ cuts that preserve the terms of trade.
A government cannot alter its local price and preserve its terms of trade with a uni21

As is well known (see Dixit, 1987), autarky Nash tari¤ equilibria typically exist as well. Our focus
here is on characterizing interior Nash tari¤s, which seems the natural focus for our purposes given that in
Section 6 we consider the possibility that these tari¤s are the initial tari¤s from which countries bargain.

12

lateral trade-policy adjustment; however, under (4) and as we discuss in greater detail
next, governments can achieve trade-volume increases without altering the terms of trade
if they liberalize trade through reciprocal adjustments in trade policies.
Reciprocity We now explore notions of reciprocal adjustments in trade policies. Motivated by the preceding discussion, we are interested in the e¤ects of reciprocal adjustments
on negotiating partners and also third parties.
To begin our discussion, we follow Bagwell and Staiger (2005) and de…ne a welfarepreservation property for the model. Speci…cally, for tari¤ vectors in , if the home
country and foreign country i negotiate changes in their respective tari¤s that leave
unaltered the world price, then the welfare of the government of foreign country j, where
j 6= i, is unaltered as well. This implication is easily veri…ed. If the negotiation between
the governments of home and foreign country i leaves the world price pew …xed at some
j
of foreign country j does not change, then p j = pew = j is
level pw
0 , and if the tari¤
also unaltered and so W j (p j ( j ; pew ); pew ) is unaltered as well.
When would a negotiated change in the tari¤s of the home country and foreign country
i leave the world price unaltered? Referring to (4), we see that a negotiated change in
the tari¤s of the home country and foreign country i can preserve the world price pew
only if the tari¤s move in the same direction. Using foreign country i’s trade-balance
condition (2), Bagwell and Staiger (2005) go further and argue that the world price
remains unaltered in this two-good setting if the home country and foreign country i
negotiate tari¤ changes that satisfy the principle of bilateral reciprocity whereby the
value of any change in foreign country i’s exports is equal to the value of any change
in its imports.22 Given our maintained assumption that the home country’s trade policy
is nondiscriminatory, the principle of bilateral reciprocity thus completely insulates third
parties from spillover e¤ects associated with bilateral negotiations.
For our purposes here, it is convenient to formally de…ne the principle of bilateral
reciprocity directly in terms of its implication for the world price. To this end, we specify
an initial tari¤ vector, ( 0 ; 01 ; 02 ) 2 ; and associated world price, pw
ew ( 0 ; 01 ; 02 ),
0 = p
and consider a negotiation between home and foreign country 1, say. With 2 held …xed
at the initial level 02 , the negotiated tari¤ vector may be represented as ( 1 ; 11 ; 02 ) 2 ,
22

Formally, consider a negotiation between the home country and, say, foreign country 1 concerning
changes in their respective tari¤s. Let ( 0 ; 01 ; 02 ) 2 and ( 1 ; 11 ; 02 ) 2 represent the initial and
negotiated tari¤ vectors, with associated world prices pw
pew ( 0 ; 01 ; 02 ) and pw
pew ( 1 ; 11 ; 02 ).
1
0
1
1
1
w
Let the corresponding local prices in foreign country 1 be denoted as p0 = p0 = 0 and p11 = pw
1= 1 .
Bagwell and Staiger (2005) de…ne the principle of bilateral reciprocity as holding if and only if
M 1 (p11 ; pw
1)

w
1
1 w
M 1 (p01 ; pw
0 ) = p0 [E (p1 ; p1 )

E 1 (p01 ; pw
0 )]

As Bagwell and Staiger (2005) argue, after applying (2) for i = 1 at both the initial and negotiated tari¤
w
vectors, it follows easily that the principle of bilateral reciprocity holds if and only if pw
0 = p1 :

13

with an associated world price that is given as pw
ew ( 1 ; 11 ; 02 ). We now say that
1 = p
a negotiated tari¤ change between home and foreign country 1 satis…es the principle of
w
bilateral reciprocity if the world price is unchanged: pw
0 = p1 . The de…nition extends
in the obvious way if the bilateral negotiation is between the home country and foreign
country 2.
Even though two countries are unable to alter the terms of trade when undertaking a
negotiation that satis…es the principle of bilateral reciprocity, they are able to change their
local prices and thereby experience welfare e¤ects as a consequence of such a negotiation.
Indeed, as noted above, starting at the Nash tari¤s, both negotiating countries gain from
exchanging small tari¤ cuts that satisfy the principle of bilateral reciprocity. Furthermore,
as the welfare-preservation property indicates, the third country experiences no welfare
e¤ect as a consequence of a negotiated tari¤ change that is undertaken by the other
countries and that satis…es bilateral reciprocity.
We turn now to multilateral negotiations in which the tari¤s of all countries may
change. One implication is that all three countries may experience welfare e¤ects even
when tari¤s satisfy a notion of multilateral reciprocity. To make this argument precise,
we …rst must de…ne multilateral reciprocity.
To this end, we now consider a multilateral negotiation among all three countries.
Let us specify an initial tari¤ vector, ( 0 ; 01 ; 02 ) 2 ; and associated world price, pw
0 =
w
1
2
1
2
pe ( 0 ; 0 ; 0 ), and also a negotiated tari¤ vector, ( 1 ; 1 ; 1 ) 2 , and associated
ew ( 1 ; 11 ; 12 ). We say that a negotiated tari¤ change satis…es the
world price, pw
1 = p
w
principle of multilateral reciprocity if the world price is unchanged: pw
0 = p1 . Of course,
multilateral reciprocity is satis…ed if the home country negotiates with only one foreign
country and the negotiation conforms with bilateral reciprocity. Multilateral reciprocity
is likewise satis…ed if the home country negotiates separately with both foreign countries,
with each individual negotiation satisfying bilateral reciprocity. Multilateral reciprocity
is also consistent, however, with a scenario where individual negotiations, if viewed in
isolation, would violate bilateral reciprocity. Finally, multilateral reciprocity is consistent
as well with a scenario in which only the foreign tari¤s are changed, where under (4) the
world price is maintained only if the foreign tari¤s are changed in opposite directions.
Building directly on arguments made above, we can now report as well a simple welfare result for negotiated tari¤ cuts that satisfy the principle of multilateral reciprocity.
Speci…cally, starting at the Nash equilibrium, if all three countries o¤er slight tari¤ cuts
and the three tari¤ cuts in combination satisfy the principle of multilateral reciprocity,
then all three countries experience a welfare gain.

14

3

The Constructed Mechanism

With the basic model and some key properties now de…ned, we are prepared to analyze the
manner in which multilateral tari¤s may be determined through negotiation. Motivated
by GATT tari¤ bargaining behavior, our approach is to require that any proposed change
in tari¤s satis…es the principles of non-discrimination and multilateral reciprocity. In
line with renegotiation provisions found in GATT Article XXVIII, we require further
that no country is ever forced to accept a trade volume in excess of that implied by its
proposal.23 The remaining challenge is then to introduce any priority or rationing rules
that may be needed for situations in which one side of the market is short relative to the
other. We address these issues in this section and construct a mechanism that translates
simultaneous tari¤ proposals from each country into a vector of assigned tari¤s. In the
following section, we then argue that the constructed mechanism results in a dominant
strategy for each country.
Setup We assume that the three countries begin their negotiation with an exogenous
initial tari¤ vector, ( 0 ; 01 ; 02 ) 2 . The associated initial world price is represented as
pew ( 0 ; 01 ; 02 ) > 0:
pw
0

Strategies The game form involves simultaneous proposals by all three countries. We
impose two restrictions on the strategy set. First, we assume that each country can only
make proposals concerning its own tari¤ and that of its trading partner(s). Since the
two foreign countries do not trade with one another, this means that no foreign country
proposes a change in the tari¤ of the other foreign country. Second, we assume that each
proposal if accepted must maintain the world price. The latter restriction means that we
are restricting proposals to satisfy multilateral reciprocity, as that term is de…ned above.24
Formally, the respective strategy spaces are:
Home country’s strategy: A proposal Th

(Thh ; Th 1 ; Th 2 ) 2

Foreign country 1’s strategy: A proposal T
pew (T h1 ; T 11 ; T 12 ) and T 12 = 02 :
23

1

such that pw
0

(T h1 ; T 11 ; T 12 ) 2

pew (Thh ; Th 1 ; Th 2 ):

such that pw
0

As Bagwell and Staiger (1999, 2002) discuss in detail, GATT Article XXVIII contains renegotiation
provisions under which a country can initiate reciprocal tari¤ increases that preserve the terms of trade.
If a negotiated tari¤ agreement were such that a country achieved greater trade volume than it preferred
at the given terms of trade, then the country could subsequently utilize GATT Article XXVIII and
renegotiate to achieve a preferred trade volume at the given terms of trade. Following Bagwell and
Staiger (1999, 2002), we capture the implications of this constraint here by assuming that no country can
be forced to accept a trade volume in excess of that implied by its proposal.
24
Recall that the MFN requirement is built into the model itself, with the assumption that the home
country has only one import tari¤, .

15

Foreign country 2’s strategy: A proposal T
pew (T h2 ; T 21 ; T 22 ) and T 21 = 01 :

2

(T h2 ; T 21 ; T 22 ) 2

such that pw
0

Using h to denote the home country and i to denote foreign country i, we interpret the
notation for proposals as follows: Th is the tari¤ vector proposed by the home country,
Thh is the tari¤ that the home country proposes for itself, Th i is the tari¤ that the home
country proposes for foreign country i, T i is the tari¤ vector proposed by foreign country
i, T ii is the tari¤ proposed by foreign country i for itself, T hi is the tari¤ that foreign
country i proposes for the home country, and T ij = 0j is the (status quo) tari¤ that
foreign country i proposes for foreign country j, where i 6= j. Let Sh ; S 1 and S 2
denote the respective strategy spaces so de…ned, and let S Sh S 1 S 2 .
The proposal of the home country may entail tari¤ changes by some or all countries,
and the requirement of multilateral reciprocity ensures that any such changes would preserve the world price at its initial level. By contrast, the proposal of foreign country i
can only entail changes in the tari¤s of the home country and foreign country i, and so
the requirement of multilateral reciprocity for the proposal of foreign country i amounts
to a requirement of bilateral reciprocity.
Summarizing, once the simultaneous proposals are made, we have the following objects:
Th

(Thh ; Th 1 ; Th 2 ); T

pw
0

pew (Thh ; Th 1 ; Th 2 ) = pew (T h1 ; T 11 ; T 12 ) = pew (T h2 ; T 21 ; T 22 );

T

2
1

=

2

0

and T

1
2

=

(T h1 ; T 11 ; T 12 ) and T

1

1

0

2

(T h2 ; T 21 ; T 22 ); where

:

Equivalence Class From the point of view of any single country, there exists a continuum of tari¤ adjustments by the other two countries that leave unaltered the world price.
For any foreign country, tari¤ changes by the home country and the other foreign country
that preserve the world price correspond to changes that satisfy bilateral reciprocity. By
the welfare-preservation property, such adjustments leave the former foreign country indi¤erent. We recall also that, by (4), a world-price preserving tari¤ adjustment between
the home country and any one foreign country requires that the tari¤s are changed in the
same direction. Foreign tari¤s also may be adjusted in a way that maintains the world
price and thus leaves the home country indi¤erent. In this case, as previously noted, we
may use (4) to conclude that the adjusted foreign tari¤s move in opposite directions.
In recognition of such policies, we are led to de…ne for each country a class of tari¤s for
the other countries that are equivalent from the former country’s perspective. We begin
by de…ning an equivalence class of tari¤s for each foreign country.
De…nition 1 Given T

1

(T h1 ; T 11 ; T 12 ) and pw
0
16

pew (T 1 ), we may de…ne an equivalence

class for foreign country 1 as a tari¤ set
EC 1 (T 1 )

fTb 1

(Tbh1 ; Tb 11 ; Tb 12 )g

fTb 2

(Tbh2 ; Tb 21 ; Tb 22 )g

that satis…es the requirements that (i) Tb 11 = T 11 and (ii) pew (Tb 1 ) = pw
0 : Likewise, given
w
w
2
1
h
pe (T 2 ), we may de…ne an equivalence class for foreign
T2
(T 2 ; T 2 ; T 2 ) and p0
country 2 as a tari¤ set
EC 2 (T 2 )

that satis…es the requirements that (i) Tb 22 = T

2
2

and (ii) pew (Tb 2 ) = pw
0:

Thus, an equivalence class for foreign country i maintains i’s proposed tari¤ for
itself and allows for alternative tari¤s for home and foreign country j, where j 6= i,
such that these alternative tari¤s when joined with i’s proposed tari¤ for itself serve
to maintain the initial world price. Notice that an equivalence class is not empty, since
T i 2 EC i (T i ): Next, we observe that we can reach any member of EC i (T i ) by …xing
Tb ii = T ii and then allowing changes from (T hi ; T ij ) to (Tbhi ; Tb ij ) that satisfy bilateral
reciprocity between home and foreign country j and that thus maintain the initial world
price. Finally, let e i (T i ) denote a representative member of EC i (T i ). Since T i and
any e i (T i ) 2 EC i (T i ) generate the same world price pw
0 and local price in foreign
country i (as i’s own tari¤ is unaltered by requirement (i)), it follows that T i and any
e i (T i ) 2 EC i (T i ) generate the same economic magnitudes (e.g., trade volumes) and
government welfare for foreign country i. The latter implication is a re-statement of the
welfare-preservation property.
We now de…ne an equivalence class of tari¤s for the home country.
De…nition 2 Given Th (Thh ; Th 1 ; Th 2 ) and pw
0
class for the home country as a tari¤ set
ECh (Th )

fTbh

pew (Th ), we may de…ne an equivalence

(Tbhh ; Tbh 1 ; Tbh 2 )g

that satis…es the requirements that (i) Tbhh = Thh and (ii) pew (Tbh ) = pw
0:

Thus, an equivalence class for the home country maintains home’s proposed tari¤
for itself and allows for alternative tari¤s for the two foreign countries such that these
alternative tari¤s when joined with home’s proposed tari¤ for itself serve to maintain the
initial world price. Given that Th 2 ECh (Th ), we know that ECh (Th ) is not empty. We
say that we can reach any member of ECh (Th ) by …xing Tbhh = Thh and then allowing
changes from (Th 1 ; Th 2 ) to (Tbh 1 ; Tbh 2 ) that maintain the initial world price. Finally, since
17

Th and any eh (Th ) 2 ECh (Th ) generate the same world price pw
0 and local price in the
home country (as home’s own tari¤ is unaltered by requirement (i)), it follows that Th
and any eh (Th ) 2 ECh (Th ) generate the same economic magnitudes (e.g., trade volumes)
and government welfare for the home country.
Implied Import Volumes Each country’s proposal can be associated with an implied
import volume for itself. We now introduce some notation with which to represent for
each country the import volume that is implied by its proposal.
De…nition 3 The home country’s proposal Th is associated with an implied import volume
for home de…ned as
w
Mh M (p(Thh ; pw
0 ); p0 ):
Similarly, foreign country i’s proposal T
for foreign country i de…ned as
M

i

i

is associated with an implied import volume

w
M i (p i (T ii ; pw
0 ); p0 ):

Notice that, given the initial world price, each country’s implied import volume depends
only on that country’s proposed tari¤ for its own imports. Notice also that, for any given
country and proposal by that country, any member of the resulting equivalence class
entails the same tari¤ for that country and the same world price, and so generates as well
the same implied import volume for that country. Finally, since proposals are members
of , we also observe that Mh > 0 and M i > 0 for i = 1; 2.
Agreement We now de…ne agreement between the three tari¤ proposals.
De…nition 4 The proposals fTh ; T 1 ; T 2 g agree if and only if there exist eh (Th ) 2 ECh (Th ),
e 1 (T 1 ) 2 EC 1 (T 1 ) and e 2 (T 2 ) 2 EC 2 (T 2 ) such that eh (Th ) = e 1 (T 1 ) = e 2 (T 2 ).
Thus, proposals agree when a common tari¤ vector is in the equivalence class for each
country.
We observe that the common tari¤ vector under agreement must use the proposal that
each country makes for its own tari¤. We record this observation as follows:
Lemma 1 The proposals fTh ; T 1 ; T 2 g agree if and only if
(Thh ; T 11 ; T 22 ) 2 ECh (Th ) \ EC 1 (T 1 ) \ EC 2 (T 2 ):
We now illustrate the notion of agreement with two examples. For simplicity, we
assume in each example that the initial tari¤s are ( 0 ; 01 ; 02 ) = (15; 15; 15), the initial
18

world price is pw
0 = 1, and the world price is preserved when one unit of home liberalization
is balanced against a total of one unit of liberalization from the foreign countries. In the
…rst example, the common tari¤ vector that lies in all three equivalence classes is simply
the tari¤ proposal of the home country. The second example illustrates, however, that
the common tari¤ vector that falls in all three equivalence classes may di¤er in part from
all three proposals.
Example 1 Suppose that home’s proposal is Th = (5; 10; 10), which means that home
proposes to cut its tari¤ by 10 in exchange for cuts of 5 by both of its trading partners. Suppose that foreign country 1’s proposal is T 1 = (10; 10; 15), so that foreign
country 1 proposes to exchange tari¤ cuts of 5 with the home country while leaving
foreign country 2’s tari¤ at its initial level. Assume that foreign country 2 makes a
symmetric proposal, T 2 = (10; 15; 10). The proposals of home and each foreign counpew (15; 15; 15) =
try i maintain the world price under our assumptions, since pw
0
pew (5; 10; 10) = pew (10; 10; 15) = pew (10; 15; 10): We establish now that the proposals agree
since the home proposal Th = (5; 10; 10) is a member of all three equivalence classes. It is
immediate that Th 2 ECh (Th ): Next, observe that given T 1 = (10; 10; 15), we can reach
Th = (5; 10; 10) by having home and foreign country 2 exchange tari¤ cuts of 5 units,
which preserves the world price and leaves foreign country 1 indi¤erent. In other words,
Th 2 EC 1 (T 1 ): By a similar argument, Th 2 EC 2 (T 2 ): We conclude that the proposals
fTh = (5; 10; 10); T 1 = (10; 10; 15); T 2 = (10; 15; 10)g agree.
Example 2 Suppose that home’s proposal is Th = (5; 10; 10) but that T 1 = (12; 12; 15)
and T 2 = (8; 15; 8). The proposals of home and each foreign country i maintain the world
pew (15; 15; 15) = pew (5; 10; 10) = pew (12; 12; 15) =
price under our assumptions, since pw
0
pew (8; 15; 8). We establish now that the proposals agree, since the proposal (5; 12; 8) is a
member of all three equivalence classes. To show that (5; 12; 8) 2 ECh (Th ), we note that
given Th we can reach (5; 12; 8) by having foreign country 1 raise its tari¤ by 2 units
while foreign country 1 cuts its tari¤ by 2 units, which preserves the world price and
leaves the home country indi¤erent. Next, (5; 12; 8) 2 EC 1 (T 1 ) follows, since we can
reach (5; 12; 8) from T 1 by having home and foreign country 2 exchange tari¤ cuts of 7
units, which preserves the world price and leaves foreign country 1 indi¤erent. Likewise,
starting at T 2 we can reach (5; 12; 8) by having home and foreign country 1 exchange
tari¤ cuts of 3 units, which preserves the world price and leaves foreign country 2 indi¤erent, thus establishing that (5; 12; 8) 2 EC 2 (T 2 ). We conclude that the proposals
fTh = (5; 10; 10); T 1 = (12; 12; 15); T 2 = (8; 15; 8)g agree.
We may now report the following implication of agreement:
Lemma 2 The proposals fTh ; T 1 ; T 2 g agree if and only if pw
0 Mh = M 1 + M 2 :
19

Proof. The home proposal Th implies the market-clearing world price of pew (Th ) = pw
0 and
w
an implied import volume for home of Mh = M (p(Thh ; pw
0 ); p0 ). For the home proposal
Th , the home trade-balance condition (1) may be stated as
h w
w
pw
0 Mh = E(p(Th ; p0 ); p0 )

(7)

Suppose …rst that the proposals fTh ; T 1 ; T 2 g agree. Then we know from Lemma 1
that (Thh ; T 11 ; T 22 ) 2 ECh (Th ) \ EC 1 (T 1 ) \ EC 2 (T 2 ). Since (Thh ; T 11 ; T 22 ) 2 ECh (Th ),
we have that pew (Thh ; T 11 ; T 22 ) = pw
0 . It follows that
w
1
1
1 w
w
2
2
2 w
w
E(p(Thh ; pw
0 ); p0 ) = M (p (T 1 ; p0 ); p0 ) + M (p (T 2 ; p0 ); p0 )

= M 1 + M 2:
We may now refer to (7) to conclude that pw
0 Mh = M 1 + M 2 .
Suppose next that the proposals fTh ; T 1 ; T 2 g are such that pw
0 Mh = M 1 +M 2 . Using
(7), we may rewrite this equality as
w
1
1
1 w
w
2
2
2 w
w
E(p(Thh ; pw
0 ); p0 ) = M (p (T 1 ; p0 ); p0 ) + M (p (T 2 ; p0 ); p0 ):

It follows from the market-clearing condition (3) that pew (Thh ; T 11 ; T 22 ) = pw
0 . Given that
h
1
2
the proposal vector (Th ; T 1 ; T 2 ) employs the proposal that each country makes for its
own tari¤ and satis…es pew (Thh ; T 11 ; T 22 ) = pw
0 , we conclude that
(Thh ; T 11 ; T 22 ) 2 ECh (Th ) \ EC 1 (T 1 ) \ EC 2 (T 2 ):

Thus, by Lemma 1, the proposals fTh ; T 1 ; T 2 g agree.
We further note that under agreement the common tari¤ vector (Thh ; T 11 ; T 22 ) is a
member of . This follows from the strategy-space restriction that each country’s own
proposal vector belongs to . Since the common tari¤ vector under agreement delivers
the world price pew (Thh ; T 11 ; T 22 ) = pw
0 , the common tari¤ vector also results in the same
import volume for each country as does that country’s own proposal vector.
Mechanism We de…ne a mechanism as a pair (S; g( )), where S is the strategy space
as de…ned above and g is an outcome function that maps from a vector of tari¤ proposals,
(Th ; T 1 ; T 2 ), to a vector of tari¤s, ( ; 1 ; 2 ) 2 + . Given a vector of tari¤ proposals,
a mechanism thus assigns ( or selects) a tari¤ vector for application.
We impose two baseline rules or requirements for the mechanism that we construct.
First, if the tari¤ proposals agree, then we require that the mechanism assigns the tari¤
vector constituted of each country’s proposal for its own tari¤: (Thh ; T 11 ; T 22 ). We know
20

from Lemma 1 that this is the only tari¤ vector that is in the equivalence class for each
country. We also know from Lemma 2 that the proposals agree if and only if the home
country and foreign countries (in aggregate) propose the same value of implied import
volumes (pw
0 Mh = M 1 + M 2 ). Second, if the tari¤ proposals do not agree, then we
require that the mechanism assigns a tari¤ vector that maximizes trade volume valued
at world prices while not forcing any country to import more than its implied import
volume and while preserving the initial world price. As we will see, under disagreement,
the baseline rules do not uniquely determine the outcome function, and so we will add
further rules below to ensure a unique mapping for our constructed mechanism. For now,
we note that there are two ways that disagreement may occur: the home country may
be on the long side (pw
0 Mh > M 1 + M 2 ); or the home country may be on the short
w
side (p0 Mh < M 1 + M 2 ). We address each of these two cases and de…ne corresponding
assignment rules. Then, in the next section, we characterize dominant strategies for
countries when the resulting constructed mechanism is used.
Agreement: Our …rst requirement for the mechanism is associated with the case in
which the tari¤ proposals agree. As just noted, in this case, we require that the mechanism assigns the tari¤ vector constituted of each country’s proposal for its own tari¤:
(Thh ; T 11 ; T 22 ). By Lemma 1, this is the unique tari¤ vector that is in the equivalence
class for each country. We also know from Lemma 2 that the proposals agree if and only
if pw
0 Mh = M 1 + M 2 .
Disagreement: Our second requirement for the mechanism is associated with the case
in which the tari¤ proposals fail to agree. By Lemma 2, failure to agree, or disagreement,
occurs if and only if pw
0 Mh 6= M 1 + M 2 . When disagreement occurs, we require that
the mechanism assigns a tari¤ vector that maximizes trade volume valued at world prices
while not forcing any country to import more than its implied import volume and while
preserving the initial world price. After formally stating the associated program, we
consider its implications when home is on the long side (pw
0 Mh > M 1 + M 2 ) and when
home is on the short side (pw
0 Mh < M 1 + M 2 ).
To state the program, we must de…ne trade volume valued at world prices. Consider
any vector of applied tari¤s, ( ; 1 ; 2 ) 2 + , for which pew ( ; 1 ; 2 ) = pw
0 . We de…ne
the associated value of trade volume as
TV ( ;

1

;

2

)

w
w
pw
0 M (p( ; p0 ); p0 ) +

X

M i (p i (

i

w
; pw
0 ); p0 ):

(8)

i=1;2
1
; 2 ).
Notice that the restriction pew ( ; 1 ; 2 ) = pw
0 is built into the de…nition of T V ( ;
Consider now any vector of tari¤ proposals, (Th ; T 1 ; T 2 ), for which pw
0 Mh 6= M 1 +M 2 .

21

Our disagreement program is de…ned as follows:

( ;

max
1
2
;

)2

TV ( ;

1

;

2

w
w
pw
0 M (p( ; p0 ); p0 ) +

)

+

X

M i (p i (

i

w
; pw
0 ); p0 )

i=1;2

subject to
pew ( ;

1

;

2

) = pw
0

w
M (p( ; pw
0 ); p0 )

M i (p i (

i

w
; pw
0 ); p0 )

Mh
M i ; for i = 1; 2

Our second requirement now may be succinctly stated: whenever disagreement occurs,
the mechanism must assign a tari¤ vector that is a solution to the disagreement program.
Home Long: We begin with the case in which the tari¤ proposals are such that the
home country is on the long side:
pw
0 Mh > M 1 + M 2 :

(9)

We claim that in this case a mechanism that satis…es our baseline rules must assign the
tari¤ vector
(10)
(e; T 11 ; T 22 )
where e = e(T 11 ; T 22 ) is de…ned to satisfy

pew (e; T 11 ; T 22 ) = pw
0:

(11)

Notice here that, conditional on (9) holding, the proposed assignment rule uses only the
foreign proposals and assigns to each foreign country the tari¤ that it proposed for itself.
To establish this claim, we state and prove the following:
Lemma 3 For a vector of tari¤ proposals (Th ; T 1 ; T 2 ) such that (9) holds, the unique
solution to the disagreement program is given by the tari¤ vector (e; T 11 ; T 22 ) where e is
de…ned by (11).
Proof. The assigned tari¤ vector (e; T 11 ; T 22 ) where e is de…ned by (11) obviously maintains the initial world price. It also satis…es the constraint that implied import volumes
are not exceeded. To see this, observe that at the assigned tari¤ vector foreign country
i imports
w
M i (p i (T ii ; pw
(12)
0 ); p0 ) = M i :

22

Next, at the assigned tari¤ vector, the home country imports
w
w
w
w
M (p(e; pw
0 ); p0 ) = [1=p0 ]E(p(e; p0 ); p0 )
X
w
= [1=pw
M i (p i (T ii ; pw
0]
0 ); p0 )

=

i=1;2
w
[1=p0 ][M 1

(13)

+ M 2]

< Mh ;
where the …rst equality follows from the home trade-balance condition (1), the second
equality follows from (11) and the market-clearing condition (3), the third equality uses
(12), and the inequality employs (9).
Finally, we con…rm that, given the implied import volume limits and world price, the
assigned tari¤ vector also maximizes the value of trade volume. To see this, we consider
an arbitrary vector of tari¤s, ( ; 1 ; 2 ) 2 + , for which pew ( ; 1 ; 2 ) = pw
0 and such
that no country imports a volume in excess of its implied import volume. In other words,
we consider any tari¤ vector that satis…es the constraints of the disagreement program.
Using the de…nition of T V ( ; 1 ; 2 ) given in (8) and the home trade-balance condition (1), pew ( ; 1 ; 2 ) = pw
0 and the market-clearing condition (3), and (12), we obtain
TV ( ;

1

;

2

w
) = E(p( ; pw
0 ); p0 ) +

= 2[M 1 (p 1 (

X

M i (p i (

i=1;2
1 w
; p0 ); pw
0)

i

w
; pw
0 ); p0 )

+ M 2 (p 2 (

2

(14)

w
; pw
0 ); p0 )]

2[M 1 + M 2 ]
w
2
2
2 w
w
= 2[M 1 (p 1 (T 11 ; pw
0 ); p0 ) + M (p (T 2 ; p0 ); p0 )]

= T V (e; T 11 ; T 22 );
where the inequality follows from the restriction that imported volumes for foreign countries not exceed their respective implied import volume limits. Since by (12) the assigned
tari¤ vector ensures that both foreign countries import volumes that equal their respective
implied import volume limits, the assigned vector of tari¤s thus achieves the maximum
value for the value of trade volume.
In fact, given the proposals, any tari¤ vector ( ; 1 ; 2 ) 6= (e; T 11 ; T 22 ) such that
( ; 1 ; 2 ) 2 + , pew ( ; 1 ; 2 ) = pw
0 and no country imports a volume in excess
of its implied import volume must deliver strictly less trade volume: T V ( ; 1 ; 2 ) <
T V (e; T 11 ; T 22 ). This is because the proposal can be distinct while maintaining the initial
world price only if ( 1 ; 2 ) 6= (T 11 ; T 22 ). It follows that ( ; 1 ; 2 ) implies a distinct
w
trade volume for at least one foreign country; thus, since M i (p i (T ii ; pw
0 ); p0 ) = M i
w
and M i (p i ( i ; pw
M i for all i = 1; 2; we may conclude that T V ( ; 1 ; 2 ) <
0 ); p0 )

23

T V (e; T 11 ; T 22 ) = 2[M 1 + M 2 ]: Consequently, our baseline rules are su¢ cient to ensure
the unique determination of the assigned tari¤ vector when the tari¤ proposals satisfy
(9). In particular, for such tari¤ proposals, our constructed mechanism must assign the
tari¤ vector (e; T 11 ; T 22 ) where e is de…ned by (11).
Thus, in the case of disagreement in which the home country is on the long side, our
baseline rules or requirements deliver a unique assigned tari¤ vector (e; T 11 ; T 22 ), where
conditional on (9) the assigned tari¤ vector uses only the foreign proposals and assigns
to each foreign country the tari¤ that it proposed for itself.

Home Short: The other case of disagreement occurs when the tari¤ proposals are such
that the home country is short:
pw
0 Mh < M 1 + M 2 :

(15)

An initial point is that under our baseline rules we cannot now assign tari¤s that
achieve the implied import volumes for the foreign countries, since to do so would violate the implied import volume limit for the home country. To see this point, let us
assume to the contrary that we assign an applied tari¤ vector, ( ; 1 ; 2 ), for which
i
i
i w
; p0 ); pw
pew ( ; 1 ; 2 ) = pw
0 ) = M i for each i. Using the home
0 and such that M (p (
w
1
2
w
trade-balance condition (1), pe ( ; ; ) = p0 and the market-clearing condition (3),
w
M i (p i ( i ; pw
0 ); p0 ) = M i for each i, and (15), we then obtain
w
w
w
w
pw
0 M (p( ; p0 ); p0 ) = E(p( ; p0 ); p0 )
X
w
=
M i (p i ( i ; pw
0 ); p0 )
i=1;2

= M 1+M

2

> pw
0 Mh ;
which means that the import volume for home under this tari¤ vector must exceed the
w
home country’s implied import volume limit: M (p( ; pw
0 ); p0 ) > Mh : Hence, the tari¤
vector that we assign must be such that at least one foreign country imports a volume
that is strictly lower than its implied import volume.
Based on our discussion so far, we may anticipate that our assignment for this case will
be such that the home country imports a volume that equals that implied by its proposal:
w
M (p( ; pw
0 ); p0 ) = Mh : At least one foreign country will then import a volume that falls
strictly below its implied import volume. In fact, there are a continuum of possible ways
to allocate a …xed value of trade volume, pw
0 Mh ; across the two foreign countries, even
while maintaining the initial world price and ensuring that no foreign country imports a
volume that exceeds its implied import volume. We require additional rules, therefore, if
24

we seek a basis for a unique assigned tari¤ vector when the tari¤ proposals are such that
the home country is short. The problem is essentially one of choosing a rationing rule for
allocating the …xed value of trade volume, pw
0 Mh , across the two foreign countries.
One approach might be to construct a mechanism that assigns tari¤s so that foreign
countries split the di¤erence, with both foreign countries importing less than the volumes
implied by their respective proposals. Looking ahead toward our dominant strategy arguments, however, a potential danger with this approach is that a foreign country might
overstate its desired import volume in order to diminish the extent to which its assigned
import volume falls short of the import volume that it actually prefers.25 We thus pursue
a di¤erent approach here. We pick a foreign country at random, and specify for that
country a tari¤ that delivers its implied import volume provided that the value of that
volume is no greater than the value of the home country’s implied import volume. Otherwise, the selected foreign country imports a volume equal in value to the home country’s
implied import volume. The tari¤ of the other foreign country is then set so as to import
the remaining value, if any, of the home country’s implied import volume.26 Finally, with
these assignments in place, the home country’s tari¤ is set so as to deliver the initial world
price as the market-clearing world price. As we show below, the home country’s proposed
tari¤ for itself is then the home country tari¤ that delivers the initial world price.
To formalize this approach, suppose that the proposals are such that (15) holds and
that foreign country i is randomly selected as the “…rst” country. In the assigned tari¤
vector, foreign country i then sets the tari¤ i such that
M i (p i (

i

w
w
; pw
0 ); p0 ) = minfM i ; p0 Mh g:

There are thus two cases, which we consider in turn.
The …rst case arises if
M i pw
0 Mh :

(16)

(17)

For this case, we claim that the mechanism satis…es our baseline rules by assigning the
25

For example, if pw
0 Mh < M 1 + M 2 with M 1 = M 2 , then one approach might assign tari¤s such
that foreign country i imports pw
0 Mh =2 < M i : If the mechanism further speci…es that foreign country i
achieves its implied import volume limit when it instead makes a proposal that implies the import volume
0
limit of M i = M i + ", then foreign country i would have incentive to propose for itself a lower tari¤
0
0
that implies the import volume M i , even if its preferred volume is M i ; since M i = M i + " is closer to
M i than is pw
0 Mh =2: Hence, when the home country is short, dominant strategy implementation may fail
under some natural (Bertrand-like) assignment rules. Dominant strategy implementation likewise fails
under proportional rationing schemes (see Benassy, 1982).
26
We could allow the “second” foreign country to choose the minimum of its implied import volume
and any remaining value of the home country’s implied import volume. The scenario we consider here,
however, is one in which the home country is short, which is to say that the implied import volume of
the second foreign country exceeds any remaining value of the country’s implied import volume.

25

tari¤ vector (b; b 1 ; b 2 ) 2
Next, b

j

+;

which is de…ned as follows. First, b i is set so as to satisfy

M i (p i (

i

w
w
; pw
0 ); p0 ) = p0 Mh :

(18)

is set at a prohibitive level, so that
M j (p j (

j

w
; pw
0 ); p0 ) = 0:

Finally, we de…ne b so that the world price is maintained, given these foreign tari¤s:
27
pew (b; b 1 ; b 2 ) = pw
0:

(19)

(20)

To establish this claim, we state and prove the following:
Lemma 4 For a vector of tari¤ proposals (Th ; T 1 ; T 2 ) such that (15) holds in the form
of the …rst case (17), a solution to the disagreement program is given by the tari¤ vector
(b; b 1 ; b 2 ) where b i is de…ned by (18), b j is de…ned by (19) and b = Thh is de…ned by
(20).
Proof. The assigned tari¤ vector, (b; b 1 ; b 2 ) 2 + ; delivers the initial world price by
(20) and is also such that no country imports a volume that exceeds its implied import
volume. It is immediately clear from (17)-(19) that neither foreign country imports a
volume that exceeds its implied import volume. The home country imports a volume
that equals its implied import volume. To see this, we respectively use the home tradebalance condition (1), pew (b; b 1 ; b 2 ) = pw
0 and the market-clearing condition (3), (19) and
(18) to obtain
w
w
w
w
pw
0 M (p(b; p0 ); p0 ) = E(p(b; p0 ); p0 )

(21)

j
w
j
j
w
w
= M i (p i (b i ; pw
0 ); p0 ) + M (p (b ; p0 ); p0 )
w
= M i (p i (b i ; pw
0 ); p0 )

= pw
0 Mh ;
w
h
and thus M (p(b; pw
0 ); p0 ) = Mh : Given this equality, it now follows that b = Th ; thus,
in the …rst case, the tari¤ that is assigned to the home country is the home country’s
proposed tari¤ for itself.
Finally, we con…rm that it is not possible to …nd another tari¤ vector that generates
a greater value for trade volume while also delivering the initial world price and ensuring
27

Notice that we assume here that, given the initial world price, there exists a …nite tari¤ for foreign
country j at and above which import volume into foreign country j is zero. We show in the proof
of Lemma 4 that b = Thh ; where Th 2 . Thus, our assumptions in Section 2 ensure the existence of
(b; b 1 ; b 2 ) 2 + such that foreign country j receives no trade volume.

26

that no country imports a volume in excess of its implied import volume. To see this, we
consider an arbitrary vector of tari¤s, ( ; 1 ; 2 ) 2 + , for which pew ( ; 1 ; 2 ) = pw
0
and such that no country imports a volume in excess of its implied import volume. In
other words, we consider any tari¤ vector that satis…es the constraints of the disagreement
program.
Using the de…nition of T V ( ; 1 ; 2 ) as in (8), the foreign-country trade-balance
condition (2), pew ( ; 1 ; 2 ) = pw
0 and the implied market-clearing condition for good
x, the requirement that the import volume of the home country not exceed its implied
import volume, and (21), we obtain
TV ( ;

1

;

2

w
w
w
) = pw
0 M (p( ; p0 ); p0 ) + p0

X

E i (p i (

i

w
; pw
0 ); p0 )

i=1;2

=

2pw
0 M (p(
2pw
0 Mh

w
; pw
0 ); p0 )

w
w
= 2pw
0 M (p(b; p0 ); p0 )

= T V (b; b 1 ; b 2 ):

For the …rst case, the assigned tari¤ vector thus achieves the maximum value for the value
of trade volume, given the initial world price and the restriction that no country imports
a volume in excess of its implied import volume.
We note in this …rst case that our baseline rules do not uniquely identify an assigned
tari¤ vector; for example, we could achieve the same trade volume while satisfying the
other constraints by slightly increasing (lowering) the implemented tari¤ for foreign country i (foreign country j) in a fashion that maintains the aggregate implied import
volume for the two foreign countries. Thus, when the proposals induce this …rst case, we
impose some additional rules in constructing our mechanism so as to arrive at the assigned
tari¤ vector, (b; b 1 ; b 2 ):
The second case arises if
M i < pw
(22)
0 Mh :
For this case, we claim that the mechanism satis…es our baseline rules by assigning the
tari¤ vector ( ; 1 ; 2 ) 2 , which is de…ned as follows. First, i is set so as to satisfy
M i (p i (
from which it follows that
M j (p j (

j

i

i

w
; pw
0 ); p0 ) = M i ;
j

= T ii . Next,

is set so that

w
w
; pw
0 ); p0 ) = minfM j ; p0 Mh

27

(23)

M i g = pw
0 Mh

M i;

(24)

where the second equality follows from (15). Finally, we de…ne
price is maintained, given these foreign tari¤s:
pew ( ;

1

2

;

so that the initial world

) = pw
0:

(25)

To establish this claim, we state and prove the following:
Lemma 5 For a vector of tari¤ proposals (Th ; T 1 ; T 2 ) such that (15) holds in the form
of the second case (22), a solution to the disagreement program is given by the tari¤ vector
( ; 1 ; 2 ) where i = T ii is de…ned by (23), j is de…ned by (24) and = Thh is de…ned
by (25).
Proof. This assigned tari¤ vector, ( ; 1 ; 2 ) 2 ; delivers the initial world price and is
also such that no country imports a volume that exceeds its implied import volume. It is
immediately clear from (23) and (24) that neither foreign country imports a volume that
exceeds its implied import volume. The home country imports a volume that equals its
implied import volume. To see this, we respectively use the home trade-balance condition
(7), pew ( ; 1 ; 2 ) = pw
0 and the market-clearing condition (3), (23) and (24) to obtain
w
w
w
w
pw
0 M (p( ; p0 ); p0 ) = E(p( ; p0 ); p0 )

= M i (p i (

i

(26)

w
j
j
; pw
0 ); p0 ) + M (p (

= M i + M j (p j (
= M i + pw
0 Mh
=

M

j

j

w
; pw
0 ); p0 )

w
; pw
0 ); p0 )
i

pw
0 Mh ;

w
= Thh ; thus, in
and thus M (p( ; pw
0 ); p0 ) = Mh : Given this equality, it now follows that
the second case as well, the home country’s assigned tari¤ is the tari¤ that it proposed
for itself.
Finally, we con…rm that it is not possible to …nd another tari¤ vector that generates
a greater value for trade volume while also delivering the initial world price and ensuring
that no country imports a volume in excess of its implied import volume. To see this, we
employ a similar argument to that above for the …rst case. Speci…cally, we consider an
arbitrary vector of tari¤s, ( ; 1 ; 2 ) 2 + , for which pew ( ; 1 ; 2 ) = pw
0 and such that
no country imports a volume in excess of its implied import volume. In other words, we
consider any tari¤ vector that satis…es the constraints of the disagreement program.
Using the de…nition of T V ( ; 1 ; 2 ) given in (8), the foreign-country trade-balance
condition (2), pew ( ; 1 ; 2 ) = pw
0 and the implied market-clearing condition for good
x, the requirement that the import volume of the home country not exceed its implied

28

import volume, and (26), we obtain
TV ( ;

1

;

2

w
w
w
) = pw
0 M (p( ; p0 ); p0 ) + p0

X

E i (p i (

i

w
; pw
0 ); p0 )

i=1;2
w
w
= 2pw
0 M (p( ; p0 ); p0 )

2pw
0 Mh
w
w
= 2pw
0 M (p( ; p0 ); p0 )

= TV ( ;

1

;

2

)

Thus, for the second case, the assigned tari¤ vector achieves the maximum value for the
value of trade volume, given the initial world price and the restriction that no country
imports a volume in excess of its implied import volume.
We note in this second case that our baseline rules do not uniquely identify an assigned tari¤ vector; for example, we could achieve the same trade volume while satisfying
the other constraints by slightly increasing (lowering) the implemented tari¤ for foreign
country i (foreign country j) in a fashion that maintains the aggregate implied import
volume for the two foreign countries. Thus, when the proposals induce this second case,
we impose some additional rules in constructing our mechanism so as to arrive at the
assigned tari¤ vector, ( ; 1 ; 2 ):
The Constructed Mechanism: Recall that a mechanism is de…ned by the strategy
space S and an outcome function g that takes tari¤ proposals and assigns tari¤s. We may
now summarize the tari¤s that our constructed mechanism assigns as a function of the
tari¤ proposals:
A. If the tari¤ proposals agree, then the assigned tari¤ vector is (Thh ; T 11 ; T 22 ). The tari¤
proposals can agree if and only if pw
0 Mh = M 1 + M 2 :
B. If the tari¤ proposals do not agree and the home country is long, so that pw
0 Mh > M 1 +
1
2
w
M 2 ; then the assigned tari¤ vector is (e; T 1 ; T 2 ) where e satis…es pe ( ; T 11 ; T 22 ) = pw
0:
C. If the tari¤ proposals do not agree and the home country is short, so that pw
0 Mh <
M 1 + M 2 , then there are two cases:
1. In the …rst case, the randomly selected …rst country, foreign country i, makes a
1
2
i
proposal such that M i pw
0 Mh : The assigned tari¤ vector is then (b; b ; b ) where b
j
w
w
w
h
satis…es M i (p i ( i ; pw
satis…es M j (p j ( j ; pw
0 ); p0 ) = p0 Mh ; b
0 ); p0 ) = 0 and b = Th
satis…es pew ( ; b 1 ; b 2 ) = pw
0:
29

2. In the second case, the randomly selected …rst country, foreign country i, makes a
1
proposal such that M i < pw
; 2 ) where i =
0 Mh : The assigned tari¤ vector is then ( ;
j
w
w
w
T ii satis…es M i (p i ( i ; pw
satis…es M j (p j ( j ; pw
M i;
0 ); p0 ) = M i ;
0 ); p0 ) = p0 Mh
1
2
h
w
w
and = Th satis…es pe ( ; ; ) = p0 :
We may now summarize our …ndings for this section:

Proposition 1 The constructed mechanism satis…es the two baseline rules or requirements.
Proof. The constructed mechanism is de…ned above, and we may use Lemmas 1, 2,
3, 4 and 5, to con…rm that the mechanism so de…ned satis…es the two baseline rules or
requirements.
To conclude this section, we relate our model and constructed mechanism to the
“request-o¤er” language and practice of GATT tari¤ bargaining. In the context of this
language, we may think of Th 1 and Th 2 as the home country’s requests of foreign countries
1 and 2, respectively, and Thh as the home country’s o¤er. In similar fashion, for i = 1; 2,
we may think of T hi as foreign country i’s request and T ii as foreign country i’s o¤er.
In the context of this language, an interesting implication of our constructed mechanism
is that the o¤er in each proposal plays a central role, both when tari¤ proposals agree
and when they do not. Indeed, when tari¤ proposals agree, the mechanism assigns the
tari¤ vector that is constituted of each country’s o¤er. Under disagreement, the assigned
tari¤ vector for foreign countries corresponds to their o¤ers when the home country is
long, and the assigned tari¤ vector for the home country corresponds to its o¤er when
the home country is short.28 When the proposals disagree, a country that is on the
long side may need to reduce the depth of its o¤er in order to ensure that the assigned
tari¤ vector satis…es multilateral reciprocity. The central role for o¤ers resonates with
patterns reported by Bagwell, Staiger and Yurukoglu (2016), wherein once initial proposals
were on the table, tari¤ bargaining in the GATT Torquay Round focused on possible
modi…cations to the o¤ers in each proposal rather than requests, and such modi…cations
typically entailed reductions in the depths of o¤ers.

4

Dominant Strategies

We now consider the endogenous determination of tari¤s in the constructed mechanism
when governments use only dominant strategies. In this section, we take the …rst step in
28

When the home country is short, if the second case prevails, then the constructed mechanism also
assigns the tari¤ o¤er for one foreign country.

30

this process and characterize the respective sets of dominant strategies for foreign country
i and the home country when the constructed mechanism is used.
An initial observation is that, for any foreign country i, the proposal strategy is
completely described by T ii . To see the point, consider foreign country 1. Since foreign
country 1 is restricted to set T 12 = 02 and to set T h1 = T h1 (T 11 ) at the unique value given
T 11 that delivers pw
pew (T h1 ; T 11 ; 02 ), its proposal (T h1 ; T 11 ; T 12 ) = (T h1 (T 11 ); T 11 ; 02 )
0
is completely determined by its selection of T 11 . By contrast, as noted previously, the
home country’s proposal is not fully determined by its proposal for its own tari¤, Thh ,
since the home country’s proposal includes levels for both foreign tari¤s and these tari¤s
can be combined in di¤erent ways to generate the initial world price.
To characterize dominant strategies, we must utilize the payo¤ functions. For a
given initial world price pw
0 ; the home-country payo¤ is de…ned by the welfare function
w
w
W (p( ; p0 ); p0 ) while the payo¤ for foreign country i is de…ned by the welfare function
w
W i (p i ( i ; pw
0 ); p0 ). In (5), we describe how each welfare function varies with the world
price, for a given local price. For our present purposes, however, the world price is …xed
at its initial level, pw
0 , and the more relevant issue is how each welfare function then
varies with the corresponding local price. We now impose some modest structure on the
dependence of each welfare function on the corresponding local price.
To begin, we follow Bagwell and Staiger (1999, 2002) and de…ne the politically optimal
reaction tari¤ for the home country as the tari¤ that satis…es
w
Wp (p( ; pw
0 ); p0 ) = 0

(27)

and the politically optimal reaction tari¤ for foreign country i as the tari¤ that satis…es
Wp ii (p i (

i

w
; pw
0 ); p0 ) = 0:

(28)

Let P O and PiO denote the respective politically optimal reaction tari¤s for the home
country and foreign country i.
Having de…ned politically optimal reaction tari¤s for each country, we may now state
three further assumptions. Our …rst assumption, which requires a couple of additional de…nitions, is that the corresponding politically optimal proposals for each country generate
positive trade volumes for all countries and thus reside in . To state this assumption fori
i
mally, let us de…ne for foreign country i the proposal strategy T i;P O where T i;P
O = P O,
j
j
T i;P O = 0 and T hi;P O = T hi ( PiO ) is then uniquely speci…ed to deliver pw
0 as the marketclearing world price. Similarly, for the home country, we de…ne a set of home-country
proposal strategies for which Thh = P O with Th 1 and Th 2 then speci…ed in any fashion so
that pew ( P O ; Th 1 ; Th 2 ) = pw
0 . With these de…nitions in place, our …rst assumption is that
the initial tari¤ vector and associated world price are such that (i) T i;P O 2
and (ii)
31

1
2
there exists (Th 1 ; Th 2 ) such that pew ( P O ; Th 1 ; Th 2 ) = pw
.29
0 and ( P O ; Th ; Th ) 2
Our second assumption is that, given the …xed initial world price pw
0 , each country
has single-peaked preferences with respect to its own tari¤ (or equivalently, with respect
w
w
to its local price).30 Formally, for the given pw
0 ; we assume that Wp (p( ; p0 ); p0 ) > 0 for
w
w
w
w
w
p( ; pw
0 ) < p( P O ; p0 ) and Wp (p( ; p0 ); p0 ) < 0 for p( ; p0 ) > p( P O ; p0 ), where we recall
w
w
i
i
i w
that p( ; pw
; p0 ); pw
0 ) = p0 . Similarly, for the given p0 ; we assume that Wp i (p (
0) > 0
i
i
w
w
i
i
i w
i
i
w
i
i w
for p ( ; p0 ) < p ( P O ; p0 ) and Wp i (p ( ; p0 ); p0 ) < 0 for p ( P O ; p0 ) > p( P O ; pw
0 ),
i w
i
i w
where we recall that p ( ; p0 ) = (1= )p0 . These assumptions are all understood to
hold for tari¤s such that the corresponding country has positive trade volume. Any
scenario in which a foreign country has zero trade volume corresponds to a limiting case.
A …nal assumption that we add at this point serves to simplify the characterization of
dominant strategies for the home country. Speci…cally, we assume that, for any foreign
country i and tari¤ vector ( ; 1 ; 2 ) 2
such that pew ( ; 1 ; 2 ) = pw
0 , there exists
i0
0
10
20
w 0
10
20
=
an alternative tari¤ vector ( ;
;
)2
such that pe ( ;
;
) = pw
0 and
j
i
, j0 = 0 . Thus, if it feasible for foreign country i to achieve an import volume
1
w
; 2 ) 2 , then we assume that it is
M i (p i ( i ; pw
0 ); p0 ) with some tari¤ vector ( ;
also feasible for foreign country i to achieve that same tari¤ volume with world-pricepreserving modi…cations in and j that re-position the latter tari¤ to the initial level,
j 31
0 .

Dominant Strategies for Foreign Country i: We characterize …rst the dominant
strategies for foreign country i. As the following proposition establishes, the characterization of foreign country i’s dominant strategy set is quite simple. In the single member
of this set, foreign country i proposes PiO for itself and proposes a tari¤ for the home
country that in combination with the initial tari¤ for foreign country j maintains the
market-clearing world price at its initial level, pw
0.
Proposition 2 Given the constructed mechanism, the set of dominant strategy proposals
for foreign country i is non-empty and in fact contains a singleton de…ned by T i;P O ,
29

For the home country, our goal here is simply to ensure the existence of a tari¤ vector such that
the home-country tari¤ is P O ; the market-clearing world price is pw
0 , and all countries receive positive
import volumes. Tari¤ vectors for which the home-country tari¤ is P O ; the market-clearing world price
is pw
and thus are not
0 , and some foreign country receives zero import volume may exist but are not in
part of the set of dominant strategy proposals for the home country.
30
Bagwell and Staiger (1999, 2002) capture this assumption with the assumption that global secondorder conditions hold for all maximization problems. The global second-order condition assocated with
the maximization problem leading to home’s politically optimal reaction tari¤, for example, is that
Wpp (p; pw
0 ) < 0:
31
w
j
Achieving the import volume M i (p i ( i ; pw
set equal to 0j would not be feasible if
0 ); p0 ) with
this could not be achieved with a home tari¤ level above 1 and below the level that would prohibit trade
between the home country and foreign country j. Hence, with this assumption we rule out extreme size
asymmetries between the home country and each of its foreign trading partners.

32

j
j
i
i
h
h
where T i;P
O = P O , T i;P O = 0 and T i;P O = T i (
as the market-clearing world price.

i
P O)

is then uniquely set to deliver pw
0

Proof. Consider foreign country i: We wish to argue that foreign country i’s dominant
j
j
i
i
h
strategy is to propose T i;P O de…ned by T i;P
O = P O with T i;P O = 0 and T i;P O =
T hi ( PiO ) then set to deliver the initial world price, pw
0 ; as the market-clearing world price
under the proposal. By assumption, T i;P O 2 exists. We compare this proposal strategy
to an alternative strategy T i associated with a di¤erent own tari¤ for foreign country i,
j
j
i
i
i
h
h
i
T ii
6= T i;P
) then follow. Let
O = P O ; where as described T i = 0 and T i = T i (
i
i
i
w
w
i
i
i w
w
M i;P O M (p ( P O ; p0 ); p0 ) and M i = M (p ( ; p0 ); p0 ) denote the corresponding
implied import volumes.
If the proposals of the home country and foreign country j are such that the tari¤
proposals agree when foreign country i proposes T i;P O , then the alternative proposal T i
cannot possibly represent an improvement for foreign country i. This follows since under
proposal T i;P O foreign country i enjoys its favorite local price for the given initial world
price. By similar reasoning, if the proposals of the home country and foreign country j
are such that the home country is long when foreign country i proposes T i;P O , then the
proposal T i;P O again results in foreign country i’s favorite local price for the given initial
world price, and so the alternative proposal T i cannot possibly represent an improvement
for foreign country i.32 The remaining possibility is that the proposal T i;P O and the
proposals of other countries are such that the home country is short. To address this
remaining possibility, we distinguish between two cases for the alternative proposal, T i :
The …rst case is that the alternative proposal entails a lower tari¤ for foreign country
i: i < PiO and thus M i > M i;P O : Given that the proposals of other countries are
such that the home country is short when foreign country i proposes T i;P O ; the home
country will again be short in this …rst case under the alternative proposal, T i : If foreign
country i is not randomly selected to go …rst, then its assigned tari¤ does not depend
on its proposal (conditional on the home country being short) and so it is then indi¤erent
between the two proposals. If foreign country i is randomly selected to go …rst, then it
enjoys its favorite local price under the proposal T i;P O if M i;P O pw
0 Mh . The alternative
proposal then cannot represent an improvement for foreign country i. If foreign country
i is randomly selected to go …rst and M i;P O > pw
0 Mh , then the assigned tari¤ for foreign
i
i
i
i
i w
w
country i is b where b satis…es M (p ( ; p0 ); pw
0 ) = p0 Mh : The alternative proposal
entails an even higher implied import volume, M i > M i;P O , and thus leads to the same
assigned tari¤ for foreign country i. Hence, when the home country is short, and in the
…rst case where i < PiO , we conclude that the politically optimal proposal T i;P O is
always at least weakly preferred to the alternative proposal, T i :
32

Recall that, under the constructed mechanism de…ned above, foreign country i’s proposed tari¤ for
itself is assigned under agreement and also under disagreement when the home country is long.

33

The second case is that the alternative proposal entails a higher tari¤ for foreign
country i: i > PiO and thus M i < M i;P O : Suppose …rst that the other proposals
are such that the home country remains short under the alternative proposal (despite
the fact that the alternative proposal implies a lower trade volume for foreign country
i). If foreign country i is not randomly selected to go …rst, then its assigned tari¤ does
not depend on its proposal (conditional on the home country being short) and so it is
then indi¤erent between the two proposals. If foreign country i is randomly selected
to go …rst, then it enjoys its favorite local price under the proposal T i;P O if M i;P O
pw
0 Mh . The alternative proposal then cannot represent an improvement for foreign country
i. If foreign country i is randomly selected to go …rst and M i;P O > pw
0 Mh ; then the
i
assigned tari¤ for foreign country i under the proposal T i;P O is b where b i satis…es
w
w
pw
M i (p i ( i ; pw
0 Mh , then
0 ); p0 ) = p0 Mh : If the alternative proposal satis…es M i
the same tari¤ is assigned for foreign country i. If the alternative proposal satis…es
M i < pw
0 Mh , then the assigned tari¤ for foreign country i under the alternative proposal
w
w
T i is i which satis…es M i (p i ( i ; pw
0 ); p0 ) = M i . Given M i < p0 Mh < M i;P O ; we
i
then see that i > b > PiO . We conclude that the politically optimal proposal T i;P O is
then preferred to the alternative proposal T i ; since the assigned tari¤ for foreign country
i is closer to its politically optimal reaction tari¤ under the proposal T i;P O :
Continuing with the second case where M i < M i;P O , we suppose second that the
other proposals are such that the home country is short under the proposal T i;P O but is
not short under the alternative proposal T i . Thus, we now focus on the scenario where
M i+M j
pw
0 Mh < M i;P O + M j : Since M i > 0, the other proposals then must be
such that M j < pw
0 Mh : Under the proposal T i;P O , if foreign country i is randomly
w
selected, then it enjoys a trade volume of either M i;P O (if M i;P O pw
0 Mh ) or p0 Mh (if
M i;P O > pw
0 Mh ). Under the proposal T i;P O , if foreign country i is not randomly selected,
then it enjoys a trade volume of pw
0 Mh M j > 0: Under the alternative proposal, the home
country is not short and so foreign country i enjoys a trade volume of M i pw
0 Mh M j :
Thus, foreign country i enjoys a trade volume closer to M i;P O under the proposal T i;P O
than under the proposal T i :
Having now considered all possible trade-volume scenarios when foreign country i
proposes T i;P O , and the corresponding possibilities were foreign country i instead to
propose an alternative proposal T i ; we now conclude that alternative proposals T i which
entail i 6= PiO are dominated by the proposal T i;P O which entails i = PiO :
Finally, we argue that any tari¤ proposal for foreign country i such that T i 6= T i;P O
is not a dominant strategy. Let T i be any tari¤ proposal for foreign country i for which
T ii 6= PiO : Proposals T i;P O and T i are in . Of these two proposals, the one with the
lower proposed tari¤ for foreign country i must also have the lower proposed tari¤ for
the home country. Denote this tari¤ proposal vector as T i;L . Suppose now that the home
34

country proposes the vector T i;L as well, and that foreign country j proposes the initial
or status quo tari¤ vector, ( 0 ; 01 ; 02 ) 2 . Given these tari¤ proposals for foreign
country j and the home country, the home country is long or agrees whether foreign
country i proposes T i or T i;P O ; thus, in both cases, foreign country i imports a volume
that equals its implied import volume, which is M i under the proposal T i and M i;P O
under the proposal T i;P O , respectively, with M i 6= M i;P O . The tari¤ proposal T i;P O is
then strictly better for foreign country i than is the tari¤ proposal T i .
Dominant Strategies for the Home Country: We characterize next the dominant
strategies for the home country. As the following proposition establishes, the characterization of the home country’s dominant strategy set is quite simple, too. In any member
of this set, the home country proposes the tari¤ P O for itself and proposes a pair of tari¤s for foreign countries such that the three tari¤s together maintain the market-clearing
world price at its initial level, pw
0.
Proposition 3 Given the constructed mechanism, the set of dominant strategy proposals
for the home country is a non-empty set whose members are the home-country proposal
strategies for which Thh = P O , with Th 1 and Th 2 then speci…ed in any fashion so that
pew ( P O ; Th 1 ; Th 2 ) = pw
0.

Proof. We wish to argue that the set of dominant strategies for the home country is
de…ned by a set of proposals under which the home country proposes the tari¤ P O for
itself and tari¤s for the foreign countries that in combination with P O deliver the initial
world price as the market-clearing world price. By assumption, we know that some such
proposals exist in . To …x ideas, let us select any proposal Th;P O from this set, where the
h
1
2
proposal strategy Th;P O is thus de…ned by Th;P
O = P O with (Th;P O ; Th;P O ) then satisfying
2
1
pew ( P O ; Th;P
pw
0
O ; Th;P O ). We compare this proposal strategy to an alternative strategy
h
1
2
w
Th for which Thh
6= Th;P
pew ( ; Th 1 ; Th 2 ).
O = P O with (Th ; Th ) then satisfying p0
Recall that, given the initial world price, the home-country’s implied import volume is
w
determined by its proposed tari¤ for itself. Let Mh;P O
M (p( P O ; pw
0 ); p0 ) and Mh =
w
M (p( ; pw
0 ); p0 ) denote the corresponding implied import volumes.
If the proposals of the foreign countries are such that the tari¤ proposals agree when the
home country proposes Th;P O , then the alternative proposal Th cannot possibly represent
an improvement for the home country. This follows since under proposal Th;P O the home
country enjoys its favorite local price for the given initial world price. By similar reasoning,
if the proposals of the foreign countries are such that the home country is short when the
home country proposes Th;P O , then the home country is again assigned the tari¤ P O and
thus enjoys its favorite local price for the given initial world price; hence, once again, the
alternative proposal Th cannot possibly represent an improvement for the home country.
35

The remaining possibility is that the proposal Th;P O and the proposals of the foreign
countries are such that the home country is long so that pw
0 Mh;P O > M 1 + M 2 . Under
the proposal Th;P O ; the home country is then assigned the tari¤ e de…ned given the foreign
proposals (T 11 ; T 22 ) to deliver pw
pew (e; T 11 ; T 22 ). Given the foreign proposals, if the
0
home country remains long under the alternative proposal Th , then the same tari¤ vector is
assigned and so the alternative proposal fails to o¤er an improvement for the home country.
Suppose then the home country achieves agreement or is short under the alternative
proposal Th . For the given foreign proposals, under any of these cases for the alternative
proposal Th , the tari¤ that the home country proposes for itself, , is assigned, and so we
w
w
w
w
w
w
M 1 +M 2 = pw
have that pw
0 M (p(e; p0 ); p0 ) < p0 Mh;P O where
0 M (p( ; p0 ); p0 ) = p0 Mh
the …nal equality follows from (13). It follows that P O < e
, and so the alternative
proposal Th results in an assigned home-country tari¤ that is (weakly) further from P O
than is the assigned home-country tari¤ e that results from the proposal Th;P O .
Having now considered all possible trade-volume scenarios when the home country
proposes Th;P O , and the corresponding possibilities were the home country instead to
propose an alternative proposal Th ; we conclude that alternative proposals Th which entail
6= P O are dominated by the proposal Th;P O which specify a home-country tari¤ of
P O : Since Th;P O is an arbitrary selection in from the set of home proposals for which
h
Th;P
P O , we conclude that the alternative proposal Th is dominated by all such
O =
home-country proposal strategies that specify a home-country tari¤ of P O .
Finally, we compare distinct home-country proposal strategies that both specify a
home-country tari¤ of P O ; and we argue that for any given foreign proposals such
home-country proposal strategies must result in the same assigned tari¤ vector. A
corollary is that one home-country strategy in this class cannot dominate another. To
1
2
develop this argument, we use Th;P O = ( P O ; Th;P
O ; Th;P O ) to denote one such pro0
10
20
posal, and we denote an alternative such proposal as Th;P O = ( P O ; Th;P
O ; Th;P O ), where
1
2
10
20
(Th;P
O ; Th;P O ) 6= (Th;P O ; Th;P O ): For given foreign proposals, if Th;P O achieves agreement,
0
then Th;P O achieves agreement as well. Thus, the same tari¤ vector would be assigned
under either home-country proposal. Given the foreign proposals, if the home country is
0
short under Th;P O , then the home country similarly is short under Th;P O : For this case,
0
whether the home country proposes Th;P O or Th;P O , it is assigned the tari¤ P O and
imports a volume that equals its implied import volume, Mh;P O . Further, the assigned
1
2
foreign tari¤ vectors are independent of whether the home country proposes (Th;P
O ; Th;P O )
10
20
or (Th;P
O ; Th;P O ) for the foreign countries. The same tari¤ vector thus would be assigned
under either home-country proposal.33 Finally, given the foreign proposals, if the home
33
This statement is understood to refer to expected values when the home country is short and a “…rst”
foreign …rm is selected at random. The key point is that the selection probability is random and thus
independent of the speci…c home-country proposal.

36

0

country is long under Th;P O , then the home country is long as well under Th;P O . The
assigned tari¤ vector is then (e; T 11 ; T 22 ) whether the home country proposes Th;P O or
0
Th;P O .
We now summarize our arguments and complete the proof. Having considered all
possible trade-volume scenarios when the home country proposes Th;P O , and the corresponding possibilities were the home country instead to propose alternative proposal Th ;
we conclude that alternative proposals Th which entail 6= P O are dominated by the proposal Th;P O which entails = P O : We have also argued that the home-country proposal
Th;P O o¤ers the same assigned tari¤ vector for any given foreign proposals as does the
0
0
home-country proposal Th;P O , where Th;P O and Th;P O both entail = P O but propose
di¤erent foreign tari¤s:
Finally, we argue that any tari¤ proposal for the home country such that Thh 6= P O
is not a dominant strategy. Let Th be any tari¤ proposal for the home country for which
Thh 6= P O : Proposals Th;P O and Th are in . Of these two proposals, and given that both
must deliver market clearing at the world price pw
P O , the one with the lower proposed tari¤
for the home country must be associated with a higher aggregate foreign import volume.
Denote this tari¤ proposal vector as Th;L . This proposal implies positive import volumes
for each foreign country i when the tari¤ proposed for that country by the home country,
i
h
1
2
Th;L
, is imposed. Since pew (Th;L
; Th;L
; Th;L
) = pw
0 ; we know from our assumptions that the
same positive import volume for foreign country i can be achieved with an alternative
i
and T ij = 0j with T hi then
proposal in
by foreign country i such that T ii = Th;L
selected so that pew (T hi ; T i1 ; T i2 ) = pw
0 : Suppose now that the foreign countries propose the
alternative proposals in just constructed. The implied import volumes, M 1 and M 2 ,
w
h
M (p(Th:L
; pw
are then such that M 1 + M 2 = pw
0 ); p0 ): Given these
0 Mh:L , where Mh:L
constructed foreign proposals, the home country is short or agrees whether it proposes
Th;P O or Th ; thus, for both proposals, the home country imports a volume that is equal
to its implied import volume, which is Mh;P O under the proposal Th;P O and Mh 6= Mh;P O
under the proposal Th , respectively. The tari¤ proposal Th;P O is then strictly better for
the home country than is the proposal Th .

5

Dominant Strategy Implementation

Having characterized the sets of dominant strategies for foreign country i and the home
country, we now characterize the tari¤ vectors that can be assigned or implemented in
the constructed mechanism when governments use only dominant strategies. Our discussion shows how the …nal negotiation outcome actually emerges from dominant strategy
proposals, and we also assess the e¢ ciency of the negotiated outcome.
To begin, we require some further de…nitions. Recall from (27) and (28) that the
37

politically optimal reaction tari¤s, P O , P1O and P2O , are de…ned relative to an initial
w
world price, pw
0 , which we have taken to be exogenous. Let us now de…ne pP O as the
particular initial world price pw
0 such that if each country were to apply its politically
w
optimal reaction tari¤ relative to pw
0 = pP O , then the resulting market-clearing world
w
w
price would preserve the initial world price: pew ( P O ; P1O ; P2O ) = pw
P O when p0 = pP O .
Next, following Bagwell and Staiger (1999, 2002), we de…ne the politically optimal
tari¤s as the three tari¤s that simultaneously solve the following three equations:
Wp (p( ; pew ); pew ) = 0 = Wp ii (p i (

i

; pew ); pew ); i = 1; 2:

(29)

At the politically optimal tari¤s, the associated market-clearing world price pew takes the
w
value pw
P O . We may thus understand pP O to be the politically optimal world price. For
w
pw
.34
0 = pP O , we assume that the politically optimal tari¤s reside in
Bagwell and Staiger (1999, 2002) show that politically optimal tari¤s are e¢ cient,
where e¢ ciency is measured relative to the preferences of governments and is assessed
relative to the full set of tari¤ vectors ( ; 1 ; 2 ) 2 .35 E¢ ciency fails, however, at
tari¤s for which some but not all of the equations in (29) are satis…ed. In terms of the
analysis conducted here, the politically optimal tari¤s that Bagwell and Staiger (1999,
2002) de…ne are the politically optimal reaction tari¤s when those tari¤s are de…ned
relative to the initial world price pw
P O . An immediate implication is that the politically
optimal reaction tari¤s are e¢ cient when they are de…ned relative to pw
P O.
Motivated by this discussion, in our analysis of dominant strategy implementation, we
w
w
w
distinguish between two cases: pw
0 6= pP O and p0 = pP O :
w
Case 1: pw
0 6= pP O : In this case, a …rst point is that, when dominant strategy proposals
are used, agreement does not occur. To see this, assume to the contrary that agreement occurs. Our constructed mechanism then requires that the assigned tari¤ vector
is (Thh ; T 11 ; T 22 ). For dominant strategy proposals, we further have from Propositions
2 and 3 that (Thh ; T 11 ; T 22 ) = ( P O ; P1O ; P2O ), where as always the politically optimal
reaction tari¤s are de…ned relative to the initial world price, pw
0 . By Lemma 2, agreement
34

w
1
2
In terms of our assumptions above, for pw
0 = pP O , we thus assume that the pair ( P O ; P O ) is one of
1
2
w
1
2
w
1
2
the pairs (Th ; Th ) such that pe ( P O ; Th ; Th ) = p0 and ( P O ; Th ; Th ) 2 .
35
We distinguish this notion of e¢ ciency from that used in the social choice literature on strategy-proof
rationing rules. In the social choice literature, the volume of supply and price are given exogenously, and
the notion of e¢ ciency refers to whether the rationing rule leads to an e¢ cient allocation of this …xed
volume across agents. (See Barbera, 2011, Section 9.1, for additional discussion of that literature.)
The counterpart of this situation in our analysis arises when proposals are such that the home country
is short, and the rationing rule then concerns how the home-country implied trade volume is allocated
across foreign countries. In this context, the rationing rule that we employ allocates volume across foreign
countries in an e¢ cient manner. Our notion of e¢ ciency in this paper, however, is de…ned in relation to
the full set of tari¤ vectors, , and thus recognizes that di¤erent tari¤ vectors give rise to di¤erent world
prices and implied home-country trade volumes.

38

is possible if any only if
pw
0 Mh;P O = M

1;P O

+M

2;P O ;

(30)

w
w
where Mh;P O
M (p( P O ; pw
M i (p i ( PiO ; pw
0 ); p0 ) and M i;P O
0 ); p0 ). Using (30), the
home trade-balance condition (1), and the market-clearing condition (3), we then see that
w
w
pew ( P O ; P1O ; P2O ) = pw
0 , which contradicts the assumption that p0 6= pP O .
w
Thus, when pw
0 6= pP O , there are two possible outcomes under dominant strategy
implementation. One possibility is that under dominant strategy proposals the home
country is long. Using Propositions 2 and 3, we know that under dominant proposals
(Thh ; T 11 ; T 22 ) = ( P O ; P1O ; P2O ); and so this possibility occurs if and only if

pw
0 Mh;P O > M

1;P O

+M

2;P O :

(31)

When home is long so that (31) obtains, the implemented tari¤ vector is (e; T 11 ; T 22 )
i
i
where pew (e; T 11 ; T 22 ) = pw
0 de…nes e: Thus, with T i = P O under dominant proposals,
36
w
w
e is de…ned to satisfy pew (e; P1O ; P2O ) = pw
0 : Given pP O 6= p0 , it follows that e 6= P O .
Since for the given initial world price the foreign countries achieve their favorite local
price while the home country does not, an implication from Bagwell and Staiger (1999,
2002) is that the implemented tari¤ vector is ine¢ cient when countries use only dominant
w 37
strategies, the home country is long and pw
0 6= pP O :
w
When pw
0 6= pP O ; it is interesting to compare the implemented tari¤ vector with the
proposed tari¤s when countries use dominant strategy proposals and the home country
is long. The home-country proposal entails Thh = P O along with proposals for foreign
tari¤ that preserve the initial world price, and this proposal is clearly not employed since
j
j
w
e 6= P O when pw
P O 6= p0 . Provided that 0 6= P O , foreign country i’s proposal is
also not exactly implemented. But the implemented tari¤ vector is in foreign country
i’s equivalence class given its proposal. Thus, for each foreign country i, we can think
in this case of its proposal being accepted, once world-price-preserving modi…cations are
made to its proposed tari¤s for the home country and for foreign country j.
w
The other possibility when pw
0 6= pP O is that under dominant strategies the home
country is short. Since Propositions 2 and 3 ensure that under dominant proposals
36

w
w
w
In particular, e > P O if pw
0 < pP O ; and e < P O if p0 > pP O .
37
To see why such a tari¤ vector is ine¢ cient, suppose that Wp > 0 = Wp ii at the tari¤s (e; P1O ; P2O ).
From here, suppose all three tari¤s are slightly increased in a way that preserves the market-clearing
world price at its initial level, pw
0 . The foreign countries experience only a second-order loss, since they
initially enjoyed their favorite local prices, while the home country enjoys a …rst-order gain from the
induced higher value for p: We can now make a further small adjustment (e.g., a small cut in ) that
slightly raises the world price, so as to give the foreign countries a …rst-order gain. Provided that the
second change is small relative to the …rst, the home country continues to enjoy a …rst-order gain, and
in this way a Pareto improvement has been engineered. A related argument applies if Wp < 0 = Wp ii at
the tari¤s (e; P1O ; P2O ).

39

(Thh ; T 11 ; T 22 ) = (

P O;

1
P O;

2
P O );

this possibility occurs if and only if

pw
0 Mh;P O < M

1;P O

+M

(32)

2;P O :

When home is short so that (32) obtains, the implemented home tari¤ is Thh = P O . The
implemented foreign tari¤s depend on whether for the randomly selected foreign country
w
i we have M i;P O
pw
0 Mh;P O or M i;P O < p0 Mh;P O : Under the …rst inequality, the
i
implemented tari¤, b i ; for the randomly selected foreign country i satis…es b i
PO
while foreign country j sets a prohibitive tari¤ b j which thus satis…es b j > PjO .
Under the second inequality, the implemented tari¤, i ; for the randomly selected foreign
country i satis…es i = PiO while foreign country j sets a tari¤ j under which by
j
w
(24) we have M j (p j ( j ; pw
> PjO . Given that the home
0 ); p0 ) < M j;P O and so
country applies the tari¤ P O while at least one foreign country applies a tari¤ that
di¤ers from its politically optimal reaction tari¤, an implication from Bagwell and Staiger
(1999, 2002) is that the implemented tari¤ vector is ine¢ cient when countries use only
w 38
dominant strategies, the home country is short and pw
0 6= pP O .
w
When pw
0 6= pP O ; it is also interesting to compare the implemented tari¤ vector with
the proposed tari¤s when countries use dominant strategy proposals and the home country
is short. The home-country proposal entails Thh = P O along with proposals for foreign
tari¤s that preserve the initial world price. Since the implemented tari¤ vector speci…es
that the home country apply the tari¤ P O , any di¤erence between the home-country
proposal and the implemented tari¤ vector must involve the associated foreign-country
tari¤s. Provided that b j and j di¤er from 0j , the randomly selected foreign country
i’s proposal is also not exactly implemented, even when (as under the second inequality
above) its implemented tari¤ is PiO . The dominant strategy proposal for foreign country
j (i.e., the foreign country which is not randomly selected) sets T jj = PjO ; thus, its
proposal is clearly not implemented, since the implemented tari¤ vector speci…es either
b j > PjO or j > PjO for foreign country j. It thus follows as well that the implemented
tari¤ vector is not in foreign country j’s equivalence class given its proposal. We can
think in this case of the home-country proposal being accepted as is (if foreign country
tari¤s are speci…ed appropriately), or after world-price-preserving modi…cations are made
to the home-country proposal for foreign-country tari¤s.39
w
w
w
Case 2: pw
ew (
0 = pP O : Since p0 = pP O in this case, we have that p
38

P O;

1
P O;

2
P O)

= pw
P O.

At the implemented tari¤s, we have Wp = 0 and Wp ii 6= 0 for at least one i. We may thus engineer
small local price changes that o¤er a …rst-order gain to at least one foreign country while imposing only
a second-order cost on the home country. In line with the discussion in footnote 37, from here we can
engineer a Pareto improvement with a small change that generates a terms-of-trade gain for home.
39
When making its proposal, the home country does not know which foreign country will be randomly
selected to go …rst; thus, the home-country proposal cannot be accepted as is with probability one.

40

As above, for dominant strategy proposals, Propositions 2 and 3 yield (Thh ; T 11 ; T 22 ) =
( P O ; P1O ; P2O ). For this case, under dominant strategy proposals, we thus have that
pw
0 Mh;P O = M

1;P O

+M

2;P O ;

(33)

w
w
M i (p i ( PiO ; pw
where again Mh;P O M (p( P O ; pw
0 ); p0 ). By Lemma
0 ); p0 ) and M i;P O
2, the proposals thus agree. The implemented tari¤ vector is thus (Thh ; T 11 ; T 22 ) =
( P O ; P1O ; P2O ). Since for the given initial world price all countries achieve their favorite local price, the implemented tari¤ vector corresponds to the vector of politically
optimal tari¤s. Hence, an implication from Bagwell and Staiger (1999, 2002) is that the
implemented tari¤ vector is e¢ cient when countries use only dominant strategies and
w
pw
0 = pP O :
w
When pw
0 = pP O ; it is also interesting to compare the implemented tari¤ vector
(Thh ; T 11 ; T 22 ) = ( P O ; P1O ; P2O ) with the proposed tari¤s when countries use dominant
strategy proposals. The set of dominant strategy proposals for the home country includes
(Thh ; Th 1 ; Th 2 ) = ( P O ; P1O ; P2O ): This proposal is now feasible, since pew ( P O ; P1O ; P2O ) =
w
h
1
2
h
1
2
pw
P O = p0 . The home country may also propose (Th ; Th ; Th ) where Th = P O , (Th ; Th ) 6=
( P1O ; P2O ) and the market-clearing world price under the home-country’s proposed tarw
i¤s equals pw
0 = pP O . Relative to home’s proposal, the implemented tari¤ vector then
entails a world-price preserving adjustment in foreign tari¤s and is thus equivalent from
home’s perspective. Next, recall that the dominant strategy set for foreign country i is
j
j
i
i
h
h
i
a singleton de…ned by T i;P O , where T i;P
O = P O , T i;P O = 0 and T i;P O = T i ( P O ) is
w
w
then uniquely set to deliver pw
0 as the market-clearing world price. Since pP O = p0 , the
implemented tari¤ vector is in the equivalence class for foreign country i that is de…ned
by its dominant strategy proposal.
If the home country proposes (Thh ; Th 1 ; Th 2 ) = ( P O ; P1O ; P2O ), then we may understand that the home-country proposal is accepted as is. If instead the home country
proposes (Thh ; Th 1 ; Th 2 ) where Thh = P O and (Th 1 ; Th 2 ) 6= ( P1O ; P2O ), then we can think
of the home-country proposal being accepted, once world-price preserving adjustments are
made to its proposed tari¤s for the foreign countries. Whether or not the home-country
proposal is accepted as is, we can think of each foreign country i’s proposal as being
accepted, once world-price-preserving modi…cations are made to its proposed tari¤s for
the home country and for foreign country j.

Summary: We have established the following proposition:
Proposition 4 Given the constructed mechanism, under dominant strategy proposals, (i)
w
w
w
the implemented tari¤ vector is e¢ cient if and only if pw
0 = pP O , and (ii) when p0 = pP O ,
the e¢ cient tari¤ vector that is implemented is the politically optimal tari¤ vector.
41

As illustrated above, we can also interpret the process through which outcomes are
achieved. In some cases, the outcome entails accepting the home-country proposal as is,
or after world-price-preserving modi…cations are made to the home-country proposal for
foreign-country tari¤s. In other cases, we can think of each foreign country i’s proposal
as being accepted, once world-price-preserving modi…cations are made to its proposed
w
tari¤s for the home country and for foreign country j. When pw
0 = pP O , it is also possible that the proposals agree. Then, the home-country proposal may even be accepted
as is, and the proposal of each foreign country i is accepted once world-price-preserving
modi…cations are made to its proposed tari¤s for the home country and for foreign country
j.
To conclude this section, we return to the “request-o¤er” language and practice of
GATT tari¤ bargaining and again highlight the central role played by o¤ers (i.e., Thh , T 11
w
and T 22 ). In the case where pw
0 = pP O , for example, the implemented tari¤ vector consists
of each country’s o¤er from its initial proposal. The world-price-preserving modi…cation
of foreign country i’s proposal achieves this tari¤ vector by replacing foreign country i’s
requests of the home country and foreign country j with their o¤ers contained in their
proposals. From a practical perspective, the countries could achieve this tari¤ vector
w
by simply agreeing to the o¤ers on the table. Similarly, when pw
0 6= pP O , the o¤ers of
foreign countries are implemented when the home country is long, and the o¤er of the
home country (and perhaps one foreign country) is implemented when the home country
is short. In this situation, a country that is on the long side may need to modify its o¤er
in order to ensure that the implemented tari¤ vector satis…es multilateral reciprocity.

6

Nash Beginnings

Throughout, we have assumed a setup under which the initial tari¤ vector, ( 0 ; 01 ; 02 ),
pew ( 0 ; 01 ; 02 ), are exogenous. An interesting possiand associated world price, pw
0
bility is that the initial tari¤ vector corresponds to Nash tari¤s, so that ( 0 ; 01 ; 02 ) =
40
( N ; N1 ; N2 ) with pw
ew ( N ; N1 ; N2 ) pw
We now brie‡y discuss some implications
0 = p
N.
associated with this possibility.
As we note in Section 2, Nash tari¤s are ine¢ cient; furthermore, starting at the Nash
equilibrium, if all three countries o¤er slight tari¤ cuts that in combination satisfy the
principle of multilateral reciprocity, then all three countries experience a welfare gain.
The key ideas behind the latter …nding are that multilateral reciprocity …xes the world
price and Wp < 0 < Wp ii at the Nash tari¤s.
Let us now suppose that countries start at the Nash equilibrium, with ( 0 ; 01 ; 02 ) =
40

Given our maintained assumption that ( 0 ;
follows that ( N ; N1 ; N2 ) 2 .

0

1

;

42

0

2

) 2

, if ( 0 ;

0

1

;

0

2

) = (

N;

1
N;

2
N ),

then it

( N ; N1 ; N2 ) and pw
ew ( N ; N1 ; N2 )
pw
0 = p
N . If countries use dominant strategy proposals, then (Thh ; T 11 ; T 22 ) = ( P O ; P1O ; P2O ); where ( P O ; P1O ; P2O ) is de…ned relative
w
to the initial world price pw
0 = pN . Since no country can be forced to import a volume
greater than its implied import volume, the implemented tari¤ vector ( ; 1 ; 2 ) satis…es
i
i
i w
w
w
; p0 ); pw
Mh;P O
M (p( P O ; pw
M (p( ; pw
0)
0 ); p0 ) and also satis…es M (p (
0 ); p0 )
i
i
i
w
w
M i;P O M (p ( P O ; p0 ); p0 ), i = 1; 2.
Suppose that the proposals are such that agreement occurs or the home country is
w
w
M (p( N ; pw
long. We then may conclude that M (p( ; pw
0 ); p0 ) and
0 ); p0 ) > Mh;N
w
w
M i (p( i ; pw
M i (p i ( Ni ; pw
0 ); p0 ) > M i;N
0 ); p0 ), i = 1; 2, so that the implemented
tari¤ vector gives each country greater-than-Nash trade volumes and welfares. Given
w
the initial world price pw
0 = pN , this conclusion follows under (4) from the assumption
of single-peaked preferences, Wp < 0 < Wp ii at the Nash tari¤s, Wp = 0 at P O , and
Wp ii = 0 at PiO . The result holds as well when the home country is short, provided
that the residual volume left for foreign country j (i.e., the “second”foreign country) is
positive and exceeds its Nash volume, M j;N . This case is expected if the home country is
large relative to the individual foreign countries but is not guaranteed by our assumptions.
One case of particular interest occurs when the home country is symmetric in size
relative to the two foreign countries in aggregate. This “symmetric” case corresponds
w
w
w
to the setting in which pw
N = pP O . Hence, under symmetry, if p0 = pN and countries
use dominant strategies, then agreement would occur and the politically optimal tari¤s
would be implemented. The outcome is then e¢ cient, with all three countries enjoying
trade-volume and welfare gains relative to the Nash starting point.
We summarize these …ndings as follows:
Proposition 5 Suppose the initial tari¤ vector is the Nash tari¤ vector. Given the constructed mechanism, under dominant strategy proposals, the following obtains: (i) if agreement occurs or the home country is long, then the implemented tari¤ vector gives each
country greater-than-Nash trade volumes and welfares; and (ii) if the setting is symmetric
w
with pw
0 = pN , then agreement occurs and the implemented tari¤ vector is the politically
optimal tari¤ vector, which is e¢ cient and gives each country greater-than-Nash trade
volumes and welfares.

7

Extensions

The analysis can be extended in multiple ways. We discuss here four possible extensions.
Multiple countries As a …rst example, we may extend the analysis to consider multiple
foreign countries. Suppose for example that there are three foreign countries. When the
43

home country is short, one of the foreign countries, say foreign country i, is selected
as the “…rst” foreign country. As above, in the constructed mechanism, foreign country
w
i imports a volume that is the minimum of M i and pw
0 Mh : If p0 Mh > M i ; then the
value of the home country’s implied import volume is not exhausted by foreign country
M i , as the
i’s implied import volume. We can then treat this residual value, pw
0 Mh
value of home trade volume that is allocated across the remaining two foreign countries
M i in the model with three foreign countries then plays the role of Mh in
(i.e., pw
0 Mh
the constructed mechanism de…ned above for the model with two foreign countries). In
this general way, we can proceed inductively to de…ne the constructed mechanism for any
number of foreign countries.
Private information A second extension allows for private information. Suppose payi
w
i
i
i w
o¤ functions are given as W (p( ; pw
; p0 ); pw
); where 2 is
0 ); p0 ; ) and W (p (
0;
i
i
privately observed by the home country and
2
is privately observed by foreign
i
country i, i 6= j. We may think of
and
as intervals on the real line, for exami
ple. The variables and
correspond to preference shocks and do not directly impact
ew are all
the determination of economic variables (i.e., 0 ; 01 ; 02 ; pw
0 and the function p
independent of and i ).
For this extended model, the constructed mechanism remains the same as above. The
politically optimal tari¤ reactions are also de…ned as above, except that now they are
i
w
i
de…ned in an ex post sense. Thus, P O ( ) satis…es Wp (p( ; pw
)
0 ); p0 ; ) = 0 and P O (
i
w
i
i w
i
satis…es Wp i (p ( ; p0 ); p0 ; ) = 0. When our assumptions are extended to apply to ex
post states, Proposition 2 and 3 hold as stated above, once PiO is replaced by PiO ( i ) in
Proposition 2 and once P O is replaced by P O ( ) in Proposition 3. In the extended model,
Proposition 2 and 3 thus characterize ex post dominant strategies. Finally, Proposition
1
1
w
4 carries over as well, once pw
; 2 ) where pw
; 2)
P O is replaced by pP O ( ;
P O( ;
pew ( P O ( ); P1O ( 1 ); P2O ( 2 )). With this adjustment, Proposition 4 characterizes when
an ex post e¢ cient outcome can be implemented using dominant strategies in the private
information model, when the constructed mechanism is used.
Additional Constraints We place little restriction above on the initial tari¤ vector,
( 0 ; 01 ; 02 ). The implemented tari¤ vector may involve tari¤ cuts if the initial tari¤s
are high, as Proposition 5 illustrates. At the same time, if the initial tari¤ vector entails
tari¤s that are low, then an e¢ cient outcome such as described in Proposition 4 could
entail tari¤ increases. When the initial tari¤ vector is such that the home country is
short under dominant strategy proposals, it is also possible that one foreign country (the
“second” foreign country) is assigned a prohibitive tari¤ and receives zero trade volume
under the constructed mechanism. This assignment is not fundamental to our arguments,
44

however. For example, with some additional notation, we could impose an exogenous
upper bound on the tari¤ that each foreign country can apply, in which case the prohibitive
tari¤ would be replaced with a maximum tari¤. Another possible extension would be to
include a minimum-welfare, or ex post participation, constraint for each country, where
the threshold welfare level is exogenous.
Alternative Rationing Rules In the constructed mechanism, when the home country
is short, we specify that a randomly selected foreign country be given …rst priority in the
allocation of trade volume. As we noted, alternative rationing rules could be used. A
key task is to ensure that the any new rule is also consistent with implementation using
dominant strategies. We mention here two kinds of alternative rationing rules.
A …rst alternative rule allows that di¤erent foreign countries may be treated di¤erently,
even in an ex ante sense. Suppose, for example, that foreign country i is, for exogenous
reasons, a more signi…cant trading partner for the home country. The home country might
then regard foreign country i as a “principal supplier”in the GATT/WTO context. An
alternative rationing rule could then be speci…ed in which, when the home country is
short, foreign country i always assumes the …rst-priority position (i.e., conditional on
home being short, foreign country i is always treated as if it were randomly selected to
go “…rst” in the scheme above). The results above would continue to hold under this
asymmetric rationing rule that utilizes a …xed priority scheme. Indeed, our assumption
above that each foreign country is selected to go …rst with equal probability generates an
attractive symmetry property but plays no formal role in our analysis, and so the …xed
(i.e., determinstic) priority scheme can be understood as a limiting case of the analysis
already conducted.
The second rule is based on the “uniform allocation rule.” Sprumont (1991) de…nes
this rule for an allotment problem in which shares of a …xed volume of a divisible good are
to be allocated at a …xed price among N agents, each of whom has a continuous, singlepeaked and privately observed preference as to its preferred share. The rule gives each
agent his preferred share, provided that the shares do not fall outside of upper and lower
bounds that are determined so that shares add up to one.41 For the private-information
setting, Sprumont shows that an allotment rule is e¢ cient, strategy-proof and anonymous
if and only if it is the uniform allocation rule.42
We could impose a similar rule in our complete-information setting, although we would
41

Sonmez (1994) provides a helpful algorithm for reaching the outcome prescribed by the uniform rule.
See also Barbera (2011).
42
E¢ ciency is de…ned in this context relative to the problem of allocating the …xed volume among
privately informed agents in an e¢ cient way. (See also footnote 35.) An anonymous rule treats agents
symmetrically.

45

need to modify the rule in the case of excess supply (i.e., when the home country is long).43
Similar results would then obtain. An appealing feature of the uniform allocation rule
is that both foreign countries receive positive trade volumes when the home country is
short, even if the import volume implied by one foreign country’s proposal exceeds that
implied by the home country’s proposal. At the same time, in a decentralized bargaining
setting, the uniform allocation rule may require signi…cant coordination among parties to
ensure that the bounds are properly determined.

8

Conclusion

Motivated by GATT bargaining behavior and renegotiation rules, we construct a threecountry, two-good general-equilibrium model of trade and examine multilateral tari¤ bargaining under the constraints of non-discrimination and multilateral reciprocity. We allow
for a general family of government preferences and identify bargaining outcomes that can
be implemented using dominant strategy proposals for all countries. The resulting bargaining outcome is e¢ cient relative to government preferences if and only if the initial
tari¤ vector positions the initial world price at its “politically optimal”level. In symmetric settings, if the initial tari¤s correspond to Nash tari¤s, then the initial world price is
indeed positioned at its politically optimal level, and the resulting bargaining outcome is
e¢ cient and ensures greater-than-Nash trade volumes and welfares for all countries.
In our model, dominant strategy proposals lead to assigned tari¤ vectors once a round
of adjustments are made to ensure that multilateral reciprocity is maintained while not
requiring any country to import more than is implied by its proposal. This simple sequence
- tari¤ proposals followed by multilateral rebalancing - is broadly consistent with observed
patterns identi…ed by Bagwell, Staiger and Yurokoglu (2016) in the bargaining records
for the GATT Torquay Round. A notable feature of bargaining behavior in this round
is the lack of back-and-forth haggling over the levels of proposed tari¤s. Moreover, the
own-tari¤ o¤ers contained in the proposals –rather than the requested tari¤ changes by
others that complete each proposal – take center stage in our constructed mechanism,
consistent with the additional …nding of Bagwell, Staiger and Yurukoglu that, once initial
proposals were on the table, tari¤ bargaining at Torquay focused on modi…cations to
the o¤ers in each proposal rather than requests. Finally, and also in broad alignment
with observed patterns from the Torquay Round, when o¤ers are modi…ed to achieve
multilateral reciprocity in the constructed mechanism, the modi…cations take the form of
43

Given our requirement that a country cannot be forced to accept a trade volume in excess of that
implied by its proposal, we are not able to require a foreign country to import a reference volume that
exceeds its proposed (i.e., preferred) volume. We could thus handle the case in which the home country
is long as we do above and use the uniform allocation rule when the home country is short.

46

shallower, rather than deeper, o¤ers.
Our work also contributes to the theoretical literature on tari¤ bargaining under
nondiscrimination and reciprocity. For the case of nondiscriminatory tari¤s, we generalize prior work by Bagwell and Staiger (1999) by allowing each country to make direct
proposals regarding the tari¤s of its trading partner(s) and by characterizing bargaining
outcomes that obtain when all countries use dominant strategy proposals. This generalization that we consider here o¤ers a more direct path to the GATT tari¤ bargaining
records. With this generalization, we also show that a key …nding - that e¢ ciency can be
achieved if and only if the politically optimal MFN tari¤ vector is implemented - extends
to a setting where all countries make direct tari¤ proposals and use dominant strategy
proposals. We leave a many-good generalization of our results as an important direction
for future work.
Finally, our work contributes by drawing novel links between multilateral tari¤ bargaining and the literatures that feature strategy-proof rationing schemes. As we argue,
when tari¤ negotiations are constrained to satisfy the MFN rule and multilateral reciprocity, trade is conducted at a …xed world price. The rationing problems that emerge
are then broadly similar to those that have been studied in other research on strategyproof rationing. We mention above several extensions and directions for future work that
could help to develop this relationship more fully. Interesting future work might also explore the relationship between multilateral tari¤ bargaining and strategy-proof exchange,
as studied by Barbera and Jackson (1995), so as to determine whether circumstances
exist under which some form of multilateral reciprocity is necessary for dominant strategy
implementation of multilateral tari¤ bargaining outcomes.

References
Abdulkadiroglu, Atila and Tayfun Sonmez (1998), “Random Serial Dictatorship and the Core
from Random Endowments in House Allocation Problems,” Econometrica, 66, 689-701.
Bagwell, Kyle and Robert W. Staiger (1999), “An Economic Theory of GATT,” American
Economic Review 89(1), 215-48.
Bagwell, Kyle and Robert W. Staiger (2002), The Economics of the World Trading System,
The MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.
Bagwell, Kyle and Robert W. Staiger (2005), “Multilateral Trade Negotiations, Bilateral Opportunism and the Rules of GATT,”The Journal of International Economics 67(2), 268294.
Bagwell, Kyle and Robert W. Staiger (forthcoming), “The Design of Trade Agreements,” in
Kyle Bagwell and Robert W. Staiger (eds.), The Handbook of Commercial Policy, Vol. 1,

47

Elsevier.
Bagwell, Kyle, Robert W. Staiger and Ali Yurukoglu (2016), “Multilateral Trade Bargaining:
A First Look at the GATT Bargaining Records,” September.
Barbera, Salvador (2011), “Strategyproof Social Choice,”in Kenneth. J. Arrow, Amartya Sen
and Kotaro Suzumura (eds.), Handbook of Social Choice and Welfare, Vol. 2, Chapter 25,
731-831, Elsevier.
Barbera, Salvador and Matthew O. Jackson (1995), “Strategy-Proof Exchange,”Econometrica,
63(1), 51-87.
Barbera, Salvador, Matthew O. Jackson and Alejandro Neme (1997), “Strategy-Proof Allotment Rules,” Games and Economic Behavior, 18(1), 1-21.
Benassy, Jean-Pascal (1982), The Economics of Market Disequilibrium, New York: Academic
Press.
Bogomolnaia, Anna and Herve Moulin (2001), “A New Solution to the Random Assignment
Problem,” Journal of Economic Theory, 100, 295-328.
Curzon, Gerard (1966), Multilateral Commercial Diplomacy: The General Agreement on Tari¤ s
and Trade and its Impacts on National Commercial Policies and Techniques, Praeger: New
York.
Dixit, Avinash (1987), “Strategic Aspects of Trade Policy,” in Advances in Economic Theory:
Fifth World Congress, edited by Truman F. Bewley, 329-62. New York, NY: Cambridge
University Press.
Gul, Faruk, Hugo Sonnenschein and Robert Wilson (1986), “Foundations of Dynamic Monopoly
and the Coase Conjecture,” Journal of Economic Theory, 39, 155-90.
Interim Commission for the ITO (1949), The Attack on Trade Barriers: A Progress Report on
the Operation of the General Agreement on Tari¤ s and Trade. Geneva, August.
Ludema, Rodney (1991), “International Trade Bargaining and the Most-Favored Nation Clause,”
Economics and Politics, 3(1), 1-20.
Moulin, Herve (2000), “Priority Rules and Other Asymmetric Rationing Methods,”Econometrica, 68(3), 643-684.
Sonmez, Tayfun (1994), “Consistency, Monotonicity, and the Uniform Rule,”Economic Letters,
46, 229-235.
Sprumont, Yves (1991), “The Division Problem with Single-Peaked Preferences: A Characterization of the Uniform Allocation Rule,” Econometrica, 59(2), 509-519.

48

