                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                       TRADE LIBERALIZATION AND MORTALITY:
                           EVIDENCE FROM U.S. COUNTIES

                                         Justin R. Pierce
                                         Peter K. Schott

                                       Working Paper 22849
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w22849


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   November 2016




Schott thanks the National Science Foundation (SES-1427027) for research support. Any
opinions and conclusions expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
represent the views of the U.S. Centers for Disease Control, the Board of Governors or its
research staff. We thank Lorenzo Caliendo, Belinda Chan, Steve Redding and seminar
participants at various institutions for helpful comments. The views expressed herein are those of
the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2016 by Justin R. Pierce and Peter K. Schott. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Trade Liberalization and Mortality: Evidence from U.S. Counties
Justin R. Pierce and Peter K. Schott
NBER Working Paper No. 22849
November 2016
JEL No. F1,F13,F16,I1,I18,J08,J21,J6

                                         ABSTRACT

We investigate the impact of a large economic shock on mortality. We find that counties more
exposed to a plausibly exogenous trade liberalization exhibit higher rates of suicide and related
causes of death, concentrated among whites, especially white males. These trends are consistent
with our finding that more-exposed counties experience relative declines in manufacturing
employment, a sector in which whites and males are disproportionately employed. We also
examine other causes of death that might be related to labor market disruption and find both
positive and negative relationships. More-exposed counties, for example, exhibit lower rates of
fatal heart attacks.


Justin R. Pierce
Federal Reserve Board
20th and C Street NW
Washington, DC 20551
justin.r.pierce@frb.gov

Peter K. Schott
Yale School of Management
135 Prospect Street
New Haven, CT 06520-8200
and NBER
peter.schott@yale.edu
1      Introduction
Large literatures in economics and public health investigate the eect of economic
                                                                  1
shocks on physical and mental health, and on mortality.               Finding exogenous sources

of variation in economic conditions is an important challenge in this research agenda.

Here, we explore the relationship between mortality and a plausibly exogenous change

in U.S. trade policy  the October, 2000 granting of Permanent Normal Trade Relations

(PNTR) to China  that dierentially exposed U.S. counties to increased international

competition via their industry structure. We nd that counties more exposed to the

change in policy exhibit higher mortality due to causes of death, particularly suicide,

that have been linked to relative loss of employment and income, which we also show

to be associated with the change in policy.          We nd that relative increases in these

causes of death are concentrated among whites, which is consistent with that group's

disproportionately high employment in manufacturing, the sector most directly aected

by the change in trade policy, as well as recent research into rising white mortality by

Case and Deaton (2015).

    In principle, an increase in import competition can aect U.S. workers' health pos-

itively or negatively depending upon the sector in which they are employed and the

region in which they and their dependents live. On one hand, health might improve

with real income in areas where production lines up with U.S. comparative advantage,

and health everywhere might improve with declines in the prices of goods and services

that are important inputs to medical care. On the other hand, health might suer in ar-

eas competing most directly with imports if workers experience sharper or longer-term

declines in employment and real income. We note that while our analysis contributes

to a broader understanding of the distributional implications of trade liberalization, it

does not constitute an assessment of PNTR's overall eect on welfare.

    PNTR was a non-traditional trade liberalization in that it eliminated the threat

of tari increases on U.S. imports from China without changing the tari rates actu-

ally applied to Chinese goods. Specically, PNTR eliminated the need for politically

contentious annual renewals of China's Normal Trade Relations (NTR) status  and

the accompanying uncertainty  that was needed to preserve China's access to the low

NTR rates available to most other U.S. trading partners.               Removing the possibility

of these potential tari increases made producing in China for export to the United

States more attractive, eectively liberlizing trade between the two countries. We de-

    1 See, for example, the survey by Cutler, Deaton and Lleras-Muney (2006).



                                                 1
ne industries' exposure to PNTR as the dierence between the higher, non-NTR rates

to which taris could have risen prior to PNTR and the lower NTR rates that were

locked in by the change in policy. We refer to these dierences as NTR gaps, and,

importantly for our identication strategy, show both that they exhibit substantial

variation across industries and that they are unrelated to employment outcomes prior

to the change in policy. Indeed, nearly all of the variation in the NTR gap is accounted

for by variation in non-NTR rates, which were set by the Smoot-Hawley Tari Act of

1930. We compute counties' exposure to PNTR as the labor-share weighted average
                                               2
NTR gaps of the industries they produce.

   We use proprietary microdata from the U.S. Centers for Disease Control (CDC) to

compute mortality rates by county, year, cause of death, gender and race. Our initial

focus is on three causes of death  suicide, accidental poisoning (which includes drug

overdoses) and alcohol-related liver disease (ARLD)  that are highlighted in Case

and Deaton (2015) and that a literature described below has found to be related to

labor market disruptions. We then use a dierence-in-dierences (DID) identication

strategy to examine whether counties that are more exposted to PNTR (rst dierence)

experience dierential changes in mortality and labor market outcomes after the policy

is implemented (second dierence).

   We nd that PNTR is associated with a statistically signicant relative increase

in suicide, and that this result is robust to inclusion of county-level demographic and

economic control variables. Coecient estimates imply that an interquartile shift in

counties' NTR gaps is associated with an increase in the annual suicide rate of 4.0

percent relative to its respective average in the year 2000, the year of the change in

U.S. trade policy. Across age and racial groups, we nd that the relationship between

PNTR and suicide is concentrated among white males.               We also nd that PNTR is

associated with statistically signicant relative increases in mortality from accidental

poisoning, though those estimates are more sensitive to the set of county attributes

included in the regression and to its specication. The evidence for a link between the

policy change and mortality from ARLD is mixed, perhaps due to the longer onset

   2 Pierce and Schott (2016) show that PNTR is associated with the sharp decline in U.S. manufac-
turing employment that began around time of its passage, as well as with increases in U.S. imports
from China, the number of domestic and foreign-owned Chinese rms exporting to the United States,
the number of U.S. rms importing from China and the number of trading relationships between the
two countries. Handley and Limao (2016) develop a theoretical model that indicates that PNTR was
equivalent to a 13 percentage point permanent decline in tari rates. Feng, Li and Swenson (2016)
document the eect of PNTR on the prices and quality of goods exported to the U.S. by Chinese
rms.



                                                2
associated with fatal liver diseases.

    We examine the robustness of the DID results in several ways. First, we consider

an alternate empirical specication that places no restrictions on the timing of the

eects of the policy change and verify that the relationship between the NTR gap and

mortality from suicide for white males is only present after PNTR was passed. Second,

we demonstrate that the statistical and economic signicance of our results are similar

after accounting for the NTR gaps of other counties within the surrounding commuting

zone and controlling for potential changes in state healthcare policies. Finally, we show

that PNTR has no association with other causes of death plausibly unrelated to the

change in policy (e.g., deaths of unknown intent), and that it is negatively associated

with fatal heart attacks, perhaps due to loss of employment in industries requiring
                                  3
physically strenuous activity.

    To verify labor market disruption as a potential channel through which PNTR might

aect mortality, we estimate the relationship between the NTR gap and several labor

market outcomes.       Results from a DID specication analogous to the one described

above imply that an interquartile shift in counties' NTR gaps is associated with persis-

tent relative increases in counties' unemployment rates and persistent relative declines

in counties' manufacturing employment, overall employment, labor force participation
                                           4
rates and per capita personal income.          These ndings suggest that PNTR's relationship

with mortality rates may occur at least in part via the impact of import competition

on local labor markets.

    Finally, as a further check on the mechanism linking PNTR to mortality and to

facilitate comparison of our results with those already in the literature, we perform a

series of two-stage least squares estimations of county mortality rates on county unem-

ployment rates, using counties' exposure to the change in trade policy as an instrument.

The resulting coecient estimates suggest that a 1 standard deviation increase in the

unemployment rate (2.6 percentage points) is associated with a 29.1 percent increase

in the suicide rate. This elasticity is approximately an order of magnitude greater than

that estimated in Ruhm (2000), which nds that a 1 standard deviation increase in

   3 Ruhm (2000) reports a negative relationship between the unemployment rate and death due to
heart attacks. Hummels, Munch and Xiang (2016) show that increased eort in manufacturing jobs
resulting from positive export shocks is associated with a higher rates of hospitalization due to heart
attacks.
   4 Complementary evidence indicating the seriousness of the labor market disruption is reported
in our online appendix, where we document a relationship between PNTR and relative increases in
property crime.   Unlike Dix-Carneiro et al.   (2015), however, we nd no relationship between the
change in trade policy and the murder rate, or other forms of violent crime.



                                                  3
the state unemployment rate (2.1 percentage points) is associated with a 2.7 percent
                                5
increase in the suicide rate.

    Our analysis contributes to research in several literatures. First, the link we nd be-

tween PNTR and suicide relates to a series of papers studying the health consequences

of unemployment. Two seminal contributions in this literature are Ruhm (2000), which

reports a positive relationship between the unemployment rate and suicide in a panel of

U.S. states, and Sullivan and von Wachter (2009), which nds that high-tenure workers

displaced as part of a mass layo experience a sharp increase in their probability of
         6
death.       More recently, Classen and Dunn (2011) nd that unemployment duration is

a major force in the relationship between job loss and suicide.

    Second, our analysis contributes to the substantial body of research examining the

relationship between import competition and employment, particularly with respect
              7
to China.         Autor, Dorn and Hanson (2013), for example, nd that up to half of the

decline in U.S. manufacturing employment between 2000 and 2007 is associated with

rising imports from China, while Pierce and Schott (2016) show that both a decline

in manufacturing employment and an increase in U.S. imports from China during this

period are related to PNTR. Complementary research demonstrates that U.S. labor

markets subject to larger increases in Chinese import competition experience greater

declines in self-reported health outcomes (McManus and Schaur 2015a,b), reduced

provision of local public goods (Feler and Senses 2015), and changes in marriage and

fertility patterns (Autor, Dorn and Hanson 2015). Hummels, Munch and Xiang (2016),

by contrast, nd that the increased job eort associated with positive export demand

shocks increases rates of illness and injury for Danish workers, and Bombardini and

Li (2016) nd that higher pollution associated with expanded export production is

associated with a substantial increase in infant mortality.

   5 The dierence in magnitudes may arise from the persistence of the employment eect associated
with the trade shock  as opposed to the transitory nature of a business cycle contraction  or our
focus on county-level variation in mortality and unemployment rates, rather than state-level variation
as in Ruhm (2000).
   6 Potential reasons for the increase in mortality discussed by Sullivan and von Wachter (2009)
include reduced investments in health, increased stress, and loss of health insurance. Browning and
Heinesen (2012) nd that workers displaced by plant closures in Denmark exhibit elevated death rates
due to mental illness, suicide and alcohol-related diseases, particularly in the short run. A number of
papers in the public health literature, including Falba et al. (2005) and Deb et al. (2011), nd that
workers facing job loss are more likely to engage in unhealthy activities.
   7 See, for example, Freeman and Katz (1991), Revenga (1992), Sachs and Shatz (1994) and Bernard,
Jensen and Schott (2006). Recent papers focused specically on China include Bloom, Draca and Van
Reenen (2015), Ebenstein et al. (2014b), Groizard, Ranjan and Rodriguez-Lopez (2012), Mion and
Zhu (2013), and Utar and Torres Ruiz (2013).



                                                   4
      Finally, our research contributes to studies that take advantage of natural or

actual experiments to examine the impact of shocks to healthcare coverage. Two such

papers focus on the random allocation of Medicaid coverage in Oregon.                     Baicker et

al.    (2013) nd that coverage signicantly increases use of preventative services, the

probability of a positive screening for depression and diabetes and the use of diabetes

medication. Finkelstein et al. (2012) nd that coverage leads to better self-reported

physical and mental health. To the extent that the labor market disruptions associated

with PNTR aect access to healthcare, these ndings are consistent with the positive

links we nd between the change in trade policy and mortality.

      The paper proceeds as follows: Section 2 describes the data, Section 3 describes

our empirical strategy and mortality results, Section 4 explores mechanisms that might

explain the results, Section 5 presents the two stage least squares estimates, and Sec-

tion 6 concludes. An online appendix provides additional empirical results as well as

information about dataset construction and sources.




2        Data
2.1 County Level Mortality
We calculate the number of deaths by county, demographic category and cause using the

proprietary compressed all-county mortality les available by petition from the U.S.

Centers for Disease Control (CDC). These data summarize all death certicates led in
                                            8
the United States from 1990 to 2013.            Observable demographics include the deceased's

age, gender, race, county of residence and county of death. Underlying causes of death
                                                                                                    9
are classied according to one of several hundred external or internal categories.

Internal causes of death are dened as those that originate within the body (e.g., liver

disease) and external causes of death are dened as those whose origins lie outside the

body (e.g., suicide or accidental poisoning).

      We match year by county of residence by age by gender by race death counts to cor-

      8 A public-use version of these data can be accessed at www.wonder.cdc.gov, though the extent to
which mortality rates can be examined within causes of death and demographic groups over time is
limited to prevent disclosure of condential information.
      9 Causes of death are classied according to International Classication of Diseases (ICD). The
CDC data use version 10 of these codes (ICD-10) from 1999 to 2013 and version 9 (ICD-9) of these
codes from 1990 to 1998. We make use of a concordance between these underlying codes and major
disease categories available in Anderson et al. (2001).




                                                   5
responding population estimates compiled by the National Cancer Institute's Surveil-
                                                                      10
lance, Epidemiology and End Results (SEER) Program.                        We use these population

estimates to compute both crude and age-adjusted mortality rates, conventionally

expressed per 100,000 population. The crude death rate for a county-year is simply the

total number of deaths in that county in that year divided by its total population in

that year. The age-adjusted death rate for a county, by contrast, is a weighted average

of the crude death rates across age categories within a county, where the shares of the
                                                                                 11
overall U.S. population in each age category are used as weights.                     We use the U.S.
                                                                                                   12
population shares in the year 2000 for constructing age-adjusted mortality rates.

    Figure 1 plots the (censored) distributions of age-adjusted mortality rates across

counties at four-year intervals starting in 1990.             This gure conveys two messages.

First, the leftward movement in the distributions over time indicates that overall U.S.

mortality rates decline during our sample period. Second, the relatively wide support

of each distribution reveals that mortality rates vary substantially across counties. This

across-county variation in mortality rates is also apparent in Table 1, which summarizes

counties' population-weighted average mortality rates by gender and by race for the

year 2000. As indicated in the rst row of the table, the overall mortality rate across

counties is 858, with an interquartile range stretching from 778 to 1002. The remaining

rows show that mortality is higher for males than females (1047 versus 719), and higher
                                               13
for blacks than for other racial groups.

    Table 2 reports the year 2000 population-weighted average age-adjusted death rates

per 100,000 population for major external and internal causes of death across counties.

As noted in the table, internal causes account for more than 90 percent of deaths across

racial groups.     The three leading causes of death are cancer, circulatory disease and

respiratory ailments.

  10 Eighty-one percent of deaths occur in the deceased's county of residence, the focus of our analysis.
SEER population estimates are available at http://seer.cancer.gov/popdata/download.html.
  11 We use the following age categories in our baseline results: less than 1 year old, 1 to 4 years, 5 to
14 years, 15 to 19 years, 20 to 24 years..., 80 to 84 years, and greater than 85 years.
  12 The SEER population weights associated with these categories are provided in Table A.1 of the
online appendix.
  13 In 2000, the U.S. population shares representing males, females, whites, blacks, American Indian
and Asians or Pacic Islanders are 49, 51, 82, 13, 1 and 4 percent. Counties' weighted average death
rates vary depending on whether overall county population or demographic-specic county population
is used to weight each county. This sensitivity can be seen by comparing the rst two columns of Table
A.2 in the online appendix. The rst column (like Table 1 in the main text) uses total population while
the second column uses the population specic to the demographic group whose weighted average is
being computed. As indicated in the table, the latter are closer to the ocial CDC age-adjusted death
rates for the United States as a whole.



                                                    6
    Examining overall U.S. mortality rates by cause of death and demographic cat-

egories, Case and Deaton (2015) highlight a substantial rise in deaths due to sui-

cide, chronic liver disease and poisoning (accidental and intent undetermined) among

middle-aged whites starting in 1999. Figure 2 uses the CDC microdata examined here

to demonstrate these trends and extend them backwards in time to the beginning of

our sample period (1990), where to faciliate concordance with data from the 1990s, we

focus more specically on suicide, alcohol-related liver disease (ARLD) and accidental

poisoning. As indicated in the gure, the weighted average rates of suicide and ARLD

across counties are more or less at during the 1990s but begin increasing around the

time of the change in U.S. trade policy in the year 2000.              Deaths due to accidental

poisoning, by contrast, rise throughout the sample period but increase at a faster rate
                     14
during the 2000s.



2.2 The NTR Gap
Our analysis makes use of a plausibly exogenous change in U.S. trade policy  the U.S.

granting of PNTR to China in October 2000  that eectively liberalized U.S. imports

from China. This impact can be understood by considering the two sets of tari rates

that comprise the U.S. tari schedule. The rst set of taris, known as NTR taris, are

generally low and applied to goods imported from other members of the World Trade

Organization (WTO). The second, known as non-NTR taris, were set by the Smoot-

Hawley Tari Act of 1930 and are often substantially higher than the corresponding

NTR rates. Imports from non-market economies such as China generally are subject

to the higher non-NTR rates, but U.S. law allows the President to grant such countries

access to NTR rates on a year-by-year basis subject to annual approval by Congress.

    U.S. Presidents granted China such a waiver every year starting in 1980, but Con-

gressional votes over annual renewal became politically contentious and less certain of

passage following the Chinese government's crackdown on Tiananmen Square protests

in 1989 and other ashpoints in U.S.-China relations during the 1990s such as China's

transfer of missile technology to Pakistan in 1993 and the Taiwan Straits Missile Crisis

in 1996.    Uncertainty over China's access to NTR tari rates ended with Congress

passing a bill granting PNTR status to China in October 2000, which formally took

  14 One commonly cited explanation for the increase in death due to poisoning around the year 2000
is an increase in the misuse of prescription opioid painkillers. See, e.g., Rudd, Aleshire, Zibbel and
Gladden (2016). We hope to explore a potential link between such prescriptions and labor market
shocks in future drafts of this paper.



                                                  7
eect upon China's entry into the WTO in December 2001.

   We follow Pierce and Schott (2016) in measuring the impact of PNTR as the rise in

U.S. taris on Chinese goods that would have occurred in the event of a failed annual

renewal of China's NTR status prior to PNTR,



                       N T R Gapj = N on N T R Ratej − N T R Ratej .                            (1)



We refer to this dierence as the NTR gap, and compute it for each SIC industry                   j
using ad valorem equivalent tari rates provided by Feenstra et al. (2002) for 1999,

the year before passage of PNTR. NTR gaps vary widely across industries, with a

mean and standard deviation of 33 and 15 percentage points. As noted in Pierce and

Schott (2016), 79 percent of the variation in the NTR gap across industries is due to

variation in non-NTR rates, set 70 years prior to passage of PNTR, while less than 1

percent of variation is due to variation in NTR rates. This feature of non-NTR rates

eectively rules out reverse causality that would arise if non-NTR rates were set to
                                                                              15
protect industries with declining employment or surging imports.

   We compute U.S. counties' exposure to PNTR as the employment-share weighted

average NTR gap across the sectors in which they are active,


                                              X L1990
                                                 jc
                             N T R Gapc =                      N T R Gapj .                     (2)
                                               j
                                                       L1990
                                                        c

                                                                                          16
We use employment shares from 1990, a period well before the change in policy.                 NTR

gaps are dened only for industries whose output is subject to U.S. import taris,

primarily in the manufacturing and agricultural sectors. For industries whose output

is not subject to taris, such as service industries, we set NTR gaps to zero. For each

county, we also calculate the population weighted average NTR gap of the remaining

counties in its commuting zone,      N T R Gapcz .17
  15 Furthermore, to the extent that NTR rates were set to protect industries with declining employ-
ment prior to PNTR, these higher NTR rates would result in lower NTR gaps, biasing our results
away from nding an eect of PNTR.
  16 Employment by county and industry are available from the U.S. Census Bureau's County Business
Patterns (CBP) database, available at http://www.census.gov/econ/cbp/download/. We follow Autor
et al. (2013) in imputing employment for counties where only a range of employment is reported. For
more information, see David Dorn's data page, at http://www.ddorn.net/data.htm.
  17 We use the U.S. Department of Agriculture denition of commuting zones as of 1990 (Tolbert
and Sizer 1996) and the concordance of counties to commuting zones provided by Autor et al. (2013).
The counties in our sample are distributed across 741 commuting zones, with the number of counties
per commuting zone ranging from 1 to 19 (the Washington DC area).




                                                   8
    Figure 3 reports the distribution of NTR gaps across four-digit SIC industries, U.S.

counties and U.S. counties' surrounding commuting zones. Relative to the distribution

across industries, the distributions for counties and surrounding labor market areas

are shifted towards the left, reecting the fact that most workers in most counties
                                                         18
are employed outside the manufacturing sector.                Own-county NTR gaps average 7.3

percent and have a standard deviation of 6.5 percent, with an interquartile range from

2.4 to 10.6 percent, or 1.3 standard deviations. Surrounding-county NTR gaps have a

similar distribution, with a mean and standard deviation of 6.5 and 4.8 percent, and

an interquartile range from 3.3 to 8.8 percent, or 1.1 standard deviations.



2.3 Other Policy Variables
Our empirical analysis controls for four additional variables that capture changes in

U.S. or Chinese policy: the average U.S. import NTR tari rate associated with the

goods produced by each county; the average exposure of the county to the end of

quantitative restrictions on textiles and clothing imports associated with the phasing

out of the global Multi-Fiber Arrangement (MFA); and changes in Chinese import

taris and domestic production subsidies.

    NTR Rates : Counties' labor-share weighted U.S. import tari rates,                  N T Rct ,   are

computed as in Equation 2, except that the U.S. NTR tari rate for                    industry j     (in

percent) is used in place of the NTR gap for industry j. The left panel of Figure A.2 in

the online appendix summarizes the distribution of             N T Rct   across our sample period;

as shown in the gure, it declines during the late 1990s due to implementation of tari
                                                               19
reductions agreed upon during the Uruguay Round.

    MFA Exposure : We measure counties' exposure to the end of the MFA analogously.

As discussed in greater detail in Khandelwal et al. (2013), the MFA and its successor,

the Agreement on Textile and Clothing (ATC), grew out of quotas imposed by the

United States on textile and clothing imports from Japan during the 1950s. Over time,

it evolved into a broader institution that regulated the exports of clothing and textile

products from developing countries to the United States, European Union, Canada and

  18 The distribution for industries in Figure 3 omits SIC industries that that are not imported and
which therefore have NTR gaps of zero by denition.
  19 NTR tari rates from Feenstra et al. (2002) are unavailable after 2001 and so are assumed constant
after that year. Analysis of analogously computed revealed tari rates from public U.S. trade data
during this interval in Pierce and Schott (2016) suggests this is an reasonable assumption that avoids
having to make do with the smaller set of industries for which revealed rates are available.




                                                  9
Turkey. Bargaining over these restrictions was kept separate from multilateral trade

negotiations until the conclusion of the Uruguay Round in 1995, when an agreement

was struck to eliminate the quotas over four phases. On January 1, 1995, 1998, 2002 and

2005, the United States was required to remove textile and clothing quotas representing

16, 17, 18 and the remaining 49 percent of their 1990 import volumes, respectively.

Relaxation of quotas on Chinese imports did not occur until it became a member of

the World Trade Organization in 2001; as a result, its quotas on the goods in the

rst three phases were relaxed in early 2002 and its quotas on the goods in the fourth

phase were relaxed as scheduled in 2005. The order in which goods were placed into a

particular phase was chosen by the United States.

   Computation of counties' exposure to elimination of the MFA proceeds in three

steps. First, we follow Brambilla et al. (2010) in measuring the extent to which MFA

quotas in industry        j   and phase   p   were binding as the import-weighted average ll

rate of the industry's constituent import products in the year before they were phased

out,   F illRatejp .20   Industries with higher average ll rates faced more binding quotas

and are therefore more exposed to the end of the MFA. Second, for each phase, we

compute counties' labor-share weighted average ll rate across industries,           F illRatecp ,
using a version of Equation 2. Finally, we create our county-year variable of interest,

M F A Exposurect , which, for each year t, is county c's the weighted avearge F illRatecp
for industries whose quotas were relaxed in the most recent phase.             The right panel

of Figure A.2 in the online appendix summarizes the distribution of           F illRatecp   across

our sample period. As shown in the gure, ll rates are zero until the second phaseout,

in 1998. They then step up in 2002 and again in 2005, consistent with the hypothesis

in Brambilla et al (2010) that the United States placed its more sensitive textile and

clothing products into the latter two phases as a means of deferring politically painful

import competition as long as possible.

   Changes in Chinese Policy : As part of its accession to the WTO, China agreed to

institute a number of policy changes that could have inuenced U.S. manufacturing

employment, notably liberalization of its import tari rates and reductions of pro-

duction subsidies.       Following Pierce and Schott (2016) we use product-level data on

Chinese import taris from 1996 to 2005 from Brandt et al. (2012) to compute the

average change in Chinese import taris across products within each U.S. industry.

For production subsidies, we use data from the Annual Report of Industrial Enterprise

  20 Fill rates are dened as actual imports divided by allowable imports under the the quota, and
products outside the MFA have a ll rate of zero.



                                                   10
Statistics compiled by China's National Bureau of Statistics (NBS), which reports the
                                              21
subsidies provided to responding rms.             Following Girma et al. (2009) and Aghion

et al. (2015) we use the variable subsidy in this dataset to compute the change in

the subsidies to sales ratio for each SIC industry between 1999 and 2005 using concor-

dances provided by Dean and Lovely (2010). For both changes in Chinese import tari

rates and production subsidies, we then compute the labor-share weighted average of

this change across the industries each U.S. county produces. Figure A.3 in the online

appendix summarizes the distribution of counties' exposure to reductions in Chinese

import taris (left panel) and domestic production subsidies (right panel)



2.4 County Demographic Information
Our baseline specications control for interactions of a post-PNTR indicator variable

with three initial-year (i.e., 1990) county attributes: the percent of the population with-

out any college education, median household income and percent of population that are

veterans. These variables allow for the possibilities, respectively, that spurious changes

in technology might have replaced low-skill workers with technology disproportionately

during the 2000s, that high-income households gained better access to medical care af-

ter the 2000s, perhaps due to health insurance provided by their employers, and that

an increase in destructive behaviors such as suicide might be the result of combat ex-

perience associated with post-9/11 wars in Afghanistan and Iraq (Kemp and Bossarte

2012). These attributes, summarized in Table 1, are obtained from the U.S. Census
                                      22
Bureau's 1990 Decennial Census.            As noted in the table, the unweighted means and

standard deviations across counties are 54.4 and 11.4 percent (share of population with

no college education), 40.4 and 10.6 thousand dollars (median household income), and
                                                                                      23
14.4 and 2.4 percent (percent of population that are veterans, respectively.

    Table 3 reports the results of OLS regressions of counties' NTR gaps on the inital

(1990) county demographic attributes discussed in this section.             As indicated in the

table, counties with higher NTR gaps have greater exposure to the MFA, higher import

taris across the goods they produce, are exposed to larger reductions in Chinese

  21 The NBS data encompass a census of state-owned enterprises (SOEs) and a survey of all non-SOEs
with annual sales above 5 million Renminbi (~$600,000). The version of the NBS dataset available to
us from Khandelwal, Schott and Wei (2013) spans the period 1998 to 2005.
  22 These data can be downloaded from the Dexter Data Extractor at the University of Missouri,
available at http://mcdc.missouri.edu/.
  23 These values dier from national averages as they are more aected by counties with small pop-
ulations.



                                                   11
imports taris and subsidies, have lower household incomes in 1990, lower share of

population with a college education in 1990, and a higher share of the population that

are veterans in 1990. Counties with higher NTR gaps have lower median household

income in 1990.




3       PNTR and County Mortality Rates
3.1 DID Identication Strategy
Our baseline dierence-in-dierences (DID) specication examines whether counties

with higher NTR gaps (rst dierence) experience dierential changes in mortality

after the change in U.S. trade policy (second dierence) versus before,




                      Death Ratect = θP ost P N T Rt × N T R Gapc +                              (3)

                                           βXct + γP ost P N T Rt × Xc +
                                           δc + δt + εct ,



                                           24
The sample period is 1990 to 2013.              The left-hand side variable represents an out-

come in county      c,   for example the age-adjusted death rate for a particular cause of

death and demographic group in year             t.   The rst term on the right-hand side is the

DID term of interest, an interaction of a post-PNTR (i.e.,                t > 2000)   indicator with

the (time-invariant) county-level NTR Gap.                Xct   represents the two additional, time-

varying controls for policy discussed in Section 2.3: the overall U.S. import tari rate

associated with the sectors produced by the county (N T Rct ) and the sensitivity of the

county to the phasing out of the global Multi-Fiber Arrangement (M F A Exposurect ).

Xc    represents the two Chinese policy variables, exposure to changes in Chinese tar-

is between 1996 and 2005 and exposure to changes in Chinese domestic production

subsidies between 2000 and 2005, and the three initial-period county attributes, 1990

median household income, 1990 share of population without a college degree and 1990

share of population that are veterans. Including interactions of these attributes with

the   P ostP N T Rt indicator allows their relationship with mortality rates to dier before
    24 The baseline results discussed below are robust to ending the sample period in 2007, the year
before the onset of the Great Recession.



                                                     12
and after passage of PNTR.      δc   and   δt   represent county and year xed eects. Inclusion

of these xed eects nets out characteristics of counties that are time-invariant, such as

whether they are near the coast or inland, while also controlling for aggregate shocks

that aect all counties identically in a particular year.

   An attractive feature of these DID identication strategies is their ability to isolate

the role of the change in U.S. trade policy. While counties with high and low NTR gaps

are not identical, comparing outcomes within counties over time isolates the dierential

impact of China's change in NTR status.



3.2 Baseline DID Estimates for Suicide, Accidental Poisoning
    and ARLD
This section examines the link between PNTR and three specic causes of death 

suicide, accidental poisoning and alcohol-related liver disease (ARLD). We focus on

these causes of death for several reasons: they are highlighted in Case and Deaton

(2015); they are found to be important in the unemployment and mass-layo literatures

(e.g., Classen and Dunn 2011 and Browning and Heinesen 2012); their concordance

across the cause-of-death coding schemes used by the CDC over time is straightforward;

and they may be more easily observable than other forms of death, particularly in the
                                                   25
case of suicide and accidential poisoning.

   Results from estimation of Equation 3 for suicide are reported in the rst four

columns of Table 4, with standard errors clustered at the county level.                 The rst

column reports coecient estimates for a specication containing just the DID term of

interest and the xed eects. The second and third columns, respectively, add controls

for policy changes and demographic variables. The fourth column includes the full set

of controls.

   As indicated in the table, the DID point estimates of interest for suicide are positive

and statistically signicant at conventional levels across all four specications, declining

in magnitude as additional covariates are included in the regression.             We assess the

economic signicance of the DID estimates of interest by computing the change in the

mortality rates associated with moving a county from the 25th percentile to the 75th

  25 There is reason to believe that information on death certicates' cause of death may be noisy.
Kircher et al. (1985), for example, nds that 29 percent of 272 randomly selected autopsy reports
and corresponding death certicates in Connecticut in 1980 exhibit a major disagreement. The blue
form instructions for completing the cause of death section of a death certicate are available at
http://www.cdc.gov/nchs/data/dvs/blue_form.pdf.



                                                    13
percentile of the NTR gap distribution (i.e., from 2.3 to 10.6 percent, or 1.3 standard

deviations).   As indicated in the bottom panel of the table, the implied increases in

mortality under this counterfactual range from 0.63 = [0.089*(10.6-2.3)] per 100,000

in column 1 to 0.42 per 100,000 in column 4.              These changes represent 6.0 and 4.0

percent of the of the average age-adjusted suicide mortality rates across counties in the
                                                                                         26
year 2000 which, as reported in the penultimate row of the table, is 10.51.                   In terms

of the other control variables, coecient estimates in column 4 indicate that counties

with higher shares of the population that did not attend college and higher shares

of veterans in the population experience larger increases in mortality from suicide

in the post-PNTR period, relative to before.            Larger declines in Chinese production

subsidies are associated with lower mortality from suicide, post-PNTR. In this sense,

a liberalization on the part of a U.S. trading partner is associated with a decline in

mortality from suicide in the U.S.

    The next eight columns of Table 4 focus on accidental poisoning and ARLD. For

accidental poisoning, the DID terms of interest are positive and signicant in three of

the four specications, including the specication that includes the full set of control

variables.   We do not nd a statistically signicant relationship between PNTR and

accidental poisoning when only demographic variables are included. In terms of eco-

nomic signicance, the impact of an interquartile shift in counties' exposure to PNTR

implied by the DID coecient estimate from the specication with all controls is an

increase of 27.7 percent for accidental poisoning, relative to the overall mortality rate
                                       27
from that cause in the year 2000.           By contrast, we do not nd a relationship between

PNTR and ARLD in the full specication, possibly due to the longer onset period

associated with the disease.



3.3 Baseline DID Estimates by Gender, Race and Age
We examine the link between PNTR and suicide across genders and races in Table 5.

We nd that the positive relationship between PNTR and suicide overall is concentrated

  26 The relationship between PNTR and suicide might spuriously relate to changes in access to
rearms across counties that occurs at the same time as the change in trade policy. Re-estimation of
the relationship according to whether or not the suicides involve a rearm, however, reveals a positive
and statistically insignicant association at conventional levels for the former (implied impact and
standard error of 0.019 and 0.013) and a positive and statistically signicant association with respect
to the latter (implied impact and standard error of 0.037 and 0.010).
  27 The mortality rate from accidental poisoning in 2000 was 4.59 per 100,000 and 4.39 per 100,000
for ARLD.




                                                  14
in one racial group  whites  and that this link is statistically signicant at conventional
                                                                        28
levels only for white males (p-value for white females 0.14).                By contrast, we nd no

relationship between PNTR and suicide for blacks, Asians, or American Indians.

    Results in Tables 6 and 7 indicate that PNTR also is associated with higher white

mortality due to both accidental poisoning and ARLD. For accidental poisoning, this

relationship is present for both white men and white women, while for ARLD it is
                                                                               29
statistically signicant for white men, but not for white women.                    There is generally

no relationship between PNTR and mortality from ARLD or accidental poisoning for

blacks, Asians, or American Indians, though for ARLD, we nd negative and statisti-

cally signicant relationships for American Indian as well as Asian or Pacic Islander
           30
females.        Overall, the results in Tables 5, 6 and 7 provide context for the ndings

of Case and Deaton (2015), who report a worsening of trends in mortality rates from

suicide, poisoning and chronic liver disease rates among whites relative to other races.

    One potential explanation for the link between PNTR and white mortality  par-

ticularly white male mortality  is this group's disproportionate representation among

manufacturing workers, the group most directly aected by exposure to PNTR. As

indicated in Table A.6 of the online appendix, males accounted for 68 percent of U.S.

manufacturing employment versus 49 percent of the population in 1999, and whites

represented 84.3 percent of manufacturing employment versus 81.7 percent of the popu-

lation. Moreover, within manufacturing, over-representation of whites is highest among

occupations likely to be earning the highest wages  such as managerial and professional
                                                                                                      31
occupations  that might lead to largest declines in income following job separation.

    To examine how the above relationships between PNTR and mortality vary by age,

  28 As indicated in the bottom panel of Table 5, the implied impact of an interquartile shift in the
county-level NTR gap is an increase in deaths by suicide 4.8 percent of the year 2000 level for white
males.
  29 As indicated in the bottom panels of Tables 6 and 7, the implied impacts of an interquartile shift
in the county-level NTR gap is an increase in deaths rates of 59 and 14 percent for white males and
females for accidental poisoning, and of 6.7 percent for white males for ARLD.
  30 Estimates for the American Indian and Asian populations may be noisy due to their small size
and relatively uneven distribution across counties. The American Indian and Asian or Pacic Islander
populations represent 1.1 and 4.2 percent of the overall population in the year 2000. In that year, these
two groups have populations exceeding 50,000 in 48 and 158 counties, respectively, versus 2290 and
514 counties for whites and blacks. As reported in Figure A.4 of the online appendix, the American
Indian and Asian populations also tend to inhabit counties with relatively low NTR gaps.
  31 Ebenstein et al.   (2014a,b), for example, nd that workers displaced from manufacturing on
average experience wage declines in moving to another sector. As reported in Table A.6 of the online
appendix, whites accounted for 90.4 percent of managers and professionals, 86.3 percent of technical,
sales, administrative and service positions, and 83.0 percent of precision production positions, versus
78.9 percent among operators, fabricators, laborers and other occupations



                                                   15
we examine crude death rates by gender, race and age category. Results are displayed

visually in Figure 4, which reports the 95 percent condence intervals of the implied

impact of an interquartile shift in counties' exposure to PNTR on white males (left

panels) and white females (right panels) for each cause of death. For comparison, the

rst bar in each gure reproduces the 95 percent condence interval across all ages from

the bottom panel of Tables 5, 6 and 7. As indicated in the gure, an association between

PNTR and suicide is evident across several ve-year age bins between ages 20 and 54
                                                                                             32
for males, but is not statistically signicant for white females in any age category.

For accidental poisoning, the association between PNTR and mortality is positive and

signicant for both white males and white females in most age groups through 45 to

49.    Finally, PNTR-related ARLD mortality is spread across most working year age

bins for middle-age white males, and not evident in any age category for females.



3.4 Robustness Exercises
This section describes three exercises that examine the robustness of the baseline DID

results reported in the previous section. First, we use a more exible DID specication

to examine the timing of the post-2000 changes in mortality and test for the possibility

of prior trends in mortality among counties with varying exposure to PNTR. Second,

we explore the eect of the inclusion of additional covariates and xed eects. And

third, we examine the relationship between PNTR and other causes of death.

      Prior Trends and Timing : For the increase in mortality to be attributable to the

change in U.S. trade policy, the NTR gap should be correlated with mortality rates

after PNTR but not before. To examine whether this is the case, we estimate a version

of Equation 3 that interacts the time-invariant county-level NTR gap and other county

attributes with an indicator variable for each year,

  32 Gemmill et al. (2016) nd that macroeconomic shocks appear to induce suicide among working
age males, as opposed to simply moving suicides forward in time.




                                                16
                                    X
                  Death Ratect =          θt 1{year = t} × N T R Gapc +               (4)
                                      t
                                    βXct +
                                    X
                                      γt 1{year = t} × Xc +
                                      t
                                    δc + δt + εct ,



   Results for suicide, accidental poisoning and ARLD among white males and fe-

males are displayed visually in Figure 5. Each panel of the gure uses the estimated

DID parameters of interest (θt ) for a particular regression to display the 95 percent

condence interval associated with an interquartile shift in counties' NTR gaps.      As

indicated in the gure, the implied impact of PNTR for suicide is generally statistically

indistinguishable from zero prior to the change in U.S. trade policy but shifts upward

after it is implemented. This upward shift is most clearly evident for suicide by white

males in the top left panel, where the condence interval for the implied impact of

PNTR remains above zero after 2003.

   The condence interval for the implied impact of PNTR on mortality from acci-

dental poisoning for white women  shown in the middle right panel  is statistically

indistinguishable from zero prior to 2000 but becomes positive and signicant after

PNTR. The equivalent condence interval for white males shows a similar shift up

around the time of passage of PNTR, though it is negative and statistically signi-

cant through most of the 1990s. The lower two panels of Figure 5 report results for

alcohol-related liver disease for white males and females. Here, too, an upward shift

is discernible for white males, though it is not statistically dierent from zero in any

year of the sample period. For white females, there is no discernible shift.

   Surrounding Commuting Zones : Residents of a particular county may be aected

by PNTR via its impact on surrounding counties that are part of the same labor

market. To account for this possibility, we calculate for each county the employment-

weighted average NTR gap of the other counties in its commuting zone and augment

Equation 3 with the interaction of this commuting zone NTR gap (N T R     Gapcz ) and the
P ost P N T Rt   indicator. The rst two columns of the upper panel of Table 8 compare

results from this specication to the baseline results in columns 4, 8 and 12 of Table




                                             17
4. Here, too, to conserve space we focus on the implied impact of PNTR in terms of

an interquartile shift of both NTR gaps. The middle and bottom panels repeat this

comparison for white males and white females, respectively, where the baseline results

in the rst column are from Tables 5, 6 and 7. As indicated in the table, accounting

for exposure via other counties in the commuting zone has little eect on the results

for any of the three causes of death examined.

   Medicaid Expansion : Sommers et al.      (2012) nd that expansion of Medicaid in

New York, Maine and Arizona in 2001, 2002 and 2006 is associated with a signicant

reduction in age-adjusted mortality among older adults, non-whites, and residents of

poorer counties. To capture the potential inuence of these expansions on our results,

we construct three variables that interact indicators for these states with indicators

picking out the years after the expansion. To this group we add two additional vari-

ables to capture the introduction of Romneycare in Massachusetts in 2006 and the

expansion of Medicaid in Oregon in 2008 that is discussed in the introduction (Baicker

et al. 2013). Results with controls for these changes in health policy are reported in

the third column of each panel of Table 8. As indicated in the table, including these

covariates along with counties' exposure to PNTR via their commuting zones yields

results similar to those reported in column 2.

   A particularly stringent method of controlling for changes in state healthcare poli-

cies is the inclusion of the full set of state-by-year xed eects. This approach captures

any state-year level change in policy that might aect mortality rates, and also absorbs

the substantial across-state variation in the NTR gap. Results including these xed

eects are reported in the fourth column of Table 8.      As indicated in the table, we

continue to nd a positive relationship between PNTR and suicide, with the results

still concentrated among white men. For accidental poisoning, the relationship with

PNTR also remains positive but drops substantially in magnitude and loses statistical

signicance for white males and white females. Results for ARLD, by contrast, become

positive and statistically signicant overall once state-by-year xed eects are added.

   Other Causes of Death : Finally, we investigate the relationship between PNTR

and several other causes of death. The rst column of Table 9 investigates whether

PNTR is associated with deaths from events of unknown intent, which includes, for

example, poisonings, discharges of rearms and falls from high places that were not

ruled accidental or due to suicide. We view this regression as a check on the results for

suicide reported above: to the extent that events of unknown intent were not classied




                                           18
as clear cases of suicide, we do not expect them to be related to economic conditions.

As indicated in the table, we nd no statistically signicant relationship between this

cause of death and PNTR.

    In column two, we investigate the link between PNTR and deaths due to motor

vehicle accidents, a form of mortality found to be positively related to economic activity

in the literature.     Ruhm (2000), for example, nds that a 1 percent increase in the

unemployment rate is associated with 3 percent decline in mortality due to motor
                                                                                              33
vehicle accidents, and a similar relationship is found in Stevens et al. (2011).                   Here,

however, we nd no association between motor vehicle fatalities and PNTR.

    A large body of research in the economics and public health literatures examines the

potential impact of health insurance and health outcomes, hypothesizing that lack of

coverage might inhibit both preventative screening and treatment of known conditions.

Toward that end, columns three through ve of Table 9 examine links between PNTR

and diabetes, which, ideally, involves consistent monitoring and treatment, and two

categories of cancer found to be sensitive to preventative screening:                  cancer of the

digestive tract, which includes colorectal cancer, and cancer of the breast, bone and
        34
skin.        As indicated in the table, we nd no relationship with respect to diabetes or

the rst category of cancers, but nd positive and statistically signicant relationships

with respect to cancer of the digestive tract. The implied impact of an interquartile

shift in a county's exposure to PNTR for the latter is an increase in the mortality rate

of 1.1 percent compared to its year-2000 levels (of 21.4).

    A number of papers study the link between economic shocks and circulatory dis-
                                                                                                      35
ease in general and acute myocardial infarction (AMI, or heart attack) in particular.

In columns six and seven of Table 9, we examine death due to AMI versus all other

  33 The relationship between PNTR and motor vehicle accidents might be more complex if a decline
in economic activity occurs as health insurance coverage decreases. Doyle (2005), for example, nds
that the medically uninsured receive 20 percent less care and have a substantially higher mortality
rate from auto accidents. Relationships might also be more complex depending on the elasticity of
drinking while driving.
  34 Studying the Oregon health care experiment, Baiker et al. (2013) nd that access to Medicaid
increased the probability of being diagnosed with diabetes and increased the use of diabetes medica-
tion. Roetzheim et al. (1999), Bradley et al. (2002) and Tawk et al. (2016) nd that the uninsured
are diagnosed with breast, skin (melanoma), colorectal and prostate cancers at later stages than the
insured, reducing the chance of survival.
  35 Ruhm (2000), for example, nds that a 1 percent increase in the unemployment rate is associated
with a 0.5 percent decline in death due to circulatory disease, speculating that this relationship might
be driven by a decline in stressful activity. Browning and Heinesen (2012), on the other hand, nd
that Danish workers displaced by plant closure are more likely to die of both heart attack and other
forms of circulatory disease than workers with similar characteristics who are not laid o.




                                                  19
                                  36
forms of circulatory disease.          As indicated in the table, we nd a negative and statis-

tically signicant relationship between PNTR and AMI and no statistically signicant

relationship between PNTR and other forms circulatory diseases. For AMI, the im-

plied impact of an interquartile increase in counties' exposure to PNTR is a decrease

in mortality of 3.8 percent relative to the year-2000 level (of 67.7 per 100,000). One

potential explanation for this link between PNTR and AMI may be the loss of physi-

cally demanding manufacturing employment due to the trade liberalization. McManus

and Schaur (2015a), for example, argue that rms in import-competing industries em-

phasize productivity at the expense of worker safety; loss of such jobs may reduce

mortality due to AMI even as adverse health eects may increase for those who remain

employed in these industries. Relatedly, Hummels, Munch and Xiang (2016) nd that

a rise in rm exports is associated with increases in injuries, severe depression and

hospitalizations due to AMI and strokes.

     Finally, the last two columns of Table 9 summarize the relationship between PNTR

and deaths due to all internal and all external causes. We nd a positive and statisti-

cally signicant relationship in both cases. Coecient estimates for all internal causes

of death suggest that the implied impact of an interquartile shift in counties' exposure

to PNTR is an increase in the mortality rate of 1.7 percent versus the average mortality

rate for that cause in the year 2000 (of 803 per 100,000). For external causes of death,

the analogous gure is larger, at 6.1 percent.




4       PNTR and County Labor Markets
As discussed in the introduction, one of the primary ways that trade liberalization

might lead to changes in mortality rates is through its eect on labor market outcomes.

As illustrated in Figure 6, passage of PNTR in October 2000 is followed by a sharp

decline in U.S. manufacturing employment and a pronounced increase in the U.S.
                         37
unemployment rate.            In this section we examine the relationship between PNTR

and labor market outcomes at the county level using the baseline DID specication

introduced in the last section.
    36 Circulatory disease is the leading cause of death during in the year 2000, with AMI accounting
for one-fth of deaths within this category.
    37 As discussed in Pierce and Schott (2016), U.S. value added in manufacturing continued to grow at
slightly lower than the average post-WWII growth rate after PNTR. Houseman et al. (2011) provide
evidence that this growth may in part be inated by mismeasurement of input price indexes driven
by purchases of low-cost foreign materials.




                                                   20
4.1 Employment, Unemployment and Labor Force Participa-
    tion
We investigate the relationship between PNTR and employment using data from the

U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics' (BLS) Local Area Unemployment (LAU) Statis-

tics Program and the BLS' Quarterly Census of Employment and Wages (QCEW)
            38
database.        Via these data, we observe counties' overall and manufacturing employ-

ment as well as their unemployment and labor force participation rates. The distribu-

tion of these labor market variables in the year 2000 are summarized in Table 1.

   For consistency, we make use of the same specication and covariates employed

in our analysis of mortality rates (Equation 3). Results are reported in the rst three

columns of Table 10, with standard errors clustered at the county level. As indicated in

the table, we nd that both overall and manufacturing employment exhibit a negative

and statistically signicant relationship with county exposure to PNTR. These esti-

mates suggest that an interquartile shift along the NTR gap distribution is associated

with a relative decline in overall employment of -0.03 log points and a relative decline

in manufacturing employment of -0.05 log points. We nd a positive but statistically

insignicant relationship between counties' exposure to PNTR and non-manufacturing

employment.       The negative relationship with respect to manufacturing employment

combined with the lack of a relationship for non-manufacturing highlights heterogene-

ity in the labor market implications of trade liberalization.

   The negative relationship with respect to overall and manufacturing employment

carries through to broader measures of labor market activity and slack.                 The nal

two columns of Table 10 reveal that greater exposure to PNTR is associated with

a statistically signicant increase in counties' unemployment rates and a statistically

signicant decline in counties' labor force participation rates.           Here, the DID point

estimates suggest that an interquartile shift in a county's NTR gap is associated with

a relative increase in the unemployment rate of 1.14 percentage points, or 27.9 percent

of the average unemployment rate across counties in the year 2000.                 For the labor

force participation rate, the comparable implied impact is a decline in the labor force

participation rate of -1.46 percentage points, or -2.9 percent of the average labor force
                                               39
participation rate across counties in 2000.

  38 These data are available athttp://www.bls.gov/lau/ and http://www.bls.gov/cew/cewover.htm.
  39 Autor et al. (2013) show that commuting zones experiencing greater increases in imports from
China between 2000 and 2007 exhibit greater declines in manufacturing employment, larger increases
in unemployment and greater declines in labor force participation.   Their estimates imply that the



                                               21
    Figure 7 visually reports the results of regressing these labor market outcomes

on interactions of the NTR gap with year dummies via Equation 4.                        As indicated

in the gure, 95 percent condence intervals of the estimates of                 θt   for overall and

manufacturing employment are indistinguishable from zero prior to the change in U.S.

trade policy, and decline thereafter. For the unemployment rate and the labor force

participation rate, estimates of         θt   are indistinguishable from zero until around the
                                                                            40
change in policy, and then rise and fall, respectively, thereafter.



4.2 Personal Income, Average Annual Pay and Prices
In this section we examine whether the relationship between PNTR and labor market

outcomes documented in the previous sub-section is also manifest in residents' income.

This analysis helps to determine whether residents of aected counties experienced

changes in income if PNTR led them to change rms or industries following a job loss,

even if these switches were not accompanied by periods of unemployment.                       Income

losses could occur, for example, due to the loss of accumulated rm- or industry-specic

human capital.

    We use data from two sources:             the U.S. Bureau of Economic Analysis's (BEA)

Local Area Personal Income (LAPI) database, which tracks counties' overall and per

capita personal income; and the BLS' Quarterly Census of Employment and Wages

(QCEW) database, which contains information on counties' average annual pay inside
                                    41
and outside of manufacturing.            In both cases, data are expressed in current dollars.

Absent the availability of county-level consumer price indexes, we deate the nominal

series for each county by their corresponding BLS regional Consumer Price Index for

$1,840 actual increase in imports per worker from China from 2000 to 2007 decreases the labor force
participation rate by 1.42 percentage points.
  40 Additional evidence regarding the severity of the shock to labor markets comes from examination
of the link between PNTR and crime. In Section B of the online appendix, we demonstrate a positive
link between exposure to PNTR and property crime as well as a negative but statistically insignicant
association between exposure to PNTR and birth rates. Autor et al. (2015), by contrast, nd a decline
in natality among commuting zones most exposed to rising imports from China.
  41 Personal income is dened as income received from all domestic and international sources, includ-
ing wage income, income from assets and government transfers, but excluding realized or unrealized
capital gains or losses. Annual pay include bonuses, stock options, severance pay, prot distributions,
cash value of meals and lodging, tips and other gratuities and, for some states, employer contributions
to deferred compensation plans. The LAPI data are available at http://www.bea.gov/regional/. De-
tailed discussions of the denitions of personal income and wages are available on the BEA and BLS
websites.




                                                   22
                                      42
all urban consumers (CPI-U).               The base year for each real series is 2000.

     As indicated in the rst two columns of Table 11, we nd negative associations

between PNTR and counties' real personal income and real per capita personal income,

though only the latter is statistically signicant at conventional levels. Its DID point

estimate implies that an interquartile shift in a county's exposure to PNTR is associated

with a drop in per capita personal income of -0.021 log points. Results in columns three

and four indicate a negative relationship between PNTR and average annual pay and

a positive association with respect to average annual pay in manufacturing. Neither,
                                                                        43
however, is statistically signicant at conventional levels.

     Figure 8 visually reports the results of regressing real per capita income and real

average annual pay on interactions of the NTR gap with year dummies via Equation 4.

In contrast to the employment results in Figure 7, the estimates of                 θt   for real personal

income, real per capita personal income and real average annual pay exhibit an upward

trend during the 1990s before beginning pronounced declines starting in the year 2000.

One potential explanation for the rising pre-trends is that the CPI deators used here

do not adequately account for dierential changes in prices across counties during this

period.




5       2SLS Estimates of Mortality on the Unemployment
        Rate
To further verify labor market outcomes as a mechanism behind the relationship be-

tween PNTR and mortality rates, and to facilitate comparison of our estimates to

    42 Results for the nominal series are similar but exhibit slightly higher magnitudes, which is intuitive
given the behavior of the CPIs noted below. Results are also similar if state GDP deators are used
in lieu of the CPIs (see below). See Section A of the online appendix for a more detailed discussion of
the regional CPI deators. Table 1 reports the distribution of these series across counties for the year
2000. As indicated in the table, the population weighted average per capita personal income in the
year 2000 has a mean and standard deviation of 30.5 and 9.2 thousand dollars, and ranges from 10.2
to 83.2 thousand dollars. The means and standard deviations for counties' average annual overall and
manufacturing pay are 32.9 and 9.9 thousand dollars, and 41.8 and 13.4 thousand dollars, respectively.
    43 Greater import competition might push the average wage in manufacturing up by driving out
the lowest skill workers and push it down by subjecting remaining workers to greater competition.
The sign pattern observed here is consistent with results in Autor, Dorn, Hanson and Song (2014),
which nds that increased exposure to imports from China leads to a reduction in U.S. workers'
cumulative earnings, and Ebenstein et al. (2014a,b), which nds a positive relationship between import
competition and U.S. wages in manufacturing. In complementary research, McLaren and Hakobyan
(2010) nd that blue collar workers in the U.S. industries most vulnerable to import competition from
NAFTA experience wage declines.



                                                     23
those already in the literature (e.g., Ruhm 2000), we estimate a series of two-stage-

least squares regressions of death due to suicide, ARLD and accidental poisoning on the

unemployment rate, using counties' NTR gaps as an instrument for the unemployment

rate. The plausible exogeneity of PNTR satises the standard exclusion restriction for

instruments, and the relationship between PNTR and the unemployment rate, docu-

mented above, demonstrates its explanatory power.

     Results are reported in Table 12. As indicated in columns one, three and ve, we

nd a positive relationship between the unemployment rate and all three causes of death

when using OLS, though the result is not statistically signicant for ARLD in column

ve. Two-stage least squares results, reported in columns two, four and six, indicate

a positive relationship between the unemployment rate and all three causes of death,

though here, too, results for ARLD are statistically insignicant at conventional levels.

Point estimates for suicide and accidental poisoning imply that a 1 standard deviation

increase in the county unemployment rate (2.6 percentage points) is associated with

a 29.1 (=2.6*1.176/10.51) percent increase in suicides and an 84.2 (=2.6*1.487/4.59)

percent increase in accidental poisonings vis a vis their year 2000 levels. This magni-

tude of the eect on suicide is substantially higher than that reported by Ruhm (2000),

where a 1 standard deviation increase in the state unemployment rate (2.1 percentage
                                                                                44
points) is associated with a 2.7 percent increase in the suicide rate.               The dierence

in estimates may be driven by the dierent levels of aggregation in the two analyses

 with variation here at the county-level, compared to state-level variation in Ruhm

(2000)  as well as the nature of unemployment associated with exposure to the change

in trade policy, which may be more persistent than unemployment due to more typical

cyclical uctuations.




6       Conclusion
This paper examines the relationship between county-level mortality rates and ex-

posure to an important economic shock, the trade liberalization associated with the

U.S. granting of Permanent Normal Trade Relations to China. We calculate exposure

to PNTR as the employment-weighted average exposure of the industries active in

each county. We then estimate the relationship between PNTR and mortality using a

    44 In Ruhm (2000), the standard deviation of unemployment rates across states during the 1972 to
1991 sample period is 2.1.




                                                 24
dierences-in-dierences framework that nets out any time-invariant county character-

istics, as well as annual shocks that aect counties identically.

   We nd that exposure to PNTR is associated with an increase in mortality due to

suicide and related causes, particularly among whites. These results are consistent with

that group's relatively high employment in manufacturing, the sector most aected by

the change in trade policy. We nd that these results are robust to various extensions,

including an alternate empirical specication that places no restrictions on the timing

of the eects of the policy change as well including controls for changes in state health

care policy and exposure of other counties in the surrounding labor market.

   While the results in this paper do not provide an assessment of the overall welfare

impact of PNTR, they do oer a broader understanding of the distributional implica-

tions of trade liberalization.




References
 [1] Aghion, Philippe, Mathias Dewatripont, Luosha Du, Ann Harrison and Patrick

     Legros. 2015. Industrial Policy and Competition. American Economic Journal:

     Macroeconomics 7(4): 1-32.


 [2] Anderson, Robert N., Arialdi M. Minino, Donna L. Hoyert, and Harry M. Rosen-

     berg. 2001. Comparability of Cause of Death Between ICD9 and ICD10: Pre-

     liminary Estimates. National Vital Statistics Reports 49(2):1-32.


 [3] Anukriti,    S.,    and     Todd      J.   Kumler.    2012.    "The   Eects    of    Trade

     Liberalization     on     Fertility    and    Child   Health     Outcomes      in    India."

     http://www.columbia.edu/~tjk2110/Trade_Kumler_Anukriti.pdf.


 [4] Autor, David H., David Dorn and Gordon H. Hanson. 2013. The China Syn-

     drome: Local Labor Market Eects of Import Competition in the United States.

     American Economic Review 103(6): 2121-68.


 [5] Autor, David H., David Dorn, Gordon H. Hanson and Jae Song. 2014. Trade

     Adjustment:      Worker Level Evidence. Quarterly Journal of Economics 129(4):

     1799-1860.


 [6] Autor, David H., David Dorn and Gordon H. Hanson. 2015. The Labor Market

     and the Marriage Market:         How Adverse Employment Shocks Aect Marriage,


                                                  25
    Fertility, and Children's Living Circumstances. Unpublished working paper at

    http://economics.mit.edu/les/11562.


 [7] Baicker, Katherine, Sarah L. Taubman, Heidi L. Allen, Mira Bernstein, Jonathan

    H. Gruber, Joseph P. Newhouse, Eric C. Schneider, Bill J. Wright, Alan M.

    Zaslavsky and Amy N. Finkelstein. 2013. The Oregon Experiment - Eects of

    Medicaid on Clinical Outcomes. New England Journal of Medicine 368 (May 2,

    2013):1713-1722.


 [8] Becker,    Gary    S.    1960.   An     Economic      Analysis   of    Fertility.

    http://www.nber.org/chapters/c2387.


 [9] Becker, Gary S. 1965. A Theory of the Allocation of Time. Economic Journal

    75(299): 493-517 (September).


[10] Ben-Porath, Yoram. 1973. Economic Analysis of Fertility in Israel:    Point and

    Counterpoint. Journal of Political Economy 81(2): S202-S233 (March-April)


[11] Bernard, Andrew B., J. Bradford Jensen, and Peter K. Schott. 2006. Survival of

    the Best Fit: Exposure to Low-Wage Countries and the (Uneven) Growth of US

    Manufacturing Plants. Journal of International Economics 68 (1): 219-237.


[12] Bloom, Nicholas, Stephen Bond and John Van Reenen. 2007. Uncertainty and

    Investment Dynamics. Review of Economic Studies 74: 391-415.


[13] Bloom, Nicholas, Mirko Draca and John Van Reenen. 2015. Trade Induced Tech-

    nical Change: The Impact of Chinese Imports on Innovation, Diusion and Pro-

    ductivity. Review of Economic Studies, forthcoming.


[14] Bombardini, Matilde and Bingjing Li. 2016. Trade, Pollution and Mortality in

    China. NBER Working Paper 22804.


[15] Bradley, Cathy J., Charles W. Given and Caralee Roberts. 2002. Race, Socioeco-

    nomic Status, and Breast Cancer Treatment and Survival. Journal of the National

    Cancer Institute 94(7): 490-6.


[16] Brambilla, Irene, Amit K. Khandelwal and Peter K. Schott. 2010. China's Expe-

    rience Under the Multiber Arrangement (MFA) and the Agreement on Textiles

    and Clothing (ATC). In China's Growing Roll in World Trade, edited by Robert

    Feenstra and Shang-Jin Wei. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.


                                        26
[17] Brandt, Loren, Johannes Van Biesebroeck, Luhang Wang and Yifan Wang. 2012.

    WTO Accession and Performance of Chinese Manufacturing Firms. Center for

    Economic Policy Research Working Paper 9166.


[18] Browning, Martin and Eskil Heinesen. 2012. Eect of job loss due to plant closure

    on mortality and hospitalization. Journal of Health Economics 31(4): 599-616.


[19] Case, Anne and Angus Deaton. 2015. Rising Morbidity and Mortality in Midlife

    Among White Non-Hispanic Americans in the 21st Century. Proceedings of the

    National Academy of Sciences doi: 10.1073/pnas.1518393112.


[20] Che, Yi and Xu, Xun. 2015. The China Syndrome in US: Import Competition,

    Crime, and Government Transfer. Mimeo, University of Munich.


[21] Classen, Timothy J. and Richard A Dunn. 2012. The eect of Job Loss and

    Unemployment Duration on Suicide Risk in the United States:         A New Look

    Using Mass-Layos and Unemployment Duration. Health Economics 21(3):338-

    350.David, Angus Deaton and Adriana Lleras-Muny. 2006. The Determinants of

    Mortality. Journal of Economic Perspectives 20(3): 97-120.


[22] Deb Partha, William T. Gallo , Fletcher Ayyagari and Jody L. Sindelar. 2011.

    The eect of job loss on overweight and drinking. Journal of Health Economics.

    2011 Mar; 30(2): 317-27. Epub 2011 Jan 14. PMCID: PMC3086369.


[23] Dettling, Lisa J., and Melissa S. Kearney. 2014. House Prices and Birth Rates:

    The Impact of the Real Estate Market on the Decision to Have a Baby. Journal

    of Public Economics 110 (2014): 82-100.


[24] Dix-Carneiro, Rafael, Rodrigo R. Soares and Gabriel Ulyssea. 2015. Local Labor

    Market Conditions and Crime: Evidence from the Brazlian Trade Liberalization.

    Mimeo.


[25] Doyle, Joseph J. Jr. 2005. Health Insurance, Treatment and Outcomes:       Using

    Auto Accidents as Health Shocks. Review of Economics and Statistics 87(2): 256-

    270.


[26] Ebenstein, Avraham, Ann Harrison, Margaret McMillan and Shannon Phillips.

    2014a. Estimating the Impact of Trade and Oshoring on American Workers using




                                         27
    the Current Population Surveys, The Review of Economics and Statistics, MIT

    Press, vol. 96(3), pages 581-595, October.


[27] Ebenstein, Avraham, Ann Harrison and Margaret McMillan. 2014b. "Why are

    American Workers getting Poorer? China, Trade and Oshoring." Mimeo.


[28] Falba Tracy, Hsun-Mei Teng, William T. Gallo and Jody L. Sindelar. The Eect

    of Involuntary Job Loss on Smoking Intensity and Relapse. Addiction 2005 Sep;

    100(9):1330-9.


[29] Fazel, Seena, Achim Wolf, Zheng Chang, Henrik Larsson, Guy M Goodwin, and

    Paul Lichtenstein. 2015. Depression and violence:   a Swedish population study.

    The Lancet 2(3): 224-232.


[30] Feenstra, Robert C., John Romalis and Peter K. Schott. 2002. U.S. Imports,

    Exports and Tari Data, 1989-2001. NBER Working Paper 9387.


[31] Feng, Ling, Zhiyuan Li and Deborah Swenson. 2014. Trade Policy Uncertainty and

    Exports: Evidence from China's WTO Accession. CESifo Working Paper Series

    4780, CESifo Group Munich.


[32] Feler, Leo and Mine Z. Senses. 2015. Trade Shocks and the Provision of Local

    Public Goods. Mimeo.


[33] Finkelstein, Amy, Sarah Taubman, Bill Wright, Mira Bernstein, Jonathan Gruber,

    Joseph P. Newhouse, Heidi Allen, Katherine Baicker. (2012). The Oregon Health

    Insurance Experiment: Evidence from the First Year. The Quarterly Journal of

    Economics 127(3): 1057-1106.


[34] Freeman, R., Katz, L., 1991. Industrial Wage and Employment Determination in

    an Open Economy, in Immigration, Trade and Labor Market, edited by John M.

    Abowd and Richard B. Freeman. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.


[35] Galbraith, Virginia L and Dorothy S. Thomas. 1941. Birth Rates and the Interwar

    Business Cycles. Journal of the American Statistical Association, 36(216): 465-

    476.




                                         28
[36] Gemmill, Alison, April Falconi, Deborah Karasek, Terry Hartig, Elizabeth Ander-

    son and Ralph Catalano. 2016. Do macroeconomic contractions induce or `har-

    vest' suicides? A test of competing hypotheses. J Epidemiol Community Health

    2015;69:1071-1076 doi:10.1136/jech-2015-205489.


[37] Girma, Sourafel, Gong, Yundan, Görg, Holger and Yu, Zhihong (2009). Can

    Production Subsidies Explain China's Export Performance? Evidence from Firm-

    level Data. The Scandinavian Journal of Economics 111: 863891.


[38] Hummels, David, Jakob Munch and Chong Xiang. 2016. No Pain, No Gain: The

    Eects of Exports on Eort, Injury, and Illness. Unpublished manuscript available

    at http://www.krannert.purdue.edu/faculty/cxiang/cvwp/ExpHealth.pdf.


[39] Khandelwal, Amit K., Peter K. Schott and Shang-Jin Wei. 2013. Trade Liberal-

    ization and Embedded Institutional Reform: Evidence from Chinese Exporters.

    American Economic Review 103 (6): 2169-95.


[40] Handley, Kyle and Nuno Limao. 2016. Policy Uncertainty, Trade and Welfare:

    Evidence from the U.S. and China. Mimeo.


[41] Houseman, Susan, Christopher Kurz, Paul Lengermann and Benjamin Mandel.

    2011. Oshoring Bias in U.S. Manufacturing. Journal of Economic Perspectives

    25 (2): 111-132.


[42] Hoyert and Anderson. 2001. Age-adjusted Death Rates: Trend Data Based on

    the Year 2000 Standard Population. National Vital Statistics Reports 49 (9): 1-7.


[43] Iyer, Lakshmi and Petia B. Topalova. 2014. Poverty and Crime: Evidence from

    Rainfall and Trade Shocks in India. Mimeo.


[44] Kemp, Janet and Robert Bossarte. 2012. Suicide Data Report. Department of

    Veteran Aairs, Mental Health Services, Suicide Prevention Program.


[45] Kircher, T., J. Nelson and H. Burdo. 1985. The autopsy as a measure of accuracy

    of the death certicate. New England Journal of Medecine 313(20): 1263-9.


[46] McLaren, John and Shushanik Hakobyan. 2010. Looking for Local Labor Market

    Eects of NAFTA. NBER Working Paper 16535.




                                         29
[47] McManus, T. Clay and Georg Schaur. 2015a. The Eects of Import Competition

    on Health in the Local Economy. Mimeo.


[48] McManus, T. Clay and Georg Schaur. 2015b. The Eects of Import Competition

    on Worker Health. Mimeo.


[49] Mincer, Jacob. 1963. "Market prices, opportunity costs, and income eects." Mea-

    surement in Economics (1963): 67-82.


[50] Mion, Giordano and Linke Zhu. 2013. Import Competition From and Outsourcing

    to China: A Curse or a Blessing for Firms. Journal of International Economics

    89 (1): 202-215.


[51] Pierce, Justin R. and Peter K. Schott. 2016. The Surprisingly Swift Decline of

    U.S. Manufacturing Employment. NBER Working Paper 18655.


[52] Pierce, Justin R. and Peter K. Schott. 2012. Concording U.S. Harmonized System

    Codes Over Time. Journal of Ocial Statistics 28(1): 53-68.


[53] Revenga, A.L. 1992. Exporting Jobs?              The Impact of Import Competition on

    Employment and Wages in U.S. Manufacturing. Quarterly Journal of Economics

    107 (1): 255-284.


[54] Roetzheim, Richard G., Naazneen Pal, Colleen Tennant, Lydia Voti, John Z. Aya-

    nian, Annette Schwabe and Jerey P. Krischer. 1999. Eects of Health Insurance

    and Race on Early Detection of Cancer. Journal of the National Cancer Institute

    91(16): 1409-1415.


[55] Rudd,    Rose     A.,     Noah    Alshire,      Jon     E.    Zibbell   and    Matthew      Glad-

    den.     2016.     Increases     in     Drug      and        Opioid     Overdose     Deaths      -

    United     States,         2000-2014.    Morbidity           and   Mortality       Weekly      Re-

    port.    Centers     for    Disease    Control     and    Prevention.     Available    online    at

    http://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/preview/mmwrhtml/mm6450a3.htm.                                  Accessed

    May 11, 2016.


[56] Ruhm, Christopher. 2000. Are Recessions Good for your Health?                       Quarterly

    Journal of Economics 115(2 May): 614-650.


[57] Ruhm, Christopher. 2015. Recessions, Healthy No More?                       Journal of Health

    Economics 42: 17-28.


                                                  30
[58] Shatz Howard J. and Jerey D. Sachs. 1994. Trade and Jobs in U.S. Manufactur-

    ing. Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 1994 (1): 1-69.


[59] Schott, Peter K. 2008. The Relative Sophistication of Chinese Exports. Economic

    Policy 53: 5-49 (January).


[60] Silver, Morris. 1965. "Births, marriages, and business cycles in the United States."

    The Journal of Political Economy (1965): 237-255.


[61] Sommers, Benjamin D., Katherine Baicker and Arnold Epstein. 2012. Mortality

    and Access to Care Among Adults After State Medicaid Expansions. New England

    Journal of Medicine 367: 1025-1034.


[62] Stevens, Ann, Douglas L. Miller, Marianne E. Page and Mateusz Filipski. 2011

    The Best of Times, the Worst of Times: Understanding Pro-cyclical Mortality

    NBER Working paper 17657.


[63] Sullivan, Daniel and Till von Wachter. 2009. Job Displacement and Mortality:

    An Analysis Using Administrative Data. Quarterly Journal of Economics August

    2009: 1265-1306.


[64] Tawk, Rima and Adrian Abner, Alicestine Ashford, and Clyde Perry Brown. 2016.

    Dierences in Colorectal Cancer Outcomes by Race and Insurance. International

    Journal of Environmental Research and Public Health. 2016 Jan; 13(1): 48.


[65] Tolbert, Charles and Molly Sizer. 1996. U.S. Commuting Zones and Labor Market

    Areas: A 1990 Update. Rural Economy Division, Economic Research Service, U.S.

    Department of Agriculture Sta Paper No. AGES-9614.


[66] Utar, Hale and Luis B. Torres Ruiz. 2013. International Competition and Indus-

    trial Evolution: Evidence form the Impact of Chinese Competition on Mexican

    Maquiladoras. Journal of Development Economics 105: 267-287.




                                           31
Table 1: Summary Statistics




            32
Table 2: Average Death Rates by Major Causes of Death




                         33
Table 3: 1999 NTR Gap versus Other County Attributes




                         34
Table 4: PNTR and Suicide, ARLD and Accidental Poisoning



                          35
Table 5: PNTR and Suicide




           36
Table 6: PNTR and Accidental Poisoning




                 37
Table 7: PNTR and Alcohol-Related Liver Disease




                      38
Table 8: Robustness Exercises




             39
Table 9: PNTR and Other Causes of Death




                  40
Table 10: PNTR and Employment Outcomes (LAU and QCEW)




                         41
Table 11: PNTR and County Per Capita Personal Income (LAPI and QCEW)




                                 42
Table 12: Mortality and Unemployment (2SLS)




Figure 1: Distribution of Overall Mortality Rates



                       43
    Figure 2: Death Rates for Non-Hispanic Whites




Figure 3: Distribution of 1999 NTR Gaps Across Counties




                          44
Figure 4: Implied Impact of PNTR on Death by Suicide and Alcohol-Related Liver
Disease, by Age Category




                                     45
Figure 5: Implied Impact of PNTR on Death Rates Using Annual DID Specication
(Equation 4)




                                     46
                Figure 6: Post-War U.S. Manufacturing Employment




Figure 7:   Implied Impact of PNTR on Employment Outcomes Using Annual DID
Specication (Equation 4)




                                      47
Figure 8: Implied Impact of PNTR on Income Using Annual DID Specication (Equa-
tion 4)




                                      48
Online Appendix
This online appendix contains additional empirical results and information on data

creation referenced in the main text.




A     Regional Price Indexes
The BLS produces CPIs for four regions: the northeast (Maine, Massachusetts, New

Hampshire, New Jersey, New York, Pennsylvania, Rhode Island and Vermont), the mid-

west (Illinois, Indiana, Iowa, Kansas, Michigan, Minnesota, Missouri, Nebraska, North

Dakota, Ohio, South Dakota, Wisconsin), the south (Alabama, Arkansas, Delaware,

District of Columbia, Florida, Geogia, Kentucky, Louisiana, Maryland, Mississippi,

North Carolina, Oklahoma, South Carolina, Tennessee, Texas, Virginia and West Vir-

ginia ) and the west (Alaska, Arizona, California, Colorado, Hawaii, Idaho, Montana,

Nevada, New Mexico, Oregon, Utah, Washington, Wyoming).

    For each region, the BLS produces indexes for three sets of cities: the overall CPI

for urban consumers (CPI-U), the CPI for metropolitan urban areas with population

above 1.5 million (class A) and the CPI for metropolitan urban areas fewer than 1.5

million (class B/C). These indexes are compared in Figure A.5 of this online appendix.




B     Complementary Evidence
In this section we make use of the same dierence-in-dierence specication used to

study mortality to demonstrate that counties more exposed to PNTR experience higher

rates of property crime and lower birth rates.



B.1 Crime
We examine the relationship between PNTR and crime rates for three reasons. First, an

increase in crime could aect mortality directly, e.g. via homicides, though it turns out

that we do not nd evidence for that channel. Second, an increase in crime contributes

to a lower quality of life and thereby might contribute to depression or other conditions

consistent with the increases in mortality noted above. Finally, a link between PNTR

and crime rates provides additional evidence of the seriousness of the labor market




                                           49
disruptions documented in the main text (Iyer and Topalova 2014, Dix-Carneiro et al.
         45
2015).

    Our analysis makes use of county-level crime rate statistics per 100,000 residents

available from the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) via the Uniform Crime Re-
                                46
porting (UCR) database.              These data, available from 1990 to 2006, break overall crime

rates into two main categories, violent and property crime, and eight sub-categories:
                                                                                 47
murder, rape, robbery, assault, burglary, larceny, auto theft and arson.

    Table A.7 reports the results. As indicated in the rst and second columns of the

table, counties' exposure to the change in U.S. trade policy has a positive relationship

with both overall violent crime and overall property crime, but this relationship is only

statistically signicant at conventional levels for overall property crime. The DID point

estimate for the property crime regression implies that an interquartile shift in counties

NTR gap is associated with an increase in the rate of property crime per 100,000

residents of 144.2, or 5.6 percent of the average property crime rate across counties in

the year 2000 (2592 per 100,000). These results are consistent with Feler and Senses

(2015) who note that counties more exposed to imports from China experienced small

increases in property crime, while the least exposed counties experienced a substantial

reduction in crime.

    The remaining columns of Table A.7 illustrate positive and statistically signi-

cant relationships between counties' exposure to PNTR and several sub-categories of

property crime, including robbery, larceny, motor vehicle theft and arson. Coecient

estimates suggest interquartile shifts in counties' exposure to PNTR are associated

with increases in the rates of these crimes of 15.8, 5.1, 11.6 and 21.9 percent compared

to their year-2000 levels.



B.2 Birth Rates
In principle, the association between PNTR and local labor market conditions discussed

above might aect birth rates in at least two ways. On one hand, to the extent that

workers the declines in income and employment as temporary, they might perceive a

drop in the opportunity cost of having children and the birth rate might rise. On the

  45 Che et al. (2015) examine the link between Chinese imports and U.S. crime across commuting
zones.
  46 These data are available at https://www.fbi.gov/about-us/cjis/ucr/ucr.
  47 Burglary is dened as theft (i.e., larceny) combined with unlawful entry. Robbery is dened as
forcible theft from a person.




                                                   50
other hand, to the extent that PNTR results in long-term reductions in income and
                                             48
employment, birth rates might decline.
                                                                              49
    We make use of county-level data on births available from CDC.                 Using these data

and population estimates from SEER, we compute both the birth rate for each county,

dened as births per population. We caution that the county-level birth data are often

suppressed, and that they are available to us for years 1992 to 2006 only. The number

of counties included in the regression results (i.e., those with observations both before

and after 2000) rises from an average of 457 between 1995 and 2000 to 501 between

2001 and 2006. These counties are among the largest, representing an average of 76

percent of the total U.S. population across the sample period.

    Table A.8 reports the results of baseline DID specications similar to those used

above. The rst column report results for the birth rate per 100,000 population, while

the second column reports results for the log number of births.              As indicated in the

table, the DID coecients of interest are negative but statistically insignicant in both
           50
columns.




C      PNTR and Import Prices
To the extent that imports are an important input into the production of healthcare,

trade liberalization with China might improve workers' health via lower prices for

health-related goods.     Moreover, a general reduction in prices associated with trade

liberalization may lead to welfare improvements for U.S. consumers.                 We investigate
                                                                                           51
this link using customs data from the U.S. Census provided by Schott (2008).

    We employ a generalized triple dierences specication that compares products

with varying NTR gaps (rst dierence) before and after PNTR (second dierence)

  48 These trade-os and the potential cyclicality of birth rates are discussed in Ben-Porath (1973),
Becker (1960, 1965), Galbraith and Thomas (1941), Mincer (1963) and Silver (1965). Dettling and
Kearney (2014) provide a concise discussion of this literature. Anukriti and Kumler (2012) nd that
an increase in import competition in India associated with the end of the License Raj in 1991 raised
birth rates among women with low socioeconomic status but had the opposite aect among women
of high socioeconomic status.
  49 These data can be downloaded from http://wonder.cdc.gov/wonder/help/natality.html.
  50 Autor et al. (2015), by contrast, nd a decline in natality among commuting zones most exposed
to rising imports from China.
  51 These data are available for download at http://faculty.som.yale.edu/peterschott/sub_international.htm.




                                                  51
and across source countries (third dierence) for the years 1992 to 2007:



        ln(U nit V alue)hst = θ1{c = China}s × P ostP N T Rt × N T R Gaph +                      (A.1)

                                   +λT arif fhst + δst + δsh + δht + α + εhst .

The left-hand side variable represents the log of the average unit value observed for

ten-digit HS product     h   from source country      s   in year   t.52   The rst term on the right-

hand side is the term of interest: a triple interaction of an indicator for China, an

indicator for the post-PNTR period, and the NTR gap for product                       h   that captures

the impact of the change in U.S. policy.T arif fhct represents the U.S. revealed import
tari for product h from country c in year t, computed as the ratio of duties collected

to dutiable value using publicly available U.S. trade data. δct , δch and δht represent

country×year, country×product and product×year xed eects. α is the regression

constant.

   Results are reported in Table A.9. As indicated in the table, the NTR gap has a

negative and statistically signicant relationship with import unit values. The point

estimate in the rst row of the table implies that Chinese imports after PNTR are 0.18

log points lower vis a vis imports of products from other source countries.

   We use the following back-of-the-envelope procedure to gauge the potential impact

of the decline in Chinese import unit values on health-related versus other goods within

the United States. First, we use the results in Table A.9 to compute the predicted rel-

ative impact of PNTR for each HS import product. Second, we take the average of

these impacts across HS products within NAICS industries.                      Third, we merge these

NAICS-level mean log changes into the 2007 U.S. total requirements input-output ma-

trix, whose coecients indicate the amount of the input NAICS industry needed to

produce one dollar of the using industry. Fourth, we compute the weighted average

implied relative log unit value changes across the input industries for each using indus-

try, using the IO coecients as weights. Finally, we examine the changes associated

with healthcare-related NAICS industries.             These industries are identied by having

one of the following key words in their description: health, care, pharmaceutical, drug,

hospital, medical, surgical, medicine, and imaging.

  52 The trade data report both value and quantity for each transaction and we use the ratio of these
two variables as a proxy for the price. We omit products whose units change over time, and make use
of concordances provided by Pierce and Schott (2016) to ensure product codes are consistent over the
sample period. Further details on data construction are provided in the online appendix.




                                                 52
   The distribution of log unit value declines across using industries is displayed in Fig-

ure A.6; the mean and standard deviation across industries is -0.069 and 0.095. The de-

clines associated with the health industries identied in the last paragraph are reported

in Table A.10, along with the average for those industries versus all others. As indicated

in the table, four healthcare-related industries have sizable weighted-average changes:

surgical instruments (-0.080), surgical appliances (-0.066), electromedical manufactur-

ing (-0.060) and pharmaceutical preparation manufacturing (-.054). Weighted-average

changes for the remaining industries in the table are far lower. Intuitively, this is due

to their relatively high share of labor versus other goods.




Appendix Tables and Figures




      Table A.1: Distribution of U.S. Population Across Age Categories in 2000




                                           53
Table A.2: Sensitivity of Weighted Average Death Rates Across Counties to Population
Weights




                                        54
Table A.3: PNTR and Suicide by White Males, By Age Group




                          55
Table A.4: PNTR and Suicide by White Females, By Age Group




                           56
Table A.5: PNTR and Alcohol-Related Liver Disease for White Males, By Age Group




                                      57
Table A.6: Share of Whites and Males Among Occupations in Manufacturing, 1999




                                     58
Table A.7: PNTR and Crime Rates per 100,000 Population (UCR)




                            59
Table A.8: PNTR and Birth Rates per 100,000 Population




                         60
Table A.9: PNTR and U.S. Import Prices




                 61
Table A.10: Unit Value Declines Weighted by Health-Industry IO Coecients




                                   62
    Figure A.1: Counties' Own versus Surrounding Commuting Zone NTR Gaps




Figure    A.2:     Distribution     of   Counties'   Exposure   to   MFA   Phase-Outs
(M F A   Exposurect )   and Counties' NTR Taris (N T Rct )




                                            63
Figure A.3: Distribution of Counties' Exposure to Reductions in Chinese Taris and
Domestic Production Subsidies




                 Figure A.4: County NTR Gaps by Racial Group




                                       64
Figure A.5: Consumer Price Indexes by Region and Size Class




                            65
Figure A.6: Weighted Average ln(Unit Value) Declines by Using NAICS Industries




                                      66
