NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE IMPACT OF EMERGING MARKET COMPETITION ON INNOVATION AND
BUSINESS STRATEGY
Lorenz Kueng
Nicholas Li
Mu-Jeung Yang
Working Paper 22840
http://www.nber.org/papers/w22840

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 2016

We received financial support from Industry Canada, which covered the cost of vetting the results
of our analysis. Industry Canada was otherwise not involved in the conduct of our research. In
particular, Industry Canada, Statistics Canada, nor any other party had the right to review the
paper prior to its circulation. We did not receive any other financial support for this research, and
we have no financial interest in its outcomes. The views expressed herein are those of the authors
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2016 by Lorenz Kueng, Nicholas Li, and Mu-Jeung Yang. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that
full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

The Impact of Emerging Market Competition on Innovation and Business Strategy
Lorenz Kueng, Nicholas Li, and Mu-Jeung Yang
NBER Working Paper No. 22840
November 2016
JEL No. F14,L2,O3
ABSTRACT
How do firms in high-income countries adjust to emerging market competition? We estimate how
a representative panel of Canadian firms adjusts innovation activities, business strategies, and exit
in response to large increases in Chinese imports between 1999 and 2005. On average, process
innovation declines more strongly than product innovation. In addition, initially more
differentiated firms that survive the increase in competition have better performance ex-post, but
are ex-ante more likely to exit. Differentiation therefore does not ensure insulation against
competitive shocks but instead increases risk.

Lorenz Kueng
Kellogg School of Management
Northwestern University
2001 Sheridan Road
Evanston, IL 60208
and NBER
l-kueng@kellogg.northwestern.edu
Nicholas Li
University of Toronto
150 St. George Street
Toronto, ON M5S 3G7
Canada
nick.li@utoronto.ca

Mu-Jeung Yang
Department of Economics
University of Washington
Savery Hall, 327
Seattle, WA 98195-3330
mjyang@uw.edu

INTERNATIONAL COMPETITION, INNOVATION, AND BUSINESS STRATEGY

1

What is the impact of trade integration with low-income countries on firm dynamics
in high-income countries, including firm policies such as innovation and business strategy?
A large empirical literature has documented that imports from low-wage economies such
as China had a dramatic impact on manufacturing firms in high-income countries. Establishments and firms in the US and Europe have either cut jobs and lost market shares
or have shut down altogether; see Bernard, Jensen and Schott (2006) and Bloom, Draca
and Van Reenen (2015). These results are symptomatic of a relocation of manufacturing
production from costly high-wage economies to cheaper low-wage economies and therefore
reflect the static benefits for rich countries of more import competition.
However, according to traditional R&D based models of endogenous innovation,1 there
are potentially significant dynamic costs for the importing high-income country from more
import competition. In these models, more competition reduces expected profits of firms
in high-income countries, thereby diminishing the incentives to innovate.
In contrast, a number of recent studies have argued that product markets in rich
countries are segmented and that some segments can shield firms from the adverse effects
of low-cost import competition. One example is segmentation along the product space,
as firms with novel products or with higher quality products might lose less market share
to low-cost Chinese competitors; see Khandelwal (2010) and Sutton (2012). Another
possibility is geographic segmentation, where firms that produce for local niche markets
instead of mass producing for the national market are more protected against low-cost
emerging market competition; see Holmes and Stevens (2014). Market segmentation along
product or geographic dimensions opens up the possibility that firms in rich countries try
to specialize in these differentiated or higher quality products in response to low-cost
import competition from China and hence innovate more instead of less. In other words,
there could be important dynamic gains for rich countries that reinforce the static gains
from more import competition, as in models of Amiti and Khandelwal (2013) and Bloom,
Romer, Terry and Van Reenen (2014).
In this study, we provide a comprehensive assessment of the response of firms a highincome country to import competition from China, using a nationally representative panel
of firms from the Canadian manufacturing sector from 1999 to 2005. A key contribution
of this paper is to investigate how firm performance and innovation responses differ as a
function of initial firm characteristics that capture market segmentation along product or
geographic dimensions. Our study is complementary to existing empirical work on these
issues in at least three respects.
1

Leading examples include Romer (1990), Grossman and Helpman (1991), Aghion and Howitt (1992),
Klette and Kortum (2004), and Atkeson and Burstein (2010).

2

LORENZ KUENG, NICOLAS LI, AND MU-JEUNG YANG

First, the majority of current studies focuses on samples of very large firms, such as the
publicly traded companies in Compustat.2 A common finding is that large firms in the US
do systematically reduce innovation as measured by R&D or patenting. On the one hand,
this finding could reflect diminished innovation incentives as described by traditional R&D
based models of innovation. On the other hand, large firms might substitute labor-saving
process innovations for production off-shoring to low-wage countries like China, as argued
for example by Bena and Simintzi (2015).3 We provide a complementary perspective to
these large firm studies by estimating the innovation response in a panel of Canadian firms
that is representative of the entire Canadian manufacturing sector, including small and
privately-owned firms. Additionally, the presence of smaller firms in our data is important
as it enables us to capture the impact of competition on exit more comprehensively since
small firms are more likely to exit than large firms. From this perspective, our evidence
adds a better understanding of exit effects relative to studies relying on Compustat, which
captures large firms that are less likely to exit in response to competitive shocks.
Second, an empirical challenge that arises in the analysis of a representative sample
of firms is that traditional measures of innovation activities such as patenting or R&D
spending are typically limited to relatively large firms and exclude small and medium
sized companies; see for example the evidence in Autor et al. (2016b). Our dataset has
two unique features that directly address this issue. On the one hand, we measure all
forms of innovation, including investments in novel business processes protected by trade
secrets or incremental product innovations.4 On the other hand, the dataset provides selfreported measures of intended business strategies, which allows us to measure whether
firms have innovation or low-cost production as their top strategic priority; see Yang,
Kueng and Hong (2015) for more details. Our measures of intended strategies have the
additional advantage that they are not outcome variables such as patenting and therefore
allow an analysis free of hindsight bias, which would confound the effects of luck with the
effects of intended firm policies and would therefore potentially ignore the risks associated
with innovation activities. Moreover these business strategy and innovation measures are
available for all firms and therefore allow us to contrast the impact of Chinese competition
2

See e.g., Autor, Dorn, Hanson, Pisano and Shu (2016b) or Hombert and Matray (2014).
Note that this off-shoring mechanism has very different implications for innovation of rich country
firms, as flow profits of firms that benefit from outsourcing would increase, thereby increasing innovation
incentives.
4
Another advantage of using survey data on innovation rather than patenting data is the increasing
popularity of patenting as a strategic tool by incumbents vs. entrants (Boldrin and Levine (2013)) as well
as a rent extraction tool by patent trolls (Tucker (2014)). From this perspective a fall in patenting in
response to more competition from China might just reflect the fact that domestic firms in high-income
countries recognize that they cannot enforce domestic patents against Chinese competitors and therefore
reduce patent applications.
3

INTERNATIONAL COMPETITION, INNOVATION, AND BUSINESS STRATEGY

3

on strategy and innovation decisions as a function of initial firm heterogeneity, such as
for small vs. large firms.
Third, because detailed data on the geographical scope of firms is scarce, most existing studies of the impact of low-wage import competition on innovation typically ignore
whether a given firm produces for the national market or a local niche market only. Yet,
as Holmes and Stevens (2014) show, local niche manufacturers in the US have been systematically less affected by Chinese import competition. We provide a unified empirical
perspective of firms’ innovation and business strategy responses as a function of initial
size, initial strategy and initial geographic scope.
Our identification strategy mirrors the empirical approach by Autor, Dorn and Hanson
(2013) who utilize the massive expansion of Chinese exports in the wake of China’s WTO
accession as a natural experiment. Similar to Bernard et al. (2006) for the US and
Bloom et al. (2015) for Europe, we find that increased import competition from China
led Canadian manufacturing firms to strongly contract in terms of market share and
employment and significantly increase the likelihood of exit. In terms of firm policy
responses, we find that Canadian manufacturing firms systematically reduced innovations
in response to increased import competition from China, consistent with the results of
Autor et al. (2016b) for large U.S. firms. Furthermore, this reduction in innovative activity
is strongly driven by a drop in process innovation rather than product innovation, similar
to the findings by Bena and Simintzi (2015).
However, these pooled results mask very different responses for firms with different
initial characteristics, which we define as firm characteristics in the years before China
joins the WTO. We emphasize three sets of results in particular. First, initial size is
important to gauge whether the average drop in process innovation could indeed be driven
by off-shoring, as large firms are more likely to off-shore to low-wage economies than
smaller firms. In this context, we find that the drop in process innovation is indeed
stronger for small firms. At the same time, small surviving firms in Canada seemed to
have systematically shifted away from low-cost as their top strategic priority in response
to Chinese import competition. These responses are consistent with small firms utilizing
cost-saving process innovations if they compete on low costs, but do not pursue such
process innovations if they shift away from low cost as their top strategic priority. In
complementary work, Yang et al. (2015) show that firms with low cost as their top strategic
priority indeed systematically pursue process innovations.
Our second set of results focuses on differential firm responses as a function of initial
business strategy. We find that firms stating innovation as their top strategic priority
in the years before China joins the WTO grow larger if they survive. However, we also

4

LORENZ KUENG, NICOLAS LI, AND MU-JEUNG YANG

find that firms with initial innovation strategies are more likely to exit in response to
import competition from China. These results suggest that low-wage competition renders
innovation strategies more risky, a finding that can potentially be explained by a model in
which most innovating firms focus on narrow product lines that risk becoming unprofitable
as Chinese low-cost competitors enter; see e.g., Fernandes and Paunov (2015).
Our third set of results utilizes our detailed geographic data to investigate whether a
very narrow geographic scope shields Canadian manufacturing firms from Chinese competition. We find a risk increases similar to the effects of innovation strategy. In particular,
firms specializing in selling to local markets—defined as the municipality or county of the
firm’s location—are more likely to exit in response to Chinese competition. At the same
time, if these local firms survive, they are systematically less affected in terms of market
share losses than firms that earn most of their revenues the national Canadian market.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 1 discusses the data utilized
throughout the paper and the methodology to identify the causal effect of increases in
Chinese import competition on various outcomes for Canadian firms. Section 2 lays
out our empirical results and section 3 provides additional robustness checks. Section 4
concludes.

1 Data and Methodology
1.1 Data
Our confidential firm-level data come from Canada’s Workplace and Employment Survey (WES), a random stratified sample conducted by Statistics Canada with the universe
of Canadian firms as the sampling frame.5 The survey is stratified by (NAICS 4-digit) industry, firm size and region, and we use the population weights provided for all summary
statistics and regressions. Firm size classes are based on employment bins and throughout the paper we use the WES classification of “small” (between 1 and 19 employees),
“medium” (between 20 and 499 employees) and “large” (500 or more employees). We
use data from the 1999, 2001, 2003, and 2005 waves of the survey.6 The data is a panel
with re-sampling due to firm exit or attrition. We restrict our attention to manufacturing
firms (NAICS industry codes with 3 as the first digit) since Chinese exports are heavily
concentrated in manufacturing with an export share of more than 80% over our sample
periods; see Autor, Dorn and Hanson (2016a). This gives us a starting sample of 1370
5
See http://www23.statcan.gc.ca/imdb/p2SV.pl?Function=getSurvey&SDDS=2615 for the WES
questionnaire. The online appendix reprints sections G and H of the survey for convenience.
6
The survey is conducted every year from 1999 to 2006. Information about business strategies is
asked every other year.

INTERNATIONAL COMPETITION, INNOVATION, AND BUSINESS STRATEGY

5

firms, of which about 900 survive until the end of the period depending on which outcomes
we examine.
A unique aspect of the WES data is that it contains detailed measures of firms’ (exante) intended strategies to deal with increased competition as well as firm (ex-post)
outcomes, such as innovation and current performance. Table 1 presents summary statistics for our main variables, which we now describe in detail. Note that the sample contains
a good mix of small, medium and large firms although the latter two classes are significantly over-sampled on purpose and make up a much smaller share of the total firm
population.
Firm business strategies are measured in Section G of the WES. Firms are asked to
rate the importance of 15 different strategies on a five point scale from “Not important” to
“Crucial,” with strategies ranging from expansion to new markets, new products, quality
management, and cost reductions. We focus on two sets of strategies that prove contrasting but plausible responses to low-cost import competition, innovation strategy and
low-cost strategy. Innovation strategy corresponds to three specific questions: “Undertaking research and development,” “Developing new products/services,” and “Developing
new production/operating techniques.” Low-cost strategy corresponds to two different
questions: “Reducing labour costs” and “Reducing other operating costs.”
An important measurement issue we face is that respondents are asked to assign a
numerical value from 1 to 5 to the importance of factors like “improving quality” or “lowering cost”, with higher values reflecting higher strategic importance. These numerical
values by themselves seem problematic, especially when comparing responses across respondents. Specifically, it seems that some respondents systematically rate all strategic
factors higher on average, considering more or less everything as important, while others
rate all factors particularly low. These difference reference points make a direct comparison of numerical Likert-scores across respondents and therefore across firms potentially
problematic. To deal with this issue we construct two different strategy measures, which
capture the essence of the specific research questions we aim to answer.
First, for cross-firm comparisons, such as differences in the competitive response as
function of initial strategy, we construct top strategic priorities. These are defined as
indicator variables equal to one if the firm considers the factors to be more or at least
equally important to any other strategic factors listed. We also require a strategic factor to
be considered at least “important” (a score of 3) to be considered a strategic priority. This
strategic priority variable has the advantage that it extracts mostly ordinal information on
the strategic priorities of the firm and therefore avoids the comparison of mean responses
across respondents. We use it especially for comparing differential responses to Chinese

6

LORENZ KUENG, NICOLAS LI, AND MU-JEUNG YANG

competition across firms, as a function of these priorities.
Second, we also construct a more continuous measure for the purpose of analyzing
within-firm changes in strategies as a response to the increase in emerging market competition. Our rationale is that when we ask “How much did the importance of this strategy
change over time?”, we ideally want to rely on within-firm variation. However, even when
only using within-firm variation, there remains an issue if survey respondents change over
time within the same firm. To deal with this issue we adjust these measures of strategic
changes by subtracting the average importance of the relevant strategy questions relative
to other strategic factors. Specifically, we first subtract the mean importance score of
all 15 strategy questions for each firm (thereby normalizing the importance of a particular strategy relative to the others within a firm) and then average across the relevant
questions for innovation or low-cost strategy listed above.
Table 1, panel A, reveals that innovation strategies are relatively rare in Canadian
manufacturing in 1999—only about 7% of firms rate it as a top priority (about 9% of
our unweighted sample which over-represents larger firms). Low cost strategies are more
common, as about 18% of firms list this as a top priority. Table 1, panel B, indicates that
among the firms that survived from 1999 to 2005, there has been a much greater increase
in the relative importance of low cost strategies (an increase of 20 percentage points (pp))
than innovation strategies (an increase of 8 pp) although both roughly doubled relative
to their baseline in 1999 and both gained in importance relative to other strategies.
Section G of the WES also contains several questions measuring perceptions of competition. Firms are asked “to what extent do these firms offer significant competition to your
business” and respond based on a similar five point importance scale (with “don’t know”
as an additional category), with separate items for locally-owned firms, Canadian-owned
firms, US-owned firms, and Other internationally-owned firms. This allows us assess
the increase in Chinese import competition we measure in the data is actually salient to
Canadian firms, something that is typically taken for granted. We measure changes in the
perception of foreign (non-US) competition by taking the perceived importance of competition from “Other internationally-owned” firms and subtracting the mean importance of
competition from all four sources (local, Canadian, US, non-US foreign), which like before
normalizes our measure to capture changes in the relative importance of competition from
this source within a firm. We construct a similar measure of perceived competition from
U.S.-owned firms, which we will use as a placebo for testing our “objective” measure that
uses actual Chinese import competition.7 As revealed in Table 1 Panel B, among firms
7

We recognize that this is not a perfect placebo since Chinese competition could also affect competition
from U.S. firms. However, we would expect this indirect effect to be much smaller than the direct effect
of Chinese imports to Canada.

INTERNATIONAL COMPETITION, INNOVATION, AND BUSINESS STRATEGY

7

that survived from 1999-2005 the increase in perceived importance of competition from
“Other internationally-owned” firms was over three times as large as for US firms (16%
vs. 5%).
The WES asks detailed questions about innovation outcomes and technology expenditures. Section H asks whether the firm introduced new or improved products during
the previous year and whether it introduced new or improved processes. Based on the
response, we construct distinct measures of product versus process innovation for each
firm by taking the cumulative number of years the firm innovated over the period we
examine (1999-2005 for our main analysis, two-year periods for our robustness check).
Note that the average firm in our data innovates quite frequently based on this variable.
Table 1 reveals that for the average firm that survived the seven-year period from 1999
to 2005 there were 4.4 years involving some product innovation and 3.9 years involving
some process innovation. One reason innovation is so high in our data is that product and
process innovation need not correspond to a patent or world-first innovation. The survey
explicitly recognizes that an innovation could be a world-first but could also be a Canada
first or a local market first which may simply involve adoption of existing ideas and technologies. Although the mean innovation is high, the standard deviation is also high,
consistent with a wide variance of innovation outcomes across firms. Section I asks about
the firm’s technology use, classified as computers, computer-controlled/computer-assisted
technology (e.g. robotics, optical or laser technology) and other major implementations
of technologies or machineries. Our measure of technology adoption is simply the total
estimated cost of adopting any of these new technologies cumulated over the relevant
period, normalized by initial revenue in 1999. The average surviving firm in our data
spent resources equivalent to 8.4% of its 1999 revenue on technology adoption over the
1999-2005 period.
The WES also provides detailed data on the geographic scope of each firm’s market
based on the percentage of total firm revenues that accrue from the local market, national
Canadian market, US market, and international non-US market. Local markets are defined as counties or municipalities in which the firms are located. We use these measures
to classify firms into three types – “local” firms are those that only sell to the local market,
“national” firms also sell to the Canadian market but do not export, and “exporters” are
firms that also sell goods outside of Canada. Based on this classification, approximately
40% of Canadian manufacturing firms export, 60% sell in the domestic market only, with
40% having very localized sales.
Finally, the WES contains several variables that can be used to assess firm performance. Although the WES does not contain the capital or input data we would need to

8

LORENZ KUENG, NICOLAS LI, AND MU-JEUNG YANG

estimate productivity, firms are asked to report their revenues, total employment, gross
payroll, and operating profits (defined as revenues minus operating expenses) from the
previous year. We use and report these variables in log changes except for profits (due
to negative values), for which we calculate the change in operating profits normalized by
initial revenues, i.e., the operating profit margin. The average Canadian manufacturing
firm that survives from 1999 to 2005 sees substantial growth of revenue, payroll and profits over the period (from 15-25% total over a seven-year period) but very low employment
growth (under 4% over a seven-year period).

1.2 Identification
Our main objective is to estimate the causal effect of increases in Chinese import competition on various outcomes for Canadian firms. We measure the strength of Chinese
import competition using the share of Chinese imports over total imports within a 4-digit
NAICS industry. Between 1999 and 2005 the average 4-digit NAICS manufacturing sector
experienced a rise in Chinese import share from 2.8% to 7.4%, but for some industries the
increase was much larger. Figure 1 plots the initial share of Chinese imports in 1999 for
each of the 85 4-digit NAICS industries against the subsequent change, revealing a wide
dispersion across industries that serves as our main source of identifying variation. For
instance, China’s contribution to Canadian imports in 1999 was particularly high in “apparel accessories” and “footwear” with shares of about 25%. Accordingly, in the six-year
period from 1999 to 2005 in which China’s exports increased dramatically, these shares
increased by another 13-15%. On the other hand, industries like “dairy” or “printing”
had low Chinese import shares in 1999 and also experienced only modest increases over
the subsequent six years.
Our estimation strategy is based on using cross-industry differences in the change in
Chinese import shares to identify the effects of competition on Canadian firms, where we
include firm and time fixed effects. That is, we estimate specifications like equation (1):
∆yi,s = α + β · ∆Competitions + i,s ,

(1)

where y is the firm-level outcome of interest and Competitions is the increase in the
Chinese import share in industry s. Given the short nature of our panel and the potentially
delayed response of firm variables—particularly business strategies and innovation—to
changes in Chinese import competition, our main specification uses a long-differenced
version of equation (1) where we take differences from 1999 to 2005 within each firm for
the set of firms that survive throughout the period. In section 3 we show that our main

INTERNATIONAL COMPETITION, INNOVATION, AND BUSINESS STRATEGY

9

results are robust to using two-year differences instead. For regressions where firm exit
is the outcome of interest, we simply use a dummy variable equal to one for firms that
exited by 2005 and zero otherwise.
One potential concern about estimating equation (1) by OLS is that the changes in
Chinese import share that we observe are correlated with industry-level Canadian demand
shocks or industry-level Canadian technology/supply-side shocks. For instance, Canadian
demand for textiles might have increased in this seven-year period, which could have led
to an increase in China’s import share in this industry. Alternatively, suppose better
value-chain management by Canadian firms makes it less costly to off-shore production
to China. This better technology makes textiles cheaper and hence increases sales. At
the same time, it also makes off-shoring to China more likely and thus increases import
shipments of textiles from China to Canada.
Our use of Chinese import share relative to other importers (similar to Bloom et al.
(2015)) mitigates this concern as we are essentially using China’s growing competitiveness
against other major exporters rather than Canada. However, there could still be demand
shocks for Chinese goods or technology/supply-side shocks that are correlated between
Canada and other advanced economies that export to Canada. Our main solution for
this problem is to use the initial Chinese share of imports in 1999 as an instrument for
future Chinese import growth at the industry level, following Bloom et al. (2015). The
idea behind the IV strategy is that WTO accession and productivity growth in China
during this period led to growing competitiveness of Chinese goods in industries in which
China already held a comparative advantage. Figure 1, which plots the growth of Chinese
import shares against the initial Chinese import share for each NAICS 4-digit industry,
shows that this correlation is fairly high, and we generally find F-statistics above 10 in
the first-stage of our instrumental variable regressions. We provide further reassurance
that our main results are not driven by industry time-trends (in either supply or demand)
in the robustness section where we use multiple two-year differences and industry fixed
effects in conjunction with this IV strategy.

2 Results
In this section we discuss the results obtained from the analysis described in the previous section. We start by reporting the effect of increased Chinese competition from 1999
to 2005 on the average Canadian manufacturing firm. We then leverage the representativeness of our sample to study how the effect of Chinese competition varies across firms,
based in their initial characteristics.

10

LORENZ KUENG, NICOLAS LI, AND MU-JEUNG YANG

2.1 Average Effects of Chinese Import Competition on Surviving
Firms
Table 2 presents the average effect of Chinese import competition in a sector on firm
performance outcomes based on equation (1) estimated in long-differences (1999-2005).
Standard errors are clustered by NAICS 4-digit industries throughout. While the IV
specifications are consistent with generally negative effects of rising import competition
on the revenues, employment and profits of surviving firms, the standard errors are too
large to reject a zero effect. This may be partly due to lack of statistical power but also due
to selection effects on the worst performing firms. Survivors might be the best performing
firms which would lead to an upward bias that could partially offset the negative effect of
increased Chinese import competition. Indeed, we find large negative effects on firm exit
that are statistically significant in our IV specification. The coefficient implies that the
4 percentage point increase in Chinese import share between 1999-2005 led to the exit of
3.4% of the firms sampled in 1999 over that period, which is very large relative to the
17% overall exit rate of these firms.
When firms face increased foreign competition, how do they react strategically? Table
3 presents the results for low-cost strategies and innovation strategies for firms that survive
until 2005. It is useful to point out that our summary statistics on the strategic changes
in Table 1 suggested that firms on average placed more priorities on the two strategies of
innovation and low-cost. However, as the OLS results in Table 3 show, these aggregate
changes are not necessarily driven by changes in Chinese import competition. While it is
true that more firms pursued an innovation strategy in sectors that saw increased import
competition from China, the same is not true for low-cost strategies. Here, we find that
stronger import competition from China is correlated with firms shifting away from lowcost as their top strategic priority. At first sight, these correlations seem consistent with
the notion that firms with low-cost strategies offer products that are closer substitutes
to products offered by Chinese producers. These correlations are also consistent with
theories in which firms pursue product differentiation to shield themselves against lowcost competition from China, as in Amiti and Khandelwal (2013). On the other hand, it
is important to re-emphasize that there are potentially important reasons the correlations
might not actually reflect these types of competitive effects. As previously discussed, it is
possible that sectoral technology shocks might drive these correlations. An example for
a sectoral technology shock that might drive these correlations is increased efficiency in
supply chain management, which allows companies to more easily offshore production to
China. As a result, companies might have focused more on product design and product

INTERNATIONAL COMPETITION, INNOVATION, AND BUSINESS STRATEGY

11

innovation rather than adopting cost-saving process innovations, therefore shifting their
strategic priority from low-cost to innovation. This example could therefore explain not
just the strategic shift from low cost to innovation strategies but also increased import
volumes from China, as companies get more intermediate products from there.
Our IV strategy of exploiting initial comparative advantage patterns helps to explicitly
address this concern. As shown in Table 3, the IV results do indeed substantially differ
from the simple OLS results, reinforcing the notion that sectoral technology shocks are
an important omitted variable. In fact, the IV results suggest that the response to more
import competition from China, firms on average do shift away from both low-cost and
innovation strategies, although the impact is not statistically significant for the sample of
surviving firms.
We next turn to the innovation outcomes in response to Chinese competition. We are
particularly interested in the different responses to competition, depending on whether
the innovation type is a process or a product innovation. To put our analysis into perspective, it is helpful to clarify what specifically differentiates these two types of innovations.
Product innovations describe novel products or incremental product improvements that
increase buyer utility. Examples for such product innovations include improved userfriendliness of software or new products such as a new generation of mobile devices.
In contrast, process innovations describe improvements in a firm’s operations of manufacturing, delivery or support services, which leave the nature of the product relatively
unaffected. Examples include automation of a production process, implementation of justin-time inventory techniques, bar-coded tracking of goods, or implementation of enterprise
resource software for internal accounting. Another example is the implementation of the
new waste-minimizing cutting scheme for soccer balls used by Atkin, Chaudhry, Chaudry,
Khandelwal and Verhoogen (2015) in their analysis of technology adoption in Pakistani
soccer ball producers. What these examples have in common is that the actual product is
not changed, while the process improvement often results in waste minimization and cost
reduction. This view is consistent with the interpretation by Bena and Simintzi (2015),
who interpret process innovations as primarily reducing labor costs. Furthermore, in complementary work, Yang et al. (2015) show that firms pursuing low-cost as top strategic
priority are indeed more likely to implement incremental process innovations.
With this difference between product and process innovations in mind, it seems natural that increased competition from a low-cost country such as China might have different
effects on the incentives to pursue product as compared to process innovation. In particular, in the spirit of Khandelwal (2010) and Sutton (2012), firms with novel products or
with higher quality products might lose less market share to low-cost Chinese competi-

12

LORENZ KUENG, NICOLAS LI, AND MU-JEUNG YANG

tors which might imply that innovation incentives are not strongly affected. In contrast,
if firms utilize process innovations to generate cost advantages, as is consistent with the
evidence in Yang et al. (2015), then more Chinese competition might reduce the returns
to process innovations very strongly. As a consequence, one would expect that incentives
to pursue process innovations are drastically reduced.
We do indeed find evidence that the innovation response of firms to Chinese competition depends on the type of innovation as can be seen in Table 4. On the one hand,
there are very strong and robust negative effects of Chinese import competition on process
innovation of surviving firms. The average surviving firm innovated in almost 4 out of
the 7 years between 1999 and 2005, but the average effect of Chinese import competition
lowers this by about 0.6 years. On the other hand, we find a much weaker effect of Chinese
import competition on product innovation, where the Chinese import coefficient is not
significant in the IV specification (and only marginally in the OLS) and the magnitude of
the effect is only about a tenth of the size for product innovation as compared to process
innovation.
We also find smaller and statistically insignificant negative effects on technology expenditures. At first, these results seem somewhat different from the technology adoption choices of European companies found in Bloom et al. (2015), who reported that IT
spending per employee increased in response to Chinese import competition. However,
it is important to note that our measures of technology are more comprehensive than
measures used by Bloom et al. (2015), since they include not just IT spending but also
any spending on new technologies other than IT.
Overall, our results support theories in which process innovations are complementary
with market size and hence tend to decrease as competition rises, while product innovations that potentially allow firms to escape from competition with low-wage competitors
are less strongly affected.

2.2 Heterogeneity of effects by initial firm characteristics
While the specification in equation (1) above captures the average effects of industrylevel competition from Chinese imports on continuing firms, we are particularly interested
in the heterogeneity of these competition effects across different types of firms. To measure
this heterogeneity we interact our competition measure with several dimensions of firm
heterogeneity measured at baseline in 1999 using the following specification (2):
∆yi,s = α + β · Competitions + γ · Zi,1999 + η · ∆Competitions × Zi,1999 + i,s .

(2)

INTERNATIONAL COMPETITION, INNOVATION, AND BUSINESS STRATEGY

13

The main sources of heterogeneity Z we consider are motivated by the prior theoretical
and empirical literature, namely size, business strategy, and geographic concentration of
sales.
2.2.1

Initial size

Models of competition with firm heterogeneity and entry/exit, such as Melitz (2003)
predict that an increase in competition will lead to the exit of the least productive firms,
which are also typically the smallest. At the same time, the baseline Melitz model does
not feature differences in product quality so that percentage revenue losses from Chinese
competition for small firms should not differ much from percentage revenues losses for
large firms.
Beyond the consideration of these basic extensive and intensive margin effects of Chinese import competition, we are also interested in treatment effects by initial firm size to
understand potential mechanisms through which Chinese import competition affects firm
dynamics. We documented in section 2.1 that on average, process innovation at Canadian
companies significantly fell, while there was no significant effect of Chinese import competition on business strategy. One possible explanation for these findings could be along the
lines of Bena and Simintzi (2015), who find that more offshoring to China is correlated
with a fall in process innovation patents at large, publicly traded US companies. As a
result, our aggregate findings in section 2.1, might reflect the fact that large companies
use offshoring instead of process innovation to pursue low-cost strategies and are therefore
less likely to change their business strategy away from low cost. In this context, initial size
is a particularly useful dimension of heterogeneity, as offshoring is likely to be primarily
pursued by large companies with global value chains.
Table 5 documents the responses to Chinese import competition as a function of initial
firm size. Note that we treat small firms (1-19 employees) as the omitted category and
include interactions of our competition measure with dummies for medium and large size
firms. Starting with firm exit, our baseline IV estimates show that more import competition from China significantly increased exit of small firms, consistent with the predictions
of a basic Melitz model. Additionally, note that the interaction effects for medium and
large firms are negative and the combined effect of Chinese import competition on exit
for larger firms is close to zero (and not statistically different than zero).
Column 2 of Table 5 moves to the analysis of intensive margin effects for the sample of
firms that survive from 1999 to 2005. We find that, conditional on survival, firm revenue is
not affected differently across size classes. This again is consistent with a baseline Melitz
model of monopolistic competition with productivity heterogeneity across producers.

14

LORENZ KUENG, NICOLAS LI, AND MU-JEUNG YANG

The next columns of Table 5 allow us to focus in on the mechanisms driving our
process innovation and business strategy results. In particular, column 3 shows that the
negative response of process innovation to Chinese import competition is mainly driven
by the smallest firms in our sample. As a result, using offshoring to China as substitute
for cost-saving process innovations seems unlikely to explain our aggregate results. This
is especially the case, as the interaction effect on the largest firms is positive, even if it
is not statistically significant. This conclusion is further reinforced by our finding that
the reductions in process innovation are less pronounced among very large firms, the very
firms that are most likely to be able to benefit from production offshoring to China.
The last two columns of Table 5 illustrate that there are important differences in
the strategic response to Chinese competition for small vs. large firms. Conditional
on survival, large and medium-sized firms are more likely to switch towards low cost
strategies, which would be consistent with greater potential for reducing employment or
eliminating less profitable product lines and activities for these types of firms. In contrast,
smaller surviving firms are less likely to prioritize cost reduction as a result of more Chinese
competition. This is consistent with a model in which small firms are only able to survive
if they systematically switch away from low-cost as strategic priority. Taken together,
the responses by firm size are consistent with the view that Chinese competition affected
producers competing on low-cost particularly hard in contrast to average responses in
section 2.1. These insignificant results for shifts away from low-cost strategy in section
2.1 could be driven by the fact that small surviving firms had to systematically shift away
from low-cost, while large surviving firms had more potential for cost-cutting and therefore
shifted towards low-cost as strategic priority. Finally, regarding innovation strategies, we
did not find any average increase in the importance of this business strategy, and do not
find statistically different results across firms of different size.
2.2.2

Initial business strategy

In this section we explore the question of whether firms were affected differently as a
function of their initial business strategy. This question is of special relevance in the light
of prior studies by Amiti and Khandelwal (2013) and Bloom et al. (2015), which suggest
that firms pursing higher quality products or deploying more advanced technologies are
more insulated from the adverse effects of Chinese competition. This seems to suggest that
firms in advanced economies such as Canada should pursue innovation to shield themselves
against competition from low-wage countries such as China. It is worth emphasizing
at this point that a particularly attractive feature of our empirical analysis is the use
of measures of initially intended business strategies. The reason is that these initially

INTERNATIONAL COMPETITION, INNOVATION, AND BUSINESS STRATEGY

15

intended strategies are not outcome measures such as patent applications and technology
adoption and therefore avoid hindsight bias: a company that was lucky enough to be
granted a patent before the rise of Chinese competition will outperform others due to
the direct effect of patent monopoly rights as opposed to product or process innovations
pursued.8
Therefore, the key question is whether firms that initially pursue innovation as their
top strategic priority are performing better in response to increased Chinese competition
than firms not pursuing this strategy. Additionally, our strategy measures also enable
us to analyze the flip side of this question. Do firms that pursue low-cost as their top
strategic priority initially tend to underperform other firms when Chinese import competition increases? Low-cost firms might be harder hit if we think their products are less
differentiated than those of Chinese firms and import competition from China undermines
their main source of appeal, whereas innovative firms might be less affected.
Turning to our results, Table 6 examines whether firms that had different strategic
priorities in 1999 had different responses to rising Chinese imports over the 1999-2005
period. We document interactions of Chinese import competition with dummies for firms
that made innovation a top priority (8% of the initial sample) or that made low costs
a top priority (20% of the initial sample). The first three columns of Table 6 display
the effect of Chinese competition on exit as well as revenue and payroll conditional on
survival, as a function of whether firms initially pursued innovation as top strategic priority. The surprising result is that exit probabilities sharply increase for firms pursing
innovation strategies. The magnitudes are large and imply that firms initially pursuing
an innovation strategy are four times more likely to exit in response to increase Chinese
competition than firms that do not pursue such as strategy (a coefficient of 2.8 as opposed
to 0.7). This finding might be considered unusual in the context of other empirical and
theoretical studies, which suggest that higher product quality or better technology helps
companies mitigate the impact of competition from low-wage emerging markets such as
China. However, our results can be reconciled with such findings if one focuses on the
effects of Chinese competition on the sample of surviving firms. As reported in columns
two and three of Table 6, it seems that conditional on survival, firms with innovation
strategies do significantly better than firms without innovation strategies. As the results
show, surviving firms with innovation strategies increase their revenue on average while
reducing their payroll costs. In other words, gross profits defined as revenues minus payroll costs, are increasing. Although more Chinese competition makes exit for firms with
8

This point applies even if patent applications are used instead of granted patents. In this case, it
is the luck related to finding a patentable technology as opposed to a non-patentable technology that is
the omitted outcome that is directly correlated with firm performance.

16

LORENZ KUENG, NICOLAS LI, AND MU-JEUNG YANG

innovation strategies more likely, revenue and profits are also more likely to increase, conditional on survival. Seen together, these results suggest that innovation strategies do
not just deterministically insulate firms from Chinese competition. Instead, innovation
strategies seem to imply higher risk: they increase the probability of failure, but also
systematically promise higher profits if the company survives.
Contrasting the results of innovation strategies with low-cost strategies is particularly
instructive, as the last three columns of Table 6 show. Although the likelihood of exit
seems to increase for firms initially pursing low-cost strategies, the extent of the increase
is smaller and statistically insignificant. Furthermore, there are important differences for
the sample of low-cost firms that survives. Like the firms pursuing an innovation strategy,
low-cost firms do exhibit some increases in revenues, if anything. However, a big difference compared to innovation firms is that low-cost firms also see an increase in overall
payroll costs. As a consequence, average gross profits appear to fall for low-cost firms.
The increase in payroll costs indicated that surviving low-cost firms do not necessarily
become smaller in response to more Chinese competition. On the contrary, these results
are consistent with the view that surviving low-cost firms meet Chinese competition by
aggressively reducing margins and striving for higher volumes. Contrasting the competitive responses of low-cost strategy firms to firms pursuing an innovations strategy we
note that performance results for low-cost strategy firms seem more uniformly negative.
Even as increased exit probabilities are marginally insignificant, even for surviving lowcost companies, gross profits seem to fall, in contrast to increasing gross profits for firms
with innovation strategies. Indeed, while the empirical evidence for innovation strategies
points to higher risks for these firms, the evidence for low-cost companies is reminiscent of
more classical notions that more competition is depressing profits margins, as in the literature on pro-competitive effects of trade such as Melitz and Ottaviano (2008), Arkolakis,
Costinot, Donaldson and Rodrı́guez-Clare (2015) and Feenstra and Weinstein (2010).
2.2.3

Initial geographic scope

While much of the empirical analysis in the previous subsections was focused on how
differentiation along the product space might mitigate the impact of Chinese competition, in this section we pursue a complementary margin. Specifically, previous empirical
research by Holmes and Stevens (2014) has identified the possibility that firms that specialize in local niche production might be less affected by Chinese import competition
than firms that produce for the mass market at greater scale. As previously mentioned, a
particularly attractive feature of our data is that it provides a breakdown of revenues by
market, which might be local county or municipality, national market or export markets.

INTERNATIONAL COMPETITION, INNOVATION, AND BUSINESS STRATEGY

17

While exporting and focus on local markets are obviously correlated with firm size, there is
also plenty of overlap across categories, with small exporters as well as large firms that do
not export. Following the geographic market segmentation model of Holmes and Stevens
(2014), one would expect that firms focusing on local niche markets are less affected by
Chinese competition. This should show up in lower revenue losses in response to Chinese
competition as well as in lower exit probabilities for local niche market firms.
Table 7 explores the heterogeneous effects of competition for firms that focus on the
local or national markets versus those that export. Note that firms initially drawing all
their revenues from local counties or municipalities are the omitted baseline category.
Perhaps surprisingly in light of our earlier discussion, we find that firms that sell only to
local markets are more likely to exit due to foreign competition while this effect appears
to be muted for firms that sell nationally or export.
On the other hand, the effects on revenue are consistent with more negative effects
for surviving firms that export or sell to national markets, as documented in columns two
and three of Table 7. Indeed, firms that only sell locally appear to face no change in
revenues, while exporting firms see a significant drop in their revenues. Note that payroll
at nationally competing firms or exporters contracts in a fashion similar to the revenue
contraction. This is consistent with the view that conditional on survival, firms with
broad geographic scope are losing market share and contract more relative to local niche
market firms.
Taken together, these exit and intensive margin results are reminiscent of the higher
risk mechanism we emphasized for innovation strategy firms in the last section. Firms
focusing on local niche markets face a higher risk of exit in response to Chinese competition, but if they survive, the adverse effects of Chinese are strongly attenuated. In this
respect, the pursuit of geographic differentiation seems to be similar to the pursuit of
differentiation along the product space dimension.

3 Robustness
Our empirical approach has been widely employed in the literature, but there is a
concern that increases in Chinese import competition (in changes or initial levels) are
correlated with industry time-trends in technology or demand for Chinese products. Although our data only cover a short period, by constructing a panel with up to three
two-year periods for each firm we are able to use variation in the increase in Chinese
imports for different periods to achieve identification that does not rely exclusively on the

18

LORENZ KUENG, NICOLAS LI, AND MU-JEUNG YANG

industry cross-section. Specifically, we can estimate
∆yi,s,t = β · ∆Competitions,t + δs + δt + i,s,t ,

(3)

where ∆ denotes differences within-firm, and δs are NAICS 4-digit industry dummies that
control flexibly for (linear) time-trends. When estimating equation (3) with instrumental
variables, we use a standard “shift-share” instrument based on interacting the initial share
of Chinese imports in the sector (in 1999) with the total change in Chinese exports to
the world. The idea is that periods in which Chinese exports are booming more should
also be periods during which Canadian firms in sectors for which China had an initial
comparative advantage, should experience greater competition.
Table 8 presents the results from this robustness exercise for our major outcomes,
providing both the OLS version of equation (3) without industry fixed effects, IV results
without industry fixed effects, and IV results that include the industry fixed effects.
The results confirm our earlier findings that surviving firms decrease process innovation
and experience some negative effects on revenues, employment and profits (note that
while some of the effects are now significantly negative the magnitudes for revenue and
employment are virtually identical). This provides some reassurance that our results are
not simply driven by a spurious correlation between Chinese import share and pre-existing
trends in process innovation across industries.

4 Conclusions
Motivated by the recent emergence of China as a major international competitor, we
empirically analyzed the implications of this competitive shock for firm dynamics in the
Canadian manufacturing sector. Our baseline results for average firms, including small
and privately-held companies, are consistent with US studies of large, publicly traded
Compustat firms. In particular, we document a strong decrease in process innovations
in response to more Chinese competition that contrasts with a more muted response of
product innovation. Furthermore, initial heterogeneity in business strategy turns out
to be important for understanding the aggregate responses. Our findings indicate that
business strategies pursuing differentiation along product space or geographic dimensions
leave firms systematically exposed to higher risk. On the one hand, exit likelihoods in
response to Chinese competition increase. On the other hand, adverse effects of Chinese
competition on profits are attenuated if companies manage to survive. These empirical
results add a more nuanced perspective to recent studies of the response of rich country
firms to increased competition from emerging markets. Additionally, they suggest that

INTERNATIONAL COMPETITION, INNOVATION, AND BUSINESS STRATEGY

19

adding risk-return trade-offs to models of international trade and innovation will significantly enhance our understanding of firm dynamics. Note that this additional risk margin
is directly related to an aggregate competitive shock. This means that it will influence
common, non-diversifiable risks and might therefore influence risk pricing. Such a model
might therefore link international trade, innovation and asset pricing. This is a topic,
that we leave for future research.

References
Aghion, Philippe and Peter Howitt, “A Model of Growth through Creative Destruction,”
Econometrica, 1992, 60 (2).
Amiti, Mary and Amit K. Khandelwal, “Import Competition and Quality Upgrading,”
Review of Economics and Statistics, 2013, 95 (2), 476–490.
Arkolakis, Costas, Arnaud Costinot, Dave Donaldson, and Andrés Rodrı́guez-Clare, “The
Elusive Pro-Competitive Effects of Trade,” Working Paper, 2015.
Atkeson, Andrew and Ariel T. Burstein, “Innovation, Firm Dynamics, and International
Trade,” Journal of Political Economy, 2010, 118 (3), 433–484.
Atkin, David, Azam Chaudhry, Shamyla Chaudry, Amit Khandelwal, and Eric A. Verhoogen, “Organizational Barriers to Technology Adoption: Evidence from Soccer-Ball
Producers in Pakistan,” Working Paper, 2015.
Autor, David H., David Dorn, and Gordon H. Hanson, “The China Syndrome: Local
Labor Market Effects of Import Competition in the United States,” American Economic
Review, 2013, 103 (6), 2121–2168.
, , and , “The China Shock: Learning from Local Labor Market Adjustment to
Large Changes in Trade,” Working Paper, 2016.
, , , Gary Pisano, and Pian Shu, “Foreign Competition and Domestic Innovation:
Evidence from US Patents,” Working Paper, 2016.
Bena, Jan and Elena Simintzi, “Labor-Induced Technological Change: Evidence from
Doing Business in China,” Working Paper, 2015.
Bernard, Andrew B., J. Bradford Jensen, and Peter K. Schott, “Survival of the Best
Fit: Exposure to Low-Wage Countries and the (Uneven) Growth of US Manufacturing
Plants,” Journal of International Economics, 2006, 68 (1), 219–237.
Bloom, Nicholas, Mirko Draca, and John Van Reenen, “Trade-Induced Technical Change?
The Impact of Chinese Imports on Innovation, IT and Productivity,” Review of Economic Studies, 2015.
, Paul M. Romer, Stephen J. Terry, and John Van Reenen, “Trapped Factors and

20

LORENZ KUENG, NICOLAS LI, AND MU-JEUNG YANG

China’s Impact on Global Growth,” Working Paper, 2014.
Boldrin, Michele and David K. Levine, “The Case Against Patents,” Journal of Economic
Perspectives, 2013, 27 (1), 3–22.
Feenstra, Robert C. and David E. Weinstein, “Globalization, Markups and US Welfare,”
Working Paper, 2010.
Fernandes, Ana M. and Caroline Paunov, “The Risks of Innovation: Are Innovating Firms
Less Likely to Die?,” Review of Economics and Statistics, 2015, 97 (3), 638–653.
Grossman, Gene M. and Elhanan Helpman, “Quality Ladders and Product Cycles,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 1991, 106 (2), 557–586.
Holmes, Thomas J. and John J. Stevens, “An Alternative Theory of the Plant Size Distribution, with Geography and Intra- and International Trade,” Journal of Political
Economy, 2014, 122 (2), 369–421.
Hombert, Johan and Adrien Matray, “Can Innovation Help US Manufacturing Firms
Escape Import Competition from China?,” Working Paper, 2014.
Khandelwal, Amit K., “The Long and Short (of) Quality Ladders,” Review of Economic
Studies, 2010, 77 (4), 1450–1476.
Klette, Tor J. and Samuel Kortum, “Innovating Firms and Aggregate Innovation,” Journal of Political Economy, 2004, 112 (5), 986–1018.
Melitz, Marc J., “The Impact of Trade on Intra-Industry Reallocations and Aggregate
Industry Productivity,” Econometrica, 2003, 71 (6), 1695–1725.
and Gianmarco I. P. Ottaviano, “Market Size, Trade, and Productivity,” Review of
Economic Studies, 2008, 75 (1), 295–316.
Romer, Paul M., “Endogenous Technological Change,” Journal of Political Economy,
1990, 98 (5).
Sutton, John, Competing in Capabilities: The Globalization Process 2012.
Tucker, Catherine, “Patent Trolls and Technology Diffusion: The Case of Medical Imaging,” Working Paper, 2014.
Yang, Mu-Jeung, Lorenz Kueng, and Bryan Hong, “Business Strategy and the Management of Firms,” Working Paper, 2015.

Table 1: Summary Statistics
Panel A: Initial levels in 1999
Chinese share of Canadian imports
US share of Canadian imports (for comparision)
Innovation strategy top priority
Low‐cost strategy top priority
Medium firms (21‐499 employees)
Large firms (500 plus employees)
National firms
Exporters
Exit by 2005

Panel B: Changes from 1999‐2005
Chinese share of Canadian imports
Perceived non‐US foreign competition
Perceived US competition
Innovation strategy top priority
Low‐cost strategy top priority
Cumulative product innovations
Cumulative process innovations
% change in revenue
% change in employment
% change in gross payroll
Change in operating profits/1999 revenue

N
106
106
1370
1370
1370
1370
1370
1370
1370

N
106
868
868
868
868
913
913
864
868
868
864

Weighted
Mean
S.D.

Unweighted
Mean
S.D.

0.069
0.181
0.260
0.007
0.209
0.411
0.169

0.024
0.756
0.093
0.215
0.511
0.110
0.171
0.578
0.147

0.253
0.385
0.439
0.083
0.407
0.492
0.375

0.047
0.181
0.290
0.411
0.500
0.313
0.376
0.494
0.354

Weighted
Mean
S.D.

Unweighted
Mean
S.D.

0.016
0.005
0.077
0.202
4.436
3.917
0.256
0.036
0.275
0.142

0.038
0.077
‐0.001
‐0.014
0.202
4.923
4.662
0.223
‐0.011
0.193
0.200

1.573
1.363
1.073
0.995
3.263
3.287
0.704
0.578
0.654
1.039

0.053
1.073
1.489
1.082
0.939
3.426
3.421
0.742
0.585
0.630
1.413

Table 2: Average effect of Chinese import competition on firm performance and exit, 1999‐2005
Dependent variable

Chinese share of imports

Observations
Adj R‐squared
First‐stage F‐statistic

Revenue

Payroll

Operating Profit Margin

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

OLS
0.447
(0.785)

IV
‐2.386
(1.499)

OLS
0.841
(1.010)

IV
‐1.353
(1.272)

OLS
‐0.675
(0.521)

IV
‐0.725
(0.713)

859
0.000

859
‐0.061
13.81

863
0.005

863
‐0.038
13.81

859
0.000

859
0.000
13.81

Exit
(7)

(8)

OLS
IV
0.529 0.842**
(0.388) (0.354)
1,354
0.009

1,354
0.006
40.43

Notes: The regressions use long difference from 1999 to 2005. The Chinese share of imports increses on average by 5
percentage points (pp) from 1999 to 2005 with a standard deviation of 6.3 pp, strating from 2.9% in 1999. Columns (1)-(6)
are based on the subsample of firms that survive until 2005. Robust standard errors in parentheses are clustered by 4-digit
NAICS industry. ***, **, * mark significance at the 1, 5, and 10 percent level, respectively.

Table 3: Average effect of Chinese import competition on strategy, 1999‐2005
Dependent variable

Chinese share of imports

Observations
Adj R‐squared
First‐stage F‐statistic

Innovation strategy
(1)
(2)

Low‐cost strategy
(3)
(4)

OLS

IV

OLS

IV

1.540*
(0.807)

‐0.361
(1.435)

‐2.235**
(0.909)

‐0.211
(1.287)

863
0.007

863
‐0.005
13.81

863
0.018

863
0.002
13.81

Notes: Dependent variables are normalized continuous strategy Likert scores on
importance of strategy, see text. Robust standard errors in parentheses are
clustered by 4-digit NAICS industry. ***, **, * mark significance at the 1, 5, and 10
percent level, respectively.

Table 4: Average effect of Chinese import competition on innovation and technology adoption
Dependent variable

Chinese share of imports

Observations
Adj R‐squared
First‐stage F‐statistic

Process Innovation

Product Innovation

Technology expenditure

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(7)

(8)

OLS

IV

OLS

IV

OLS

IV

‐6.121*
(3.488)

‐1.748
(4.288)

‐0.132
(0.238)

‐0.211
(0.287)

908
0.012

908
0.006
14.35

906
0.000

906
0.000
14.31

‐9.799*** ‐12.012***
(3.230)
(3.799)
908
0.033

908
0.031
14.35

Notes: Dependent variables are the cumulative number of innovations over 1999 to 2006, by innovation
type and cumulative technology expenditure relative to initial revenues in 1999. Robust standard errors in
parentheses are clustered by 4-digit NAICS industry. ***, **, * mark significance at the 1, 5, and 10 percent
level, respectively.

Table 5: Heterogeneity in effects of Chinese competition by firm size

(2)

Process
Innovation
(3)

Cost
strategy
(4)

Innovation
strategy
(5)

1.126**
(0.482)

‐0.717
(1.107)

‐10.347**
(4.213)

‐2.382**
(1.027)

0.131
(1.701)

Chinese share of imports * Medium

‐0.826*
(0.450)

‐3.823
(4.254)

‐6.545
(6.311)

5.065*
(2.739)

‐0.985
(3.345)

Chinese share of imports * Large

‐0.676
(0.553)

‐42.248
(37.663)

5.645
(23.111)

18.606***
(6.793)

‐6.937
(7.875)

YES

YES

YES

YES

YES

1,354
0.003

859
‐0.087

908
0.106

863
‐0.001

863
‐0.008

Dependent variable

Exit

Revenue

(1)
Chinese share of imports

Main effect (firm size)
Observations
Adj R‐squared

Notes: All columns are IV regressions; see text for details. The omitted firm size category is small firms.
Robust standard errors in parentheses are clustered by 4-digit NAICS industry. ***, **, * mark significance
at the 1, 5, and 10 percent level, respectively.

Table 6: Heterogeneity in effects of Chinese competition by initial business strategy
Innovation strategy
Dependent variable

Low‐cost strategy

Exit
(1)

Revenue
(2)

Payroll
(3)

Exit
(4)

Revenue
(5)

Payroll
(6)

Chinese share of imports

0.737**
(0.347)

‐2.437
(1.553)

‐1.103
(1.278)

0.620*
(0.323)

‐3.101*
(1.815)

‐2.181*
(1.286)

Chinese share of imports * Innovation strategy

2.122***
(0.820)

5.757**
(2.368)

‐1.133
(2.878)
1.231
(0.835)

5.160** 5.984***
(2.534)
(1.748)

Chinese share of imports * Low‐cost strategy

Main effect (business strategy)
Observations
Adj R‐squared
First‐stage F‐statistic

YES

YES

YES

YES

YES

YES

1,354
0.007
18.24

859
‐0.054
6.616

863
‐0.008
6.633

1,354
0.012
13.91

859
‐0.061
5.967

863
‐0.024
6.064

Notes: All columns are IV regressions; see text for details. The omitted category for each regression is firms that do not
have the featured strategic priority. Robust standard errors in parentheses are clustered by 4-digit NAICS industry. ***, **,
* mark significance at the 1, 5, and 10 percent level, respectively.

Table 7: Heterogeneity in effects of Chinese competition by market scope
Dependent variable

Exit
(1)

Revenue
(2)

Payroll
(3)

Chinese share of imports

1.310**
(0.575)

0.202
(0.960)

0.984
(1.336)

Chinese share of imports * National

‐0.912
(0.591)

‐8.785
(8.824)

‐7.077
(6.280)

Chinese share of imports * Exporter

‐0.907
(0.602)

‐2.476***
(0.838)

‐2.630**
(1.117)

YES

YES

YES

1,330
0.007
10.40

841
‐0.091
0.509

845
‐0.061
0.509

Main effect (market scope)
Observations
Adj R‐squared
First‐stage F‐statistic

Notes: All columns are IV regression; for details see text. The omitted
category is firms with local (county or municipality) sales only. Robust
standard errors in parentheses are clustered by 4‐digit NAICS industry. ***,
**, * mark significance at the 1, 5, and 10 percent level, respectively.

Table 8: Robustness of effects using short (2‐year) differences and industry dummies
Process Innovation

Dependent variable

Chinese share of imports

Industry FE
Observations
Adj R‐squared
First‐stage F‐statistic

Revenue

Employment

Operating Profit Margin

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

(9)

(10)

(11)

(12)

OLS

IV

IV

OLS

IV

IV

OLS

IV

IV

OLS

IV

IV

‐9.574**
(4.198)

0.639
(0.931)

‐1.950*
(1.044)

‐2.278
(1.392)

‐0.418
(0.577)

‐6.251*** ‐11.628***
(1.551)
(2.412)

‐1.874*** ‐2.320**
(0.711)
(0.911)

‐0.594
(0.553)

‐1.297** ‐3.520*
(0.656) (1.910)

No

No

Yes

No

No

Yes

No

No

Yes

No

No

Yes

3,424
0.021

3,424
0.004
27.29

3,424
0.141
50.12

3,348
0.006

3,348
‐0.012
25.37

3,348
0.016
45.10

3,356
0.001

3,356
‐0.006
25.55

3,356
0.048
45.34

3,345
0.002

3,345
0.001
25.30

3,345
0.005
45.08

Notes: Because the variables of interest are measured as two-year within-firm differences, the industry dummy is equivalent to an industry linear time-trend. Robust
standard errors in parentheses are clustered by 4-digit NAICS industry. ***, **, * mark significance at the 1, 5, and 10 percent level, respectively.

Figure 1 – First Stage of IV

.25
Cut and Sew Apparel

Change in China’s Share 1999 to 2005

Audio and Video

.2
Household Furniture
Computer
Apparel Knitting Other Textile

.15

Apparel Accessories
Footwear

Furnishings
HouseholdTextile
Appliance
Lighting
Veneer, Plywood, etc
Other Manufacturing
Handtool

.1

Foundries
Clay

.05

Tobacco

Other Leather

0
Other Transportation

−.05

2

R =.2
Slope=.48
F−stat=20.85

Ship and Boat

−.1
0

.05

.1
.15
.2
.25
China’s Share of Canadian Imports in 1999

.3

Online Appendix
A. WES Questionnaire

(Workplace and Employee Survey)

Section G : Business Strategy
Please rate the following factors with respect to their relative importance in your workplace general business
strategy.
Not
applicable

Not
important

Slightly
important

Important

Very
important

Crucial

1

2

3

4

5

6

B. Developing new products /
services

1

2

3

4

5

6

C. Developing new production /
operating techniques

1

2

3

4

D. Expanding into new
geographic markets

1

2

3

1

2

3

1

at
io

F. Improving product / service
quality

5

6

4

5

6

4

5

6

n

E. Total quality management

ly

A. Undertaking research and
development

on

34.

2

3

4

5

6

2

3

4

5

6

1

2

3

4

5

6

1

2

3

4

5

6

1

2

3

4

5

6

1

2

3

4

5

6

1

2

3

4

5

6

M. Increasing employees'
involvement / participation

1

2

3

4

5

6

N. Improving coordination with
customers and suppliers

1

2

3

4

5

6

O. Improving measures of
performance

1

2

3

4

5

6

1

H. Using more part-time,
temporary or contract workers
Reducing other operating
costs

J.

Reorganizing the work
process

Fo
ri

nf
o

I.

rm

G. Reducing labour costs

K. Enhancing labourmanagement cooperation

L. Increasing employees' skills

Page 30

4-4700-3.1

If you reported "non-profit organization" in Question 28, go to Question 40.
Between April 1, 2004 and March 31, 2005, what percentage of your total sales from all products and
services were in each of the following market areas?

A. Local market (same municipality or county)

%

B. Rest of Canada

%

C. U.S.A.

%

ly

35.

on

D. Rest of the world
Total (A + B + C + D should total 100%)

100 %

3

4

5

Yes, Canadian-owned enterprises
Yes, American-owned enterprises

at
io

2

Yes, locally-owned firms

rm

1

n

Do you directly compete with locally, Canadian or internationally-owned firms? (Check all that apply.)

Yes, other internationally-owned enterprises (other than American)
No

nf
o

36.

%

Î Go to Question 40

Fo
ri

36 (a) To what extent do these firms offer significant competition to your business?
Significant competition refers to a situation where other firms market products / services similar to yours
which could be purchased by your customers.
Not
applicable

Not
important

Slightly
important

Important

Very
important

Crucial

Don't
know

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

A. Locally-owned
B. Canadian-owned
C. American-owned
D. Other internationallyowned

4-4700-3.1

Page 31

37.

Please indicate how many firms (whether based in Canada or not) offer products / services directly competing
with yours in your most important market. Your most important market is represented by the highest
percentage of your total sales reported in Question 35.
Products directly competing refers to products / services, whether brand name or generic, that compete
directly with yours in the same market. In other words, products / services which compete with yours to
satisfy the same needs of the same customers.

2

3

Over 20

2

Higher
About the same
Lower

rm

3

n

Please indicate the general price level of your products / services relative to the price level of your main
competitors in your most important market.
1

Compared to your main competitors, how would you rate your workplace performance between April 1, 2004
and March 31, 2005 in each of the following areas?

nf
o

39.

6 to 20

at
io

38.

1 to 5

on

4

0 Î Go to Question 39

ly

1

Fo
ri

Much
worse

A. Productivity

Worse

About the
same

Better

Much
better

Don't
know

1

2

3

4

5

6

1

2

3

4

5

6

1

2

3

4

5

6

B. Sales growth
C. Profitability

Page 32

4-4700-3.1

Section H : Innovation
40.

Between April 1, 2004 and March 31, 2005, has this workplace introduced…
Yes

A. new products or services?

1

B. improved products or services?
3

3
4

3

1

3

1

4

3

New products or services differ significantly in character or intended use from previously produced goods or
services.
Improved products or services are those whose performance has been significantly enhanced or upgraded.

n

2

1

New processes include the adoption of new methods of goods production or service delivery.

at
io

1

3

on

D. improved processes?

1

ly

C. new processes?

2

No

Improved processes are those whose performance has been significantly enhanced or upgraded.

rm

If you have answered "No" to A, B, C and D, go to Question 43.

What was your most important innovation between April 1, 2004 and March 31, 2005? By most important,
we mean the one which cost the most to implement.

42.

Was this innovation:

Fo
ri

nf
o

41.

1

2

3

4

4-4700-3.1

a world first?

a Canadian first?
a first in the local market?
none of the above.

Page 33

