NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

DOES THE SAMARITAN'S DILEMMA MATTER? EVIDENCE FROM U.S. AGRICULTURE
Tatyana Deryugina
Barrett Kirwan
Working Paper 22845
http://www.nber.org/papers/w22845

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 2016, Revised May 2017

We thank David Albouy, Jeff Brown, Don Fullerton, Nolan Miller, Julian Reif, Michael J.
Roberts, and Kent Smetters for helpful discussions and comments. We are grateful to seminar
participants at the American Economic Association Meetings, the Institute of Government and
Public Affairs, NBER Insurance Working Group, Kansas State University, the Midwestern
Economics Association Meetings, the University of British Columbia, and the University of
Illinois. Xian Liu provided excellent research assistance. The views expressed herein are those of
the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2016 by Tatyana Deryugina and Barrett Kirwan. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Does The Samaritan's Dilemma Matter? Evidence From U.S. Agriculture
Tatyana Deryugina and Barrett Kirwan
NBER Working Paper No. 22845
November 2016, Revised May 2017
JEL No. D72,H84,Q18
ABSTRACT
The Samaritan’s dilemma posits a downside to charity: recipients may rely on free aid instead of
their own efforts. Anecdotally, the expectation of free assistance is thought to be important for
decisions about insurance and risky behavior in numerous settings, but reliable empirical
evidence is scarce. We estimate whether the Samaritan’s dilemma exists in U.S. agriculture,
where both private crop insurance and frequent federal disaster assistance are present. We find
that bailout expectations are qualitatively and quantitatively important for the insurance decision.
Furthermore, aid expectations reduce both expenditure on farm inputs and subsequent crop
revenue.

Tatyana Deryugina
Department of Finance
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
515 East Gregory Drive, MC-520
Champaign, IL 61820
and NBER
deryugin@illinois.edu
Barrett Kirwan
310 Mumford Hall
1301 W. Gregory
Urbana, Illinois 61801
bkirwan@illinois.edu

1

Introduction

The state periodically steps in as the “insurer of last resort” during systemic shocks, such as natural
disasters (e.g., Hurricanes Katrina and Sandy) and economic crises (e.g., the financial crisis of
2007-2008). In doing so it faces the Samaritan’s dilemma, first described by Buchanan (1975):
victims who expect to be bailed out may take on additional risk in response. For example, potential
bailout recipients may purchase less flood insurance or invest in riskier securities.1 This type of
moral hazard increases the economic cost of the shock and decreases overall welfare due to the
variability in the marginal utility of income across states of nature (Kaplow, 1991; Coate, 1995;
Kim and Schlesinger, 2005). In other words, bailout expectations lead to unequal marginal utilities
of income across states of nature, which in turn creates a welfare loss even if real outcomes such
as output are unaffected. If real outcomes are affected as well, the welfare loss is larger.
We provide some of the first evidence on the empirical importance of the Samaritan’s dilemma
with respect to ad hoc aid. Anecdotally, the expectation of free assistance is thought to be an important explanation for the relatively low rates of insurance take-up and self-protection measures in
several important settings, including natural disaster insurance, foreign aid, and financial markets.
However, empirically estimating the Samaritan’s dilemma is incredibly challenging for at least two
reasons. First, bailouts and risk exposure are simultaneously determined: the size of a bailout depends on economic agents’ risk exposure, and agents’ risk exposure depends on their expectation
of a bailout. Moreover, changes in background risk that are unobservable to the econometrician
may affect both the size of a bailout and the agents’ choice of risk exposure (Gollier and Pratt,
1996; Harrison et al., 2007). Few empirical studies have attempted to tackle the simultaneity and
confounding variables issues.2 Second, shocks during which agents can reasonably expect to be
bailed out, such as Hurricane Katrina or the financial crisis of 2007-2008, are rare in most settings,
and rare shocks do not easily lend themselves to systematic statistical examination.
To credibly gauge the relevance of the Samaritan’s dilemma for the provision of social insurance, we would need a setting with fairly frequent shocks, extensive insurance availability, and
relatively frequent government bailouts that, to some extent, vary exogenously. U.S. agriculture
provides such a setting. Agricultural producers can purchase heavily subsidized crop insurance,
but the government appears unable to withhold ex post aid: Congress provided ad hoc disaster
1
Terms that describe phenomena similar to the Samaritan’s dilemma include “ex ante moral hazard” and, more
generally, “crowd out”. ex ante moral hazard typically refers to market insurance crowding out self-protection activities
(Ehrlich and Becker, 1972). Papers that deal with crowd out more generally typically consider the relationship between
a permanent public insurance program and private insurance (e.g., Cutler and Gruber, 1996; Brown and Finkelstein,
2008; Gruber and Simon, 2008). By contrast, the ad hoc nature of bailouts makes them more similar to charity than to
public insurance.
2
Exceptions are Raschky and Schwindt (2009) and Kousky et al. (2015). See Raschky and Weckhannemann (2007)
for an overview of the literature.

2

payments every year between 1990 and 2010, the period of our analysis, at an average of $1.8
billion per year.3 Politics has long been thought to play a role in agricultural disaster aid allocation, both in the U.S. and elsewhere (e.g., Garrett, Marsh, and Marshall, 2006; Goodwin and Vado,
2007; Cole, Healy, and Werker, 2012; Chang and Zilberman, 2014), creating plausibly exogenous
variation in aid that is not directly related to farmers’ insurance decisions.
Motivated by these facts, we rely on political variation to identify the causal relationship between aid expectations and insurance decisions. Our choice of instrument is guided by the theory
of tactical redistribution in which politicians make pre-election promises in a bid to gain votes
(Dixit and Londregan, 1996, 1998). Specifically, we employ the “swing voter” model, which is
the most commonly used model in this literature (Lindbeck and Weibull, 1987; Dahlberg and Johansson, 2002). We use changes in the percent of a county’s voters who voted for a third-party
candidate in the most recent prior presidential election as an instrument for disaster aid. As we discuss later, third-party voters are easier to sway than someone voting for a Republican or Democrat,
making them excellent targets for any politician who is trying to gain voters in county, congressional, state, or even national elections. Likewise, agricultural disaster aid is a cost-effective way
to target voters, because the majority of Americans of both parties favor financially supporting
farmers, especially in bad years (see, e.g., Kull et al., 2004). At the same time, farmers represent
a small share of the population, reducing the likelihood of instrument endogeneity with respect to
crop insurance.
We use county fixed effects to account for unobserved cross-sectional heterogeneity, such as
the inherent riskiness of an area for crop production. We account for macro-level shocks, such
as price variation or policy changes, with year fixed effects. Thus, our identification comes from
within-county changes in voting patterns, disaster aid, and insurance coverage. We also control
for a number of time-varying county characteristics, including farm and non-farm incomes, total
employment, population, the share of population employed in agriculture, and the number of farm
proprietors. Our identifying assumption is that, conditional on these controls, recent voting behavior in a county is related to the crop insurance decisions of a county’s farmers only through the
disaster aid channel. We argue that our instrument is likely to meet the exogeneity requirement,
in part because farmers make up a small fraction of the electorate in the modern U.S. We also
show that our estimates are robust to employing additional instrumental variables based on other
political theories.
We find that the elasticity of farmers’ out-of-pocket expenditure on insurance with respect to
expected disaster payments is about −0.2. That is, a 10-percent increase in expected disaster payments reduces the premiums farmers pay by 2 percent. We confirm this result by using alternative
measures of coverage, such as total liability, total number of policies, and premium subsidies.
3

All dollars are inflation-adjusted to 2011.

3

Consistent with farmers reducing insurance coverage rather than foregoing it altogether, we find
evidence that farmers are choosing less generous insurance plans. Finally, we find that bailout
expectations result in reduced spending on farm labor and fertilizer, lower price-weighted yields,
and lower revenue from crop sales.
Theoretical literature predicts that subsidizing risk-reduction activities such as insurance reduces agents’ reliance on bailouts (Coate, 1995); the theory can be extended to show that increasing the uncertainty of a bailout also reduces the Samaritan’s dilemma. Crop insurance is heavily
subsidized—the government currently pays about two-thirds of the premiums—and bailouts are
ad hoc and thus inherently uncertain, especially from the point of view of an individual farmer.
Yet we find that the Samaritan’s dilemma still exists and is non-trivial in magnitude, suggesting
that it is a more pervasive phenomenon than expected.
Our findings have important implications for a number of other settings. Two that are particularly similar are domestic disaster aid more generally and foreign aid.4 The U.S. spent about $100
billion on non-agricultural domestic disaster relief in the 2011-2013 fiscal years (Weiss and Weidman, 2013) and about $31 billion in foreign economic assistance in the 2012 fiscal year (United
States Agency for International Development, 2014). In both cases, the aid is discretionary and
thus uncertain. At the same time, it is awarded fairly regularly, making it more likely that potential
recipients will expect it. The similarities between these settings and ours make the existence of the
Samaritan’s dilemma in the former very likely.
Our results also empirically validate the idea that the Samaritan’s dilemma and, more generally, ex ante moral hazard—where recipients expose themselves to a higher risk of income loss
because of the presence of some safety net—are present in social insurance settings such as unemployment insurance, TANF, or SNAP (Buchanan, 1975). In contrast to private insurance markets
where premiums, deductibles, and co-payments can be adjusted to internalize ex ante moral hazard
(Chiappori, 2000; Dave and Kaestner, 2009), the Samaritan’s dilemma implies long-run, persistent
welfare losses in social insurance programs that cannot easily be tailored to individual behavior.
In addition, our findings are relevant for gauging the effects of agricultural subsidies, which are
prevalent in developed nations. In their theoretical work on the Samaritan’s dilemma, Bruce and
Waldman (1991) and Coate (1995) suggest that replacing ex post disaster aid with an ex ante inkind transfer in the form of full insurance coverage eliminates the Samaritan’s dilemma. Although
some U.S. agricultural subsidies are independent of production or prices, many are effectively
partial insurance programs where payments depend on market conditions. Indeed, direct (unconditional) payments to U.S. producers have been shrinking over time, while subsidies for crop
insurance have grown substantially and now account for a large share of agricultural support. Our
4

For theoretical considerations of the Samaritan’s dilemma in foreign aid settings, see Pedersen (1996); Svensson
(2000); Pedersen (2001); Svensson (2003) and Hagen (2006).

4

findings suggest that even these large subsidies appear to not eliminate the Samaritan’s dilemma
entirely.
Finally, our results also provide insight into how farmers alter their risk-management behavior
in anticipation of future government payments. A substantial body of research examines the relationship between farmers’ risk-management behavior and land-specific subsidies that are known
to the farmer ex ante, e.g., Direct Payments (see Weber and Key, 2012, for an overview of this
literature). Surprisingly little work, however, provides carefully identified empirical estimates of
the risk-management response to ex ante unknown subsidies, such as Counter-Cyclical Payments
or Loan Deficiency Payments.5 Our research, therefore, provides an innovative way to examine
the effect of expected government benefits on farmers’ risk-management behavior.
To our knowledge, only two working papers have attempted to credibly estimate the importance of the Samaritan’s dilemma in the areas of foreign aid and domestic disaster aid. Raschky
and Schwindt (2009) estimate the impact of foreign aid on recipient countries’ death tolls from
natural disasters, a proxy for disaster preparedness. To get around the endogeneity problem, they
use voting patterns in the U.N. General Assembly and the aid recipient’s oil reserves and natural
gas production as instruments for foreign aid. More foreign aid leads to higher death tolls from
storms, which provides some evidence for the Samaritan’s dilemma. However, they cannot measure disaster preparedness efforts directly and do not find any effect of foreign aid on death tolls
from earthquakes or floods. With respect to domestic disaster assistance, Kousky, Michel-Kerjan,
and Raschky (2015) use several measures of political variation as instrument for aid. They find
that higher disaster aid in the previous year leads to lower flood insurance takeup on the intensive
but not the extensive margin.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we outline the basic intuition for the
inefficiency of ex post relief, which has been shown formally in previous theoretical literature. In
Section 3, we provide background on crop insurance and disaster payments in the U.S. In Section 4,
we describe our data and empirical strategy. Section 5 presents the results, and Section 6 concludes.

2

The Inefficiency of Ex Post Aid

Numerous theoretical papers have demonstrated the inefficiency behind the Samaritan’s dilemma
(Kaplow, 1991; Bruce and Waldman, 1991; Coate, 1995; Kim and Schlesinger, 2005; Dijkstra,
2007). To frame our empirical work, we highlight the salient intuition from this literature. Altruism
is a fundamental tenet of the Samaritan’s dilemma— it is the altruism of some economic agents
(the ”Samaritans”) that leads to the recipients’ inefficient behavior. In our setting, non-farmers
are altruistic toward farmers, which is a well-documented phenomenon (Variyam et al., 1990;
5

McDonald and Sumner (2003) review the shortcomings of this literature.

5

Kull et al., 2004; Ellison et al., 2010a; Lusk, 2012). As a consequence, farmers’ consumption is
a public good for non-farmers, and private charity will be inefficiently low due to the free-rider
problem. In the theoretical literature, the government acts to address the free-rider problem with
ex post transfers, which in our empirical setting corresponds to providing farmers with ad hoc aid
following a negative shock.
Despite solving the free-rider problem, the socially optimal level of the public good is unlikely
to be privately optimal for farmers. The Samaritan’s dilemma has adverse efficiency effects stemming from the fact that the government acts ex post rather than ex ante and acts in the interest of
the Samaritans rather than the farmers. Coate (1995) shows that ex post aid will be less than the net
indemnity under full insurance in the loss state. This outcome is ex ante inefficient because farmers
will have unequal consumption in the “loss” and “no-loss” states of nature. And by under-insuring
in the first period, risk-averse farmers take on too much risk.
Finally, Kaplow (1991) and Bruce and Waldman (1991) show that ex post aid is not costeffective because it affects agents’ self-insurance. This fact is also potentially relevant in our
setting, as farmers have multiple means of self-insurance. For instance, they can ameliorate the
consequences of an adverse production shock through irrigation, pesticides, or increased labor;
and savings and inventory can ease the burden of a price shock. When the amount of ex post aid
depends on the size of the loss, farmers have incentive to reduce self-insurance, which exacerbates
the cost of a bailout.

3

Crop Insurance and Disaster Payments

Federal crop insurance and agricultural disaster payments have provided overlapping risk protection to farmers for over 40 years. The Agricultural Adjustment Act of 1938 established the Federal
Crop Insurance Corporation (FCIC) to administer what was essentially an experimental crop insurance program until 1980.6 In 1973, while crop insurance was in this experimental phase, Congress
established a standing Crop Disaster Payment (CDP) program that was akin to free insurance coverage for a select group of crops. When yields fell below two-thirds of normal, low-yield payments
were made to farmers who participated in income- and price-support programs. The Government
Accountability Office (GAO) suspected that there was a conflict between these programs—the
Samaritan’s dilemma—when it reported that, where crop insurance was offered, “[disaster] payments actually compete with crop insurance because they require no premiums” (U.S. Government
Accountability Office, 1980). Aware of the disincentive effects disaster payments have on crop insurance demand, some crop insurance demand models have included proxies for disaster payments
(e.g. Niewuwoudt and Bullock, 1985; Barnett and Skees, 1995). These models typically reveal a
6

For a more detailed history of the early crop insurance program see Glauber and Collins (2002).

6

negative correlation, but they cannot identify the direct effect of disaster payments on crop insurance demand.
In 1980, Congress ended the standing CDP program and greatly expanded the Federal Crop
Insurance (FCI) program. In spite of this expansion, Congress continued the pattern of having two
parallel mechanisms for dealing with crop-loss risk by providing $6.9 billion in disaster payments
on top of $4.3 billion in crop insurance indemnities in 1980–1988 (U.S. General Accounting Office,
1989). At the same time, FCI participation stagnated at 50 million acres, less than 25% of insurable
land (Glauber and Collins, 2002). In 1989 the GAO reported that, “federal disaster assistance
programs provide farmers with direct cash payments at no cost to the farmers, resulting in the
perception [among farmers] that crop insurance is unnecessary.” Despite GAO warnings, Congress
continued to frequently authorize ad hoc disaster aid throughout the 1990’s and 2000’s, allocating
a total of $40.2 billion (2011 dollars) to CDP programs in 1990–2011.7

3.1

Crop Insurance

Starting from the mid-1990’s, farmers have had a lot of choice when it comes to crop insurance.
Importantly, farmers can choose the generosity of the insurance plan they purchase. The options
typically range from a 50% coverage plan, which only pays indemnities after the farmer’s yield
or revenue has fallen to 50% or less of its expected value, to a 90% coverage plan, which begins
paying after only a 10% drop. Farmers can also choose how much money they are paid per unit of
shortfall from a pre-specified range.8
In addition, if a farmer owns multiple plots growing the same crop in the same county, he
can choose to insure them jointly and pay a lower insurance premium. If crop insurance were
actuarially fair, economic theory predicts that a farmer would want to combine all his plots under
a single insurance policy, as he should care about his aggregate income rather than income from
any single plot. However, because crop insurance is heavily subsidized, farmers sometimes find
it advantageous to insure plots under different policies in order to maximize the expected return
per dollar of premium, even if doing so raises the overall variance of their income. Importantly,
because of farmers’ ability to insure plots separately, the number of policies can reflect both the
extensive and intensive measure of insurance takeup.
Unlike many other insurance markets, providers of crop insurance cannot set their own prices
or offer customized insurance plans. However, the federal government reinsures the providers
and reimburses them for administrative expenses. The prices and plans are determined by the
Risk Management Agency (RMA) of the USDA and are typically made public near the end of the
preceding calendar year. The rating methodology used to set prices has been fairly consistent and
7
8

See the appendix for a list of public laws passed between 1989 and 2009 that authorize crop disaster payments.
For more details on how indemnity payments are determined, see the Online Appendix.

7

largely formulaic throughout our sample period.9 This is another important feature of our setting,
as it rules out the possibility that insurance prices might be changing for political reasons or in
anticipation of greater disaster aid from the government.
Since Congress ended the CDP program in 1980, it has subsidized crop insurance premiums
to encourage farmers to purchase more coverage and thereby reduce the need for ad hoc disaster
payments. Figure 1 illustrates the evolution of premium subsidy rates from 1990–2011. Despite
premium subsidies ranging from 17% (for 75% coverage) to 30% (for 50% and 65% coverage)
during the 1980s and early 1990s, voluntary participation in the Federal Crop Insurance (FCI)
program remained low. The Federal Crop Insurance Reform (FCIR) Act of 1994 greatly expanded
the crop insurance program by requiring farmers who received other government support to adopt
fully subsidized catastrophic-level (50%) coverage. The FCIR also increased premium subsidies
for higher coverage levels. The insurance requirement was removed in the following year, but
the higher subsidy rates remained. The Agricultural Risk Protection Act of 2000 (ARPA) further
increased premium subsidies, especially for higher coverage levels. The subsidy rate increased
by half for the 65% coverage level, more than doubled for the 75% coverage level, and nearly
tripled for the 85% coverage level. It is important to note that the premium subsidy rates do not
vary geographically. Thus, they cannot be manipulated by politicians to target specific areas in the
same way that disaster payments can.
Predictably, the above-mentioned reforms raised insurance coverage. Figure 2 illustrates the
share of total acres insured by FCI by coverage level from 1990–2011. Nearly all of the increase
in participation in 1995 came from an increase in the mandated (and most heavily subsidized) 50%
coverage. In 2001, participation levels increased further when premium subsidies were raised even
more under ARPA. With these dramatically increased subsidy rates, participation returned to the
1994-mandated level in 2004 and has hovered around 80% of eligible acreage since then. However,
insurance coverage among the insureds is far from full—most acres are insured under plans with
at least a 25% deductible (coverage level of 75% or lower). About a third of insured acres are
covered by plans with at least a 35% deductible (coverage level of 65% or lower).

3.2

Disaster Payments

Unlike crop insurance indemnities, which are known for a given loss level and plan choice, disaster
payments are not perfectly predictable, especially from an individual farmer’s point of view. The
disaster designation process adds to the uncertainty. First, a state’s governor requests a disaster
designation for the affected counties in the state. The Secretary of Agriculture then determines
whether a natural disaster has caused a 30-percent or more production loss of at least one crop in
9

See the Online Appendix, Coble et al. (2010), and Coble et al. (2011) for more details on how prices are set.

8

the county. Once the Secretary of Agriculture issues a disaster designation, farmers in the primary
and contiguous counties become eligible for emergency loans. Farmers in these counties may
also receive disaster payments if Congress passes legislation funding an ad hoc disaster program.
Disaster payments are usually calculated in a way that is very similar to a not-very-generous crop
insurance plan.10
Figure 3 shows the pattern of indemnity payments, made by insurance companies, and crop
disaster payments, made by the government, over the same time period. To control for the growth
of insurance coverage, we show these quantities as a percent of total liability. On average, disaster
and indemnity payments are similar in magnitude. In several years, disaster payments exceed
indemnity payments. In recent years, disaster payments have been relatively low, potentially due
to increasing coverage. Disaster payments were made in every year, although in some years the
amount is very small. Consistent with their ad hoc nature, disaster payments are much more
volatile than indemnity payments.
Disaster aid programs are administered in such a way that disaster payments are a de facto
supplement to indemnity payments. In an effort to be equitable and not discourage crop insurance
purchase, Congress typically mandates that “there should not be discrimination, in making payments, against persons who had acquired federal crop insurance” (2000 Crop Disaster Program,
2001). In other words, both insured and uninsured farmers can qualify for disaster payments. Only
the U.S. Troop Readiness, Veterans’ Care, Katrina Recovery, and Iraq Accountability Appropriations Act of 2007 (2007) and the Food, Conservation, and Energy Act of 2008 (2008) have limited
disaster payments to farmers who purchased insurance or who did not have the option to purchase
insurance.11 For insured farmers, disaster payments “top up” indemnity payments. However, insurance payments are not ignored completely; once the sum of indemnity and disaster payments
reaches 95% of the farmer’s expected revenue, the farmer is not eligible for more disaster payments.12 Allowing disaster payments to be given in addition to crop insurance creates a strong
incentive for farmers to respond on the intensive margin by purchasing less insurance than they
otherwise would, rather than foregoing crop insurance entirely.
Although Congress has regularly responded to agricultural disasters with CDP programs, it has
not been without reluctance. Over the period of our analysis Congress attempted to move away
from CDP programs by strengthening the Federal Crop Insurance (FCI) program and weakening
its own ability to pass disaster-assistance legislation by tightening budgetary constraints. In 1990–
10

We provide more details on how crop insurance and disaster aid payments are typically calculated in the Online
Appendix.
11
The latter group has access to a separate disaster assistance program called Noninsured Crop Disaster Assistance
Program (NAP), which we do not consider here.
12
Typically, a CDP program stipulates “the sum of the value of the crop not lost, if any; the disaster payment
received under this part; and any crop insurance payment . . . for losses to the same crop, cannot exceed 95 percent of
what the crop’s value would have been if there had been no loss” (2005–2007 Crop Disaster Program, 2008).

9

1994, disaster payments came from emergency supplemental appropriations that were exempted
from discretionary spending caps. The 1994 FCIR eliminated the use of emergency legislation
for agricultural crop disaster assistance, thereby making future disaster payments subject to discretionary spending caps. Together with mandatory catastrophic coverage, these requirements
were meant to send a signal that future disaster payments were unlikely (see Jose and Valluru,
1997).13 Congress, however, rescinded the catastrophic-coverage mandate after just one year. In
1998, it also reverted disaster spending to “emergency” status and implemented a multi-year CDP
program—something it said it would not do four years earlier.14
In an attempt to reduce disaster payment uncertainty, the 2008 farm bill established a standing disaster program called the Supplemental Revenue Assistance Program (SURE) (Food, Conservation, and Energy Act of 2008, 2008). The program, however, failed to reduce uncertainty;
according to USDA officials it was “the most complex program USDA’s Farm Service Agency has
undertaken” (Shields, 2010). Moreover, despite the standing disaster program, Congress passed ad
hoc disaster payment legislation in 2009, and in a rare move the president sidestepped Congress
and implemented a CDP program in 2010. SURE expired in 2011 and was not renewed in the
2014 farm bill. Thus, the current pattern of a heavily subsidized insurance market combined with
relatively frequent ad hoc disaster aid can be expected to continue.
It is important to note that crop insurance and disaster payments are part of a larger safety net
that includes price supports, production subsidies, and input-specific subsidies. Subsidy programs
are unlikely to confound our analysis, however. They are determined by the federal farm bill, which
only changes every six years and applies uniformly to all farms in the U.S. Because of this uniformity, it is unlikely that politicians use general agricultural subsidies to target counties based on
changes in their third-party voting patterns, although they can use such subsidies to target agricultural counties more generally. In contrast, crop insurance-coverage decisions and disaster-payment
legislation occur annually and apply differentially depending on a county’s disaster designation.
Thus, politicians can deliver on their election-year promises more quickly and in a more targeted
fashion with disaster payments than with changes to the farm safety net.

3.3

The Likely Importance of the Samaritan’s Dilemma in U.S. Agriculture

Despite circumstances that seem to favor the Samaritan’s dilemma in our setting, it is not a foregone
conclusion. Four potentially offsetting factors make it difficult to determine, ex ante, the extent to
which government bailouts affect insurance decisions. First, free disaster payments may seem
13

Speaking just before passage of FCIR, Rep. Larry Combest declared, “This means an end to emergency spending
for agricultural disasters.” (Rep. Combest (Texas), 1994)
14
Agriculture, Rural Development, Food and Drug Administration, and Related Agencies Appropriations Act, 1999
(1998)

10

preferable to costly insurance, but due to heavy premium subsidies, crop insurance is cheap, which
should reduce the amount of crowd out. Second, although disaster payments have been made fairly
regularly, they are still more uncertain than insurance payments, especially from the point of view
of an individual farmer. Third, because disaster payments can supplement indemnity payments,
we expect lower crowd out than if insured producers could not receive disaster payments. Finally,
if the conditions that trigger crop insurance and disaster payments are very similar, then the latter
might be a good substitute for the former. However, as we show in later sections, disaster payments
are heavily influenced by politics, and thus might be a poor replacement for market insurance.
To gain some insight into the likely importance of the Samaritan’s dilemma in U.S. agriculture,
we simulate farmers’ insurance choices, taking into account insurance subsidies, the uncertainty of
disaster payments, and the fact that the correlation between disaster payments and losses may be
low. Specifically, we model the farmers’ choice of coverage level in a plan that insures individual
revenue and calculate the corresponding out-of-pocket payments for a range of realistic loss and
disaster payment parameters. The details of the simulation are presented in the Online Appendix.
As expected, increasing the uncertainty of disaster payments or decreasing their correlation with
losses reduces the amount of crowd out. Overall, we find a substantial amount of crowd out across
a variety of scenarios, suggesting that the Samaritan’s dilemma is likely to be important in this
setting.

4

Empirical Strategy

4.1

Data

We identify the effect of expected disaster payments on crop insurance coverage with county-level
administrative data. Despite the absence of individual-level data connecting disaster payments to
crop insurance decisions, the designs of these two programs allow us to estimate the magnitude of
the Samaritan’s dilemma at the county level. Notably, all farms in a county face similar incentives
because both the disaster designation process and the crop-insurance base premium calculation
occur at the county level.
Crop insurance takeup information is publicly available from the RMA.15 For each year between 1990 and 2011, the dataset reports the number of insurance policies purchased, the amount
of premiums and premium subsidies paid, total liability, the number of acres insured, and the total indemnity payments.16 We measure county-level crop-related disaster payments with USDA
15

Available at http://www.rma.usda.gov/data/sob.html
We exclude rangeland, which became insurable in the middle of our sample period, from the crop insurance
sample. Because of its low value, it is not likely to be receiving a substantial amount of disaster payments. However,
it makes up a significant fraction of insured acres (but not of premiums or liabilities), and its inclusion may obscure
16

11

Farm Services Agency (FSA) data, obtained through a Freedom of Information Act request. After 1994, uninsurable crops received disaster payments through the “Non-insurable Crop Disaster
Assistance Program” (NAP). We eliminate NAP payments from our data and focus on the disaster
payments that may directly affect farmers’ insurance decisions. The county-level characteristics
we control for in our estimation come from the Regional Economic Information Systems (REIS)
and the County Business Patterns (CBP) databases. Expenditure on farm labor and fertilizer, as
well as crop revenue are also reported by REIS. Finally, data on production and average farm
price received are from the National Agricultural Statistical Service. Total production and acres
harvested are observed at the crop-county-year level, while prices received are summarized at the
crop-year level.
Table 1 shows key summary statistics for our main regression sample. As we discuss below, it is important for our identification strategy that only a small fraction of a county’s population is composed of farmers and their employees. Indeed, we see that less than 4% of the
average county’s population consists of farm proprietors. About 1% of total employment is in the
forestry/agriculture sectors, and farm income represents only about 3.5% of total personal income
on average.17 Of course, while agriculture is a small share of economic activity on average, in
some counties it makes up a much larger share. We later show that excluding these counties from
our sample does not affect our results.
The next few variables in Table 1 summarize the insurance coverage in our sample. On average,
there are about 420 crop insurance policies issued per county in each year, covering about 66,000
acres. Farmers in the average county spend about $677,000 on insurance, with the government contributing an additional $889,000 in premium subsidies. Because of the heavy premium subsidies,
we distinguish between premiums that are paid by the farmers themselves and total spending on
insurance coverage. Specifically, we refer to the former as “out-of-pocket” insurance expenditure
and premiums that include subsidies and out-of-pocket payments as “gross premiums.”
The mean total liability in a county is about $18 million. Over our sample period, insurers
paid $1.24 million in indemnity payments in the average county each year, while the government
disbursed an additional $464,000 in disaster payments to producers of insurable crops. Thus, disaster payments are over a third of the size of indemnity payments, while premium subsidies are
two-thirds as large as indemnity payments. Taken together, premium subsidies and disaster payments exceed indemnity payments, reinforcing the idea that farmers enjoy substantial government
support in this area.
farmer responses to disaster payments on that margin.
17
Farm income is reported net of costs, and it is not unusual for county-level farm income to be negative. It is also
possible for farm income to exceed 100% of personal income in some cases because of some methodological differences in calculating personal and farm incomes. For further details, see http://www.bea.gov/regional/
pdf/lapi2010.pdf.

12

Finally, as we discuss in detail below, we use the percent of voters casting ballots for a thirdparty candidate in the most recent previous presidential election as our instrument. The 2004 and
2008 county-level data come from Dave Leip’s Atlas of U.S. Presidential Elections (Leip, 2014),
while earlier data were generously shared by James Snyder. For non-election years, we use votes
from the most recent past presidential election. In the average county, about 33,000 votes were
cast, with about 7% of those votes going to a third-party candidate. The standard deviation of 8.2
suggests that there is substantial variation in third-party voting in our sample.
Figure 4 shows the spatial distribution of third-party voting for the counties in our preferred
regression sample. To illustrate the variation used in subsequent analysis, we subtract the countylevel mean and account for year fixed effects. We then take the absolute values of these deviations from geographic and temporal trends and average them by county. The resulting map thus
demonstrates the locations of the largest sources of variation in third party voters (darker areas).
Although we see some geographic concentration in parts of the South and Midwest, there is substantial idiosyncratic variation outside these areas, suggesting that our results will not be driven by
a particular part of the country.

4.2

Regression Specification

The central empirical question examined in this paper is “Is the Samaritan’s dilemma relevant in US
agriculture?” We answer this question by testing whether farmers in county c and year t purchase
less crop insurance—Insurancec,t , as measured by one of the metrics discussed below—when
they expect more ad hoc disaster payments conditional on a) county fixed effects (ac ) that account
for the underlying soil type, climate, and other characteristics that determine the inherent riskiness
of producing in each area and b) year fixed effects (at ) that account for macroeconomic shocks
such as annual crop price variation and broad changes in the crop insurance program over time
(e.g., the premium subsidy rates).
If the Samaritan’s dilemma holds, we would expect estimates of γ in the following equation to
be negative:
Insurancec,t = γE[Disasterc,t ] + X0c,t−1 φ + ac + at + εc,t .

(1)

The key variable in equation (1) is farmers’ expectation of disaster payments in county c and
year t, E[Disasterc,t ]. The county-level control variables, Xc,t−1 , include population, the number
of farm proprietors, total farm income, and per capita income from REIS, as well as the fraction
of total employment in forestry and agriculture sectors from CBP. The characteristics are lagged
throughout because the insurance decision must be made by March of each year in most cases.
Several metrics of the multifaceted insurance decision are available to us. Given the insti13

tutional background, much of the response to disaster aid expectations may be on the intensive
margin, with farmers reducing their insurance coverage rather than foregoing it altogether. A variable that captures both the intensive and extensive margins, farmers’ out-of-pocket expenditure on
insurance, is arguably the most relevant measure of the Samaritan’s dilemma in our setting. Total
liability and subsidy payments made by the government provide alternative measures of both the
intensive and extensive margins.
The total number of policies seemingly provides a clear measure of the extensive margin of the
insurance decision. However, because farmers may consolidate multiple plots under one policy or
insure them separately, a drop in the number of policies is not straightforward to interpret. Instead,
the number of acres insured provides a cleaner measure of the extensive margin.
Three challenges in estimating and interpreting equation (1) are apparent. First, insurance
decisions are based on expected disaster payments, E[Disasterc,t ], which are unobservable to us.
Instead, we observe actual disaster payments, Disasterc,t . To the extent that the latter is a noisy
estimate of farmer expectations, the potential for measurement error and attenuation bias arises.
Thus, our estimates of the extent to which the Samaritan’s dilemma matters in agriculture should
be viewed as lower bounds. Second, realized disaster payments are likely themselves affected by
farmers’ insurance decisions, as outlined in the theoretical models of the Samaritan’s dilemma:
areas that buy less insurance coverage may receive more aid. In this case, the simultaneity of
the insurance and bailout decisions will cause estimates of γ to be meaningless from a causal
point of view. Third, unobservable (to us) changes in risk may affect both insurance coverage and
disaster payments, again introducing bias to estimates of γ (e.g., Gollier and Pratt, 1996). Over
the period of our analysis several innovations, e.g., climate change and genetically modified seed,
have changed the pattern and practice of crop production in ways that may have affected both the
crop insurance decision and disaster payments but remain unobserved and unaccounted for in the
analysis. We discuss how we try to overcome these challenges in Section 4.3.
Table 2 shows the results of estimating equation (1) with ordinary least squares where our
measure of Insurancec,t is ln (P remiumsc,t ), the log of farmers’ out-of-pocket expenditure on
insurance (i.e., not counting subsidies) in county c in year t. We substitute the log of realized
disaster payments, ln (Disasterc,t + 1), for E[Disasterc,t ].18 All specifications include county
and year fixed effects, while Columns 4–6 also control for lagged county-level characteristics.
Standard errors are clustered by county.
We find a positive and highly significant relationship between contemporaneous disaster payments and insurance expenditure, possibly because both variables are responding to an unobserv18

We add 1 to disaster payments prior to taking the natural log due to the presence of many zeros. Our results are
robust to adding other positive numbers to all disaster payments and to replacing the zeros with small positive numbers.
Adding 1 to the dependent variables prior to taking the log, which we do not do in our preferred specifications,
increases the magnitude of most of our estimates, making our conclusions even stronger.

14

able shock. For example, low precipitation prior to the growing season may be indicative of adverse growing conditions, prompting farmers to take out more insurance to protect themselves and
leading to higher disaster payments. Additionally, the adoption of a high-value crop might prompt
more coverage and increase the size of disaster payments.
We also find a positive relationship between lagged disaster payments and insurance expenditure; when we include both lagged and contemporaneous disaster payments, each is significant.
Specifically, a 1% increase in disaster payments is associated with a 0.007 to 0.009% increase in
insurance expenditure in the current year and a 0.011 to 0.012% increase in the following year.
The lagged positive relationship can arise for a number of reasons. First, farmers who receive
disaster payments are typically required to purchase crop insurance in the next one or two years.
Second, an adverse event can trigger disaster payments and change farmers’ beliefs about risk to
their crops, resulting in more insurance in future years. More generally, simultaneity confounds
the OLS estimate of γ in equation (1). Thus, without a valid instrument for disaster payments, we
cannot say much about the Samaritan’s dilemma.
To address potential sources of bias in estimating γ, we need to isolate variation in disaster
payments that is correlated with farmers’ disaster aid expectations but uncorrelated with the risk
environment or insurance decisions more broadly. Consonant with the idea that the government
provides ad hoc disaster payments because of voters’ altruistic preferences toward farmers, our
instrument is derived from county-level voting patterns, which plausibly affect the benefits of crop
insurance only through their effect on disaster payments. We discuss this assumption in more detail
in the next section.

4.3

The Political Determinants of Disaster Aid

To identify the effect of aid expectations on the insurance decision, we exploit the political determinants of agricultural disaster aid over a twenty-year period, using the tactical redistribution
theory as our guide (Dixit and Londregan, 1996, 1998). The most commonly used model of tactical
redistribution is the “swing voter” model, which posits that elected officials cater to easily persuadable voters with pre-election promises (e.g., Lindbeck and Weibull, 1987; Dahlberg and Johansson,
2002).19 This model is typically formulated as two competing political parties promising transfers
in exchange for votes. The parties have limited resources and must thus direct transfers to places or
voters where they get the most “bang for their buck.” Rationally, the parties promise the marginal
dollar in a way that maximizes the number of votes they subsequently receive. The easiest-topersuade voters that are targeted by the marginal dollar of political funds are then referred to as
“swing voters.”
19

A full review of the literature on models of tactical redistribution is beyond the scope of this paper. For an
overview of special interest politics, see Grossman and Helpman (2002).

15

Although the theory behind the swing voter model is clear, the empirical literature in political
science and political economy has surprisingly little to say about the characteristics of actual swing
voters in the United States or even how to measure whether someone is easily persuadable.20 In
one of only two systematic studies, Mayer (2007) defines a swing voter as one who equally likes
or dislikes the two major parties.21 Using National Election Studies data from 1972–2004, he
finds that approximately 9% of voters view the two major parties equally favorably or equally
unfavorably and that these voters are almost equally likely to vote for Democrats and Republicans.
Expanding this definition to include voters who very slightly favor one party over another, he finds
that about 23% of the electorate can be classified as a swing voter in each presidential election
during this time period, on average. Surprisingly, there are few systematic demographic differences
(e.g., age, race, or gender) between swing and non-swing voters. However, swing voters are less
partisan, are more likely to be moderates, and care less about who wins the election.
No county-level surveys tell us how many voters are indifferent or close to indifferent between
the major parties. Our measure of easily persuadable voters in a county is the percentage of votes
cast for a third-party candidate in the most recent previous presidential election. It is generally
agreed that third-party voters are dissatisfied with the major parties and/or the government, feeling
alienated from or perceiving little difference between the two major parties (e.g., Rosenstone, 1996;
Donovan et al., 2000; Allen and Brox, 2005). Gold (1995) attributes the fact that 19% of voters
cast their ballot for Perot in the 1992 election to a “large base of weak partisans.” Contrary to
popular belief, Herron and Lewis (2007) predict that at least 40% of Nader voters in Florida would
have voted for Bush, not Gore, if Nader were not running.22 Both these findings support the idea
that third-party voters are promising targets for both major parties. Overall, the characteristics of
third-party voters correspond nicely to those we would expect swing voters to have.
Of course, if third-party voters’ expression of dissatisfaction were permanent, they would not
be easy to persuade. However, the national share of votes going to a third party in a presidential
election varies widely: between 1988 and 2012, it ranged from under 2% in 2008 to almost 19%
in 1992. At the county level, the variation is even larger. Because we use county fixed effects,
our identification comes from the changes in the share of votes going to a third party, which corresponds to voters who switch between (a) voting for a major party or not voting at all and (b) voting
for a third-party candidate. Year fixed effects flexibly account for the overall trend in third-party
voting over this time period. As discussed in Section 4.1, the geographic variation in the residual
changes in third-party voting patterns is substantial.
20

For example, considering only “undecided” voters as swing voters might miss a substantial fraction of the electorate with a very weak and easily changeable preference (Mayer, 2007).
21
Also see Kelley (1983).
22
To do this, they analyze actual ballots, using individual voting patterns in non-presidential races to estimate the
counterfactual in the presidential race.

16

Politicians appear to be aware of the perils and opportunities that third parties represent. For
example, the Nader candidacy appears to have affected how and where Al Gore campaigned in
2000 (Ceaser and Busch, 2001). More generally, Hirano and Snyder (2007) find that much of
the 20th century decline in third-party voting in the United States was due to the Democratic Party
adopting left-wing third parties’ agendas. More recently, the emergence of the Tea Party movement
seems to have caused the Republican party to shift to the right in order to attract disaffected voters
(Jacobson, 2011; Abramowitz, 2011; Williamson et al., 2011).
We do not claim that the swing voter channel is the only one through which politicians direct
agricultural funds to their advantage. Politicians may also allocate aid in response to their core
constituents’ preferences—the “core voter” theory (e.g., Cox and McCubbins, 1986; Levitt and
Snyder, 1995)—or to increase voter support by a combination of increasing turnout of loyal voters
and decreasing turnout of non-loyal voters (Chen, 2013). Because our main goal is to estimate the
effect of disaster aid on the decision to insure, we require only one credible instrument for disaster
aid, and fully explaining the political process behind the allocation of funds is outside the scope of
our inquiry.
Counties are natural geo-political units at which to direct disaster payments, and politicians
need not be trying to win elections at the county level to want to direct disaster payments to specific counties. Rather, politicians competing (or expecting to compete) in elections at the congressional district, state, or even national level may find targeting specific counties appealing because
counties are the “units” of disaster declarations and because certain counties contain more easily
persuadable voters. However, we do not use the number of third-party voters as our instrument to
avoid capturing variation driven by unobservable county growth patterns that may be, for example,
reducing the amount of farmland.
Despite being a small share of the voting population, targeting farmers can yield many votes at
the margin, because voters who are concerned about farmers are likely to respond to disaster payments to farmers. Previous research has shown that the majority of Americans favor agricultural
subsidies for small farms (e.g., Kull et al., 2004; Ellison et al., 2010b,a; Lusk, 2012). At the same
time, most Americans believe that small farmers get an equal or greater share of agricultural subsidies than large farmers, while in reality the former receive only 20% (Kull et al., 2004). Moreover,
the second most common reason for favoring subsidies is the unpredictability of farmers’ incomes,
due to weather and other factors (Ellison et al., 2010a).23 Relatedly, the majority of subsidy proponents prefer to give farmers subsidies only in “bad years” (Kull et al., 2004). Finally, although
an earlier study finds higher levels of support for farm subsidies among Democrats (Variyam et al.,
1990), more recent studies find no relationship between a Republican versus Democratic party af23

The most common reason is to maintain a secure food supply for U.S. citizens, which might also lead voters to
support disaster aid.

17

filiation and the level of support for farm subsidies (Ellison et al., 2010a; Lusk, 2012). Thus, it is
rational for Congressmen to allocate agricultural disaster spending strategically, including to areas
where farmers are not a large fraction of the voting population.
While it is true that farmers make up a small share of the average county’s population, there
are a few counties where farm proprietors make up a quarter or more of the population and where
farm employment is a very large component of total employment. In order for third-party voting
to remain a valid source of exogenous variation in these counties, it must be true that (a) variations
in third-party voting are largely driven by non-farmers and non-farm workers OR (b) the factors
that drive farmers’/farm workers voting patterns (and are unobservable to us) do not also affect
farmers’ crop insurance decisions directly. While the first condition almost certainly does not hold
in counties where farmers and their employees make up a large share of the population, the second
condition is more plausible, especially once we control for time-varying characteristics such as
farm income and the agricultural share of employment. However, because identifying assumptions
are fundamentally untestable, we also replicate our analysis using only the sample of counties
where agricultural employment never exceeds 5% of total employment, with little changes to our
results.
Other commonly considered determinants of disaster payments, such as Representatives’ membership on the Agriculture or Appropriations Committee (see, e.g., Garrett, Marsh, and Marshall,
2006; Goodwin and Vado, 2007), are less likely to be appropriate instruments because they relate to
farmers’ insurance purchases through more channels that just disaster payments, i.e., they violate
the instrument exclusion restriction. Assignment to these committees is not random. Unobservable
(to the econometrician) changes in the agricultural sector in their jurisdictions that might directly
affect insurance purchase decisions also could cause a Congressperson to pursue these committee assignments. These unobservable changes are precisely the reason an instrumental variables
strategy is necessary, so using these disaster payment determinants would not solve the problem.
As a robustness check, however, we will explore the impact of using Congressional committee
membership as instrumental variables.
In the next section, we show that recent third-party voting behavior is correlated with realized
disaster aid. However, a reasonable concern is whether such behavior is correlated with farmers’
expectations about disaster aid, which we cannot observe. As discussed in the previous section, to
the extent that the first stage reflects a noisy measure of farmer expectations, our estimates will be
lower bounds. It is unlikely that farmers use observed third-party voting results directly in forming
expectations about future disaster payments. However, third-party voting behavior is likely correlated with other manifestations of discontent that predict future disaster payments and are easier for
the farmer to observe (but that are impossible for us to observe). For example, what farmers may
actually observe and use to form their expectations is discontent with elected leaders expressed
18

through conversations, town hall meetings, bumper stickers, third-party promotional material, and
so on. This discontent leads both to more third-party voting and more disaster payments. In this
case, third-party voting is a relevant instrument because it is a good proxy for voter discontent.
Alternatively, it could be that past voting patterns lead politicians to make promises about future
disaster aid in the event of a disaster, in which case third-party voting is again an appropriate instrument. Election-year promises aimed at farmers appear to be fairly common (e.g., Ganzel, 2007;
Seidl, 2010; Nosowitz, 2016), although systematic data on this phenomenon are not available.
To summarize, it seems plausible that politicians would target counties where a third-party candidate had recently won a surprisingly large number of votes by promising to allocate more agricultural disaster payments to farmers in that county. The identifying assumption is that county-level
voting outcomes are only related to the insurance decision through the disaster aid channel. The
summary statistics in Table 1 demonstrate that farmers represent a small fraction of the electorate
in most counties, and are thus unlikely to be driving the political trends. Thus, the exclusion restriction is likely to hold because we do not expect county-wide voting changes to directly affect or
be affected by an individual farmer’s incentives to insure. Nonetheless, in subsequent analysis we
control for time-varying county characteristics that could potentially affect both the crop insurance
decision and political attitudes.

5
5.1

The Effect of Disaster Aid on Crop Insurance
Swing Voters and the Allocation of Disaster Aid

We proceed by estimating the swing voter model, which makes up the first stage of our two-stage
approach:
ln (Disasterc,t ) = βP ctIndc,t−1 + X0c,t−1 θ + ac + at + νc,t ,

(2)

where ln (Disasterc,t ) is the log of total payments made to county c for a disaster in year t,
with 1 added to avoid dropping zeroes. The variable P ctIndc,t−1 measures the percentage of
the electorate that voted for a third party candidate, based on the most recent previous presidential election. We use all the years for which we have crop insurance and disaster data for the
estimation, including ones which did not follow a presidential election. For example, if X% of
the county’s electorate voted for a third-party candidate in 2004, we set P ctIndc,t−1 = X for
t = 2005, 2006, 2007, and 2008. Finally, as in equation (1), Xc,t−1 represents the time-varying
control variables that could potentially affect both the crop insurance decision and political attitudes and ac and at represent county and year fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered by
county.
19

Table 3 reports ordinary-least-squares regression estimates of equation (2). When no controls
or only county fixed effects are included (Columns 1 and 2), there is no significant relationship
between third-party voting and disaster payments, suggesting that there are important fixed determinants of third-party voting and/or disaster payments. For example, a charismatic third-party
candidate may attract a lot of votes, but if politicians understand that this is a temporary “shock,”
they are less likely to respond to such changes in voting patterns with disaster payments. Similarly,
widespread crop devastation in some years (e.g., the Great Flood of 1993) could lead to large disaster payments regardless of voting patterns, again leading to a weak correlation. For these reasons,
relying on more idiosyncratic variation is more appropriate.
The results when county and year fixed effects are included (Columns 3 and 4) show a strong
relationship between disaster payments and political changes in the county. Specifically, a one
standard deviation increase in the percent of people who voted for a third party candidate in the
last presidential election increases disaster payments in that county by 33 − 35%, suggesting that
disaster payments are indeed being used to sway independent voters. The F-statistic in the specification that includes controls for county characteristics, as well as year and county fixed effects
(Column 4), is well above the conventional threshold of 10.
All else equal, counties with higher populations, lower per-capita income and lower total employment receive more disaster payments. Perhaps surprisingly, changes in the number of farm
proprietors and the share of agricultural employment are not significant predictors of disaster payments. However, this pattern is consistent with our earlier hypothesis that agricultural disaster
payments are being used to sway the non-farming portion of the constituency. In this case, it
would not be unreasonable for changes in the local agricultural sector to make little difference for
disaster aid.

5.2

IV Regression Results

We next estimate the importance of the Samaritan’s dilemma for out-of-pocket spending on insurance, ln(P remiumsc,t ), by instrumenting for log disaster payments, ln(Disasterc,t ), with the
percentage of the electorate that voted for a third party candidate, P ctIndc,t−1 . Specifically, the
second stage of our two-stage approach is:
V

ln (P remiumsc,t ) = ac + at + γln (Disasterc,t ) + X0c,t−1 φ + εc,t .

(3)

V

The variable ln (Disasterc,t ) is the predicted value of the log of disaster payments from equation 2, the first stage. As above, Xc,t−1 represents the time-varying control variables that could
affect the crop insurance decision. In this specification, γ < 0 indicates the presence of the Samaritan’s dilemma.
20

Table 4 shows the effect of disaster payments on out-of-pocket crop insurance expenditure in a
county, as estimated by equation (3). Column 2 shows our preferred specification, which includes
controls for lagged county characteristics. A one-percent increase in expected disaster payments
causes spending on insurance to drop by 0.20 percent. This estimate is highly significant. Without
controlling for county characteristics, we get a slightly lower but still highly significant estimate
of −0.14 (Column 1). Furthermore, the results are even stronger if we include observations where
no out-of-pocket premiums are paid by adding 1 to net premiums prior to taking the log (Columns
3-4). In dollar terms, our preferred estimate roughly corresponds to a decrease in out-of-pocket
insurance spending of about $25, 000 per county for every percent increase in expected disaster
aid.24
Other measures of the insurance coverage are available to us. In Table 5, we estimate how
disaster payment expectations change total liability (Column 1). We again find evidence of the
Samaritan’s dilemma: a one percent increase in expected disaster payments lowers total liability by
0.19% or about $570, 000 per county. Column 2 in Table 5 shows the causal relationship between
disaster payments and the total number of policies (in logs). As with out-of-pocket premiums
and liability, the number of policies falls as expectations of disaster payments increase, with an
elasticity of about −0.2. However, without additional analyses, we cannot tell whether farmers are
completely dropping insurance coverage for some plots or simply consolidating multiple plots into
a single policy.
Total out-of-pocket premiums, liability, and (to some extent) the number of policies capture
both the extensive margin of the insurance decision (choosing whether or not to have crop insurance) and the intensive margin (choosing how much crop insurance to purchase). We cannot
estimate the intensive margin separately by looking at premiums per insured acre, for example,
because there could be differential selection out of insurance. We can, however, look at the extensive margin. In Column 3, we look at the number of insured acres as the outcome. Here, we find
no evidence that the number of acres insured declines, suggesting that farmers respond to disaster
payment expectations by reducing their coverage level rather than foregoing insurance altogether.
This response is sensible for several reasons. First, completely dropping coverage is risky because
disaster payments may end up not being given. Second, the 50% coverage level plans are almost
fully subsidized. Finally, disaster payments top up insurance indemnity payments until the sum
of the two reaches 95% of the farmer’s expected income, which means that farmers with the least
generous insurance plans will not lose out on most disaster payments.
Finally, we consider the extent to which the government crowds out its own premium subsidy
payments (Column 4). We find that insurance subsidy payments decrease by 0.34% for every
We arrive at this approximation by calculating eµ+bγ − eµ , where µ is the mean of the log of out-of-pocket
premiums and γ
b is the estimated impact of additional disaster payments.
24

21

percent increase in expected disaster payments. In dollar terms, this corresponds to about $43, 000
per county. Thus, for every dollar the government crowds out in farmer out-of-pocket spending, it
crowds out about $1.72 in subsidy spending.
One potential worry is that premium subsidies are changing with politics and/or disaster aid
expectations. However, as discussed earlier, premium subsidy rates do not vary geographically.
Unlike agricultural disaster payments, they are not ad hoc, do not change frequently, and, because
of their national nature, cannot be used to target specific geographic areas. Thus, politicians cannot
use the premium subsidy channel to deliver funds to particular areas, and any relationship between
premium subsidies and national politics will be accounted for by year fixed effects.
The facts that (a) the government pays for the majority of the costs of the crop insurance program and (b) government spending on disaster aid crowds out government spending on insurance
subsidies may make it seem like the crowding out of insurance by disaster aid is mostly semantics
and should not create an efficiency loss. However, the crowding out of subsidies only implies that
the total cost of public funds used for disaster aid is smaller than it would be if crop insurance were
not subsidized. The real source of inefficiency is that farmers are exposing themselves to more
risk in response to disaster aid expectations, as explained in Section 2. This inefficiency will arise
as long as ad hoc disaster aid reduces insurance coverage, regardless of whether crop insurance is
publicly or privately funded.
Next, we investigate whether the expectation of disaster payments causes some farmers to
switch to a less generous insurance plan. Recall that a farmer’s combined payments from crop insurance and disaster programs cannot exceed 95% of his baseline income. The probability that this
happens is increasing in the plan’s coverage level. Thus, instead of dropping insurance coverage
altogether, which could be devastating if disaster aid is not given, a farmer may choose a plan with
a lower coverage level.
To see if farmers are selecting out of more generous insurance plans, we look at changes in
the number of policies in different coverage levels. As in the case of liability and premiums paid,
these estimates will include both changes in who purchases insurance and changes in insurance
decisions among those who continue to insure. For simplicity, we combine coverage levels into
four groups: 50%, 55-65%, 70-75%, and 80-90% coverage levels. To avoid missing values, we
add 1 to each variable prior to taking the log.25 The results are shown in Table 6. We find that for
a 1% increase in expected disaster payments, the number of farmers choosing the most generous
set of plans falls by about 1.2%, while the number of plans with a 70 or 75% coverage level falls
by 0.4%. Correspondingly, there is a rise in the number of the less generous plans, by about 0.2%
in both the 50% and 55-65% coverage levels. The latter results confirm that some farmers are
25

Our results are similar if we do not add 1 to the number of policies prior to taking the log, although the number of
observations becomes unbalanced and the first stage F-statistics fall.

22

responding to higher expected disaster payments by switching to less generous insurance plans.26
Finally, it is important to recognize that farmers may also respond to disaster payments by
switching to a higher-risk crop, adopting a riskier farming strategy without switching crops (e.g.,
lowering pest control expenditure), or exerting less effort in maintaining crop yields if they anticipate that a disaster payment is likely. For example, extant literature suggests that in some cases
increased fertilizer applications reduce risk (Sheriff, 2005) or are perceived by farmers to reduce
risk (Stuart et al., 2014; Osmond et al., 2015). Alternatively, crop-switching can have an indirect
effect on farm inputs if the newly adopted crop requires a different amount of them.
How changes in farming strategies affect average yields is unclear. It is possible that average
yields are unchanged if the riskier strategy simply raises the yield variance. However, the riskier
strategy may also result in a higher expected yield and higher yield variance. Finally, because
disaster payments are higher when yields are lower, farmers have an incentive to reduce yieldenhancing efforts in times when disaster payments are likely. However, because historic yields
also affect payments, both under crop insurance and disaster aid, consistently targeting lower yields
is costly. It is thus theoretically unclear whether yields should increase, decrease, or remain unchanged with higher expectations of disaster payments. To construct a single measure of yields, we
use data on prices and production of eight major crops (barley, corn, cotton, oats, rice, sorghum,
soybeans, and wheat), and calculate the price-weighted yield in a county by summing price times
production across these crops, dividing by the total number of acres harvested, and taking the log.
In Table 7, we look at how disaster payments affect expenditure on farm labor and fertilizer,
price-weighted yields, and crop revenue. The results point to further welfare losses from farmers
altering their farming strategies in response to disaster payment expectations. We find that farm
labor costs fall by a small but significant amount (0.06% for a one-percent increase in disaster
payments), and fertilizer expenditure falls by about 0.12%. Price-weighted yields also fall by a
small but significant 0.03%, suggesting that farmers are switching to lower-value crops and/or
realizing lower crop yields. Relatedly, we find no evidence that farmers are switching to highervalue crops, as receipts from crop sales fall by 0.35% for every one-percent increase in expected
disaster payments.

5.3

Robustness

If our first stage yields a noisy measure of farmer expectations, then our second stage estimates
will be attenuated. While we cannot directly evaluate the seriousness of this problem because we
do not observe farmers’ expectations, we can check the robustness of our results by estimating a
26

If we look at the number of acres insured at each coverage level, our results are similar with the exception that the
number of acres covered at 70-75% coverage levels increases. This further points to farmers consolidating multiple
plots under the same insurance plan in response to disaster payment expectations.

23

model where farmer expectations are based on past disaster payments and instrument for these with
a deeper voting lag. Past disaster payments may affect farmer expectations about future disaster
payments more than local political activity.
An issue with using lagged disaster payments to study the Samaritan’s dilemma is that farmers
are often required to purchase crop insurance for 1-2 years after they receive disaster payments, resulting in a mechanical positive relationship between past disaster payments and current insurance
holdings. Unlike measurement error, which only attenuates estimates toward zero, such a requirement could in principle cause us to find a positive relationship between past disaster payments
and current insurance holdings, even if farmers do reduce insurance coverage in expectations of
disaster payments when they are not constrained by such requirements. Nonetheless, the results
we obtain from this model (shown in Appendix Table A3) are broadly similar to our preferred
specification. One exception is that we find a significant decrease in acres insured when using the
lagged model. This similarity suggests that post-aid insurance requirements are not important for
the dynamics we study here, possibly because the responses we measure appear to be happening
on the intensive rather than extensive margin.
In the mid-1990’s, the Federal Crop Insurance Reform and Department of Agriculture Reorganization Act of 1994 substantially reformed crop insurance. It is worth asking whether the Samaritan’s dilemma phenomenon was affected by this regime change. While we do not have enough
data to consider the pre-1996 period, we can easily restrict our sample to years 1996 and later. The
results, shown in Table A4, are generally stronger than what we obtain by using the entire sample
period. Importantly, we now find a significant extensive margin effect, with insured acres falling in
response to disaster payment expectations. These results demonstrate that the Samaritan’s dilemma
is a highly relevant phenomenon under the current crop insurance regime.
Our estimates could also be affected by dynamics where past third-party voting affects disaster
payments (and crop insurance choices) and disaster payments subsequently affect third-party voting. In another robustness check, we control for third-party voting two elections ago, which should
reduce the influence of these dynamics, and use third-party voting in the most recent election as
the instrument. The results, shown in Table A5, are not substantially affected by the inclusion of
this additional control variable.
As discussed earlier, while farming is a small fraction of the average county’s economy, there
are counties that rely heavily on agriculture. In these areas, overall agricultural outcomes may drive
voting patterns, implying that the instrument exclusion restriction no longer holds. To see whether
this affects our results, we exclude counties that report more than 5% agricultural employment at
any point in the sample. This restriction does not have a meaningful impact on the results, except
that the drop in labor costs is no longer significant (Appendix Table A6). In another robustness
check, we exclude counties that are not in our data for the full sample period (Appendix Table A7).
24

Our results are almost unchanged.
We also explored the impact of alternative measures of political influence as instrumental variables. Garrett et al. (2006) and Goodwin and Vado (2007) report that states receive more disaster
payments when they have a Representative or Senator on the Agriculture or Appropriations committee. A concern is that congresspeople choose membership on these committees when their state
experiences unobservable changes in the agricultural sector that might directly affect insurancepurchase decisions. Nevertheless, we examine the effect of including indicator variables of whether
a county’s congressperson is on the House Agriculture or Appropriations committee, committee
membership interacted with majority party membership, and whether the congressperson is chair
of the committee in the set of instrumental variables (Appendix Table A8).27 The results remain
essentially the same.
Our results are generally robust to a number of other assumptions. Adding 1 to the outcome
variables prior to taking the log generally increases the magnitude of our estimates and strengthens
our conclusions (Appendix Table A9). In addition, we find a marginally significant drop in the
number of acres insured in this case. Similarly, our results are invariant to adding larger or smaller
numbers (from 0.0001 to 100) to disaster aid payments prior to taking the log.28 Normalizing
insurance coverage and disaster aid measures by population, by the number of farm proprietors,
or by total cropland (as reported in the Census of Agriculture, with linear interpolation between
Census years) prior to taking the log also yields similar conclusions.
Finally, we have also probed the robustness of our instrument and second-stage results to including other controls that could affect both the insurance decisions of farmers and the population’s
decision of whether to vote for a third-party candidate. For example, the occurrence of extreme
events could plausibly lead farmers to increase their insurance coverage and cause voters to prefer
or stay away from a third-party candidate. Using data from the Spatial Hazard Events and Losses
Database for the United States (SHELDUS), we added flexible controls for up to four years of
past extreme events to our preferred specification. Our point estimates become slightly (but not
significantly) larger in absolute terms, but our overall conclusions are again left unchanged.

6

Conclusion

The Samaritan’s dilemma was described by James Buchanan forty years ago. This type of moral
hazard may exist in many areas of the economy, from banks taking on excessive risk to homeowners foregoing flood insurance because they expect to be bailed out. Its existence and magnitude
both have important implications for efficiency. However, few empirical papers confirm or dis27
28

Population-weighted shares are used when a county contains multiple congressional districts.
These and other results not in the Online Appendix are available upon request.

25

prove its existence.
We test for the existence of the Samaritan’s dilemma in U.S. agriculture, an area in which it
has long been posited to be a problem: since the establishment of modern crop insurance in 1980,
Congress has passed ad hoc bills granting disaster aid to farmers who suffered crop losses, even
if they had insurance. We instrument for disaster payments using political variation at the county
level. We then estimate how expected disaster payments affect farmers’ crop insurance decisions.
We find that the Samaritan’s dilemma exists and is of a non-trivial magnitude. Out-of-pocket
insurance expenditure is moderately sensitive to disaster payments, decreasing by 0.2% for every
percent increase in expected disaster payments. This is largely driven by farmers switching to less
generous insurance plans and consolidating multiple plots under the same policy. Furthermore,
bailout expectations also affect real outcomes, as farmers reduce expenditure on farm labor and
fertilizer and subsequently realize lower yields and lower revenues from crop sales.
Comparing our results to the previously estimated distortions from crop insurance, we find
that the distortions from ad hoc assistance appear to be greater. In contrast to disaster payments,
crop insurance deters moral hazard through deductibles, experience rating and nonlinear pricing
as coverage increases. Consequently, the moral hazard associated with crop insurance appears
to be small. Goodwin et al. (2004) find a small relationship between crop insurance and corn
acreage, and Weber et al. (2016) find no effect of expanded crop insurance coverage on farm
revenue or fertilizer expenditure. This contrast underscores the unique nature of the ex ante moral
hazard associated with the Samaritan’s dilemma. While insurance can be priced to minimize moral
hazard, ad hoc disaster relief addresses losses without distinguishing loss due to moral hazard.
Overall, our estimates imply that eliminating disaster payments would significantly raise crop
insurance coverage and reduce inefficiencies in farm investment decisions. Of course, eliminating
disaster payments would require the government to be able to commit to not grant them ex post,
something that it has not been able to do thus far.
If the government is unable to commit to not bail out farmers, why does it not give farmers
completely free insurance, as Coate (1995) suggests? One possibility is that it is politically advantageous to target ex post disaster payments to particular constituencies. Congress members may
get more “credit” from their constituencies for voting for disaster payments each year than for a
one-time passage of a free crop insurance bill. Alternatively, disaster payments might be useful
as a bargaining chip for Congressmen from non-disaster counties, who may use them to garner
support for their own policies. Finally, it is possible that an insurance system where farmers make
no out-of-pocket payments is politically infeasible or would result in even greater moral hazard
on other dimensions than those affected by ex ante uncertain ex post aid. Although the definitive
answer is outside the scope of this paper, it is a fruitful area for future research.

26

References
2000 Crop Disaster Program (2001). 66 Fed. Reg. 15979.
2005–2007 Crop Disaster Program (2008). 7 C.F.R. §760.805.
Abramowitz, A. (2011). Partisan polarization and the rise of the tea party movement. Working
paper.
Agriculture, Rural Development, Food and Drug Administration, and Related Agencies Appropriations Act, 1999 (1998). Pub. L. No. 105-277.
Allen, N. and B. J. Brox (2005). The roots of third party voting the 2000 nader campaign in
historical perspective. Party Politics 11(5), 623–637.
Babcock, B. A. (2012). The politics and economics of the us crop insurance program. In J. S. G.
Zivin and J. M. Perloff (Eds.), The Intended and Unintended Effects of U.S. Agricultural and
Biotechnology Policies. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.
Barnett, B. J. and J. R. Skees (1995). Region and Crop Specific Models of the Demand for Federal
Crop Insurance Insurance. Journal of Insurance Issues 18(2), 47–65.
Brown, J. R. and A. Finkelstein (2008). The interaction of public and private insurance: Medicaid
and the long-term care insurance market. The American Economic Review 98(3), 1083–1102.
Bruce, N. and M. Waldman (1991). Transfers in kind: Why they can be efficient and nonpaternalistic. American Economic Review 81(5), 1345–1351.
Buchanan, J. (1975). The samaritan’s dilemma. In E. S. Phelps (Ed.), Altruism, morality, and
economic theory, pp. 71–85. New York, NY: Russell Sage Foundation.
Ceaser, J. W. and A. Busch (2001). The perfect tie: The true story of the 2000 presidential election.
Rowman & Littlefield.
Chang, H.-H. and D. Zilberman (2014). On the political economy of allocation of agricultural disaster relief payments: application to taiwan. European Review of Agricultural Economics 41(4),
657–680.
Chen, J. (2013). Voter partisanship and the effect of distributive spending on political participation.
American Journal of Political Science, 57(1), 200–217.
Chetty, R. (2006). A new method of estimating risk aversion. The American Economic Review 96(5), pp. 1821–1834.
27

Chiappori, P.-A. (2000). Econometric models of insurance under asymmetric information. In
Handbook of insurance, pp. 365–393. Springer.
Coate, S. (1995). Altruism, the samaritan’s dilemma, and government transfer policy. Am. Econ.
Rev. 85(1), 46–57.
Coble, K. H., T. O. Knight, B. K. Goodwin, M. F. Miller, and R. M. Rejesus (2010, March). A
comprehensive review of the rma aph and combo rating methodology: Final report. Technical
report, U.S. Department of Agriculture.
Coble, K. H., M. F. Miller, R. M. Rejesus, R. Boyles, T. O. Knight, B. K. Goodwin, and G. Duffield
(2011, September). Methodology analysis for weighting historical experience – implementation
report. Technical report, U.S. Department of Agriculture, Washington, D.C.
Cole, S., A. Healy, and E. Werker (2012). Do voters demand responsive governments? evidence
from indian disaster relief. Journal of Development Economics 97(2), 167–181.
Cox, G. W. and M. D. McCubbins (1986). Electoral politics as a redistributive game. Journal of
Politics 48(2), 370–389.
Cutler, D. M. and J. Gruber (1996). Does public insurance crowd out private insurance? Quarterly
Journal of Economics 111(2), 391 – 430.
Dahlberg, M. and E. Johansson (2002). On the vote-purchasing behavior of incumbent governments. American Political Science Review 96(1), 27–40.
Dave, D. and R. Kaestner (2009, December). Health insurance and ex ante moral hazard: evidence
from Medicare. International Journal of Health Care Finance and Economics 9(4), 367–90.
Dijkstra, B. R. (2007). Samaritan versus rotten kid: Another look. Journal of Economic Behavior
& Organization 64(1), 91–110.
Dixit, A. and J. Londregan (1996). The determinants of success of special interests in redistributive
politics. Journal of politics 58(4), 1132–1155.
Dixit, A. and J. Londregan (1998). Ideology , Tactics , and Efficiency in Redistributive Politics.
The Quarterly Journal of Economics 113(2), 497–529.
Donovan, T., S. Bowler, and T. Terrio (2000). Support for third parties in california. American
Politics Research 28(1), 50–71.
Ehrlich, I. and G. S. Becker (1972). Market insurance, self-insurance, and self-protection. The
Journal of Political Economy 80(4), 623–648.
28

Ellison, B., J. L. Lusk, and B. Briggeman (2010a). Other-regarding behavior and taxpayer preferences for farm policy. The BE Journal of Economic Analysis & Policy 10(1), Article 96.
Ellison, B., J. L. Lusk, and B. Briggeman (2010b). Taxpayer beliefs about farm income and
preferences for farm policy. Applied Economic Perspectives and Policy 32(2), 338–354.
Food, Conservation, and Energy Act of 2008 (2008). Pub. L. No. 110-246, §12033, 122 Stat. 1663.
Ganzel, B. (2007). Jfk’s farm programs. Technical report, Wessels Living History Farm. http:
//www.livinghistoryfarm.org/farminginthe50s/money_06.html.
Garrett, T., T. Marsh, and M. Marshall (2006, June). Political allocation of US agriculture disaster
payments in the 1990s. International Review of Law and Economics 26(2), 143–161.
Glauber, J. W. and K. J. Collins (2002). Crop insurance, disaster assistance, and the role of the federal government in providing catastrophic risk protection. Agricultural Finance Review 62(2),
81–101.
Gold, H. J. (1995). Third party voting in presidential elections: a study of perot, anderson, and
wallace. Political Research Quarterly 48(4), 751–773.
Gollier, C. and J. W. Pratt (1996). Risk vulnerability and the tempering effect of background risk.
Econometrica: Journal of the Econometric Society, 1109–1123.
Goodwin, B. K. and L. A. Vado (2007). Public responses to agricultural disasters: rethinking the role of government. Canadian Journal of Agricultural Economics/Revue canadienne
d’agroeconomie 55(4), 399–417.
Goodwin, B. K. B., M. L. M. Vandeveer, and J. J. L. Deal (2004). An Empirical Analysis of
Acreage Effects of Participation in the Federal Crop Insurance Progam. American Journal of
Agricultural Economics, 1058–1077.
Grossman, G. M. and E. Helpman (2002). Special interest politics. MIT press.
Gruber, J. and K. Simon (2008). Crowd-out 10 years later: Have recent public insurance expansions crowded out private health insurance? Journal of Health Economics 27(2), 201 – 217.
Hagen, R. J. (2006). Samaritan agents? on the strategic delegation of aid policy. Journal of
Development Economics 79(1), 249–263.
Harrison, G. W., J. A. List, and C. Towe (2007). Naturally occurring preferences and exogenous
laboratory experiments: A case study of risk aversion. Econometrica 75(2), 433–458.
29

Herron, M. and J. Lewis (2007). Did ralph nader spoil a gore presidency? a ballot-level study of
green and reform party voters in the 2000 presidential election. Quarterly Journal of Political
Science 2(3), 205–226.
Hirano, S. and J. M. Snyder (2007). The decline of third-party voting in the united states. Journal
of Politics 69(1), 1–16.
Jacobson, G. C. (2011). The president, the tea party, and voting behavior in 2010: Insights from the
cooperative congressional election study. Available at SSRN: http://ssrn.com/abstract=1907251
or http://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.1907251.
Jose, H. D. and R. S. K. Valluru (1997, November). Insights from the crop insurance reform act of
1994. Agribusiness 13(6), 587–598.
Kaplow, L. (1991). Incentives and government relief for risk. Journal of Risk and Uncertainty 4(2),
167–175.
Kelley, S. (1983). Interpreting elections. Princeton University Press Princeton.
Kim, B. J. and H. Schlesinger (2005). Adverse selection in an insurance market with governmentguaranteed subsistence levels. Journal of Risk and Insurance 72(1), 61 – 75.
Kousky, C., E. O. Michel-Kerjan, and P. A. Raschky (2015). Does federal disaster assistance crowd
out private insurance? Working Paper.
Kull, S., C. Ramsay, S. Subias, and E. Lewis (2004). Americans on globalization, trade, and farm
subsidies. Program on International Policy Attitudes, University of Maryland.
Leip, D. (2014). Dave leip’s atlas of us presidential elections.
Levitt, S. D. and J. M. Snyder (1995). Political parties and the distribution of federal outlays.
American Journal of Political Science 39(4), 958–980.
Lindbeck, A. and J. W. Weibull (1987). Balanced-budget redistribution as the outcome of political
competition. Public Choice 52(3), 273–297.
Lusk, J. L. (2012). The political ideology of food. Food Policy 37(5), 530–542.
Mayer, W. G. (2007). The swing voter in american presidential elections. American Politics
Research 35(3), 358–388.

30

McDonald, J. D. and D. A. Sumner (2003). The Influence of Commodity Programs on Acreage
Response To Market Price: With an Illustration Concerning Rice Policy in the United States.
American Journal of Agricultural Economics 85(4), 857–871.
Niewuwoudt, W. L. and J. B. Bullock (1985). The Demand for Crop Insurance. In International
Association of Agricultural Economists, Malaga, Spain, pp. 655–667.
Nosowitz, D. (2016).
Here are 5 issues that caused farmers to vote for
trump.
Modern Farmer.
http://modernfarmer.com/2016/11/
5-issues-caused-farmers-vote-trump/.
Osmond, D. L., D. L. Hoag, A. E. Luloff, D. W. Meals, and K. Neas (2015). Farmers’ use of nutrient management: lessons from watershed case studies. Journal of environmental quality 44(2),
382–390.
Pedersen, K. R. (1996). Aid, investment and incentives. The Scandinavian Journal of Economics 98(3), 423–437.
Pedersen, K. R. (2001). The samaritan’s dilemma and the effectiveness of development aid. International Tax and Public Finance 8(5-6), 693–703.
Raschky, P. and M. Schwindt (2009). Aid, natural disasters and the samaritan’s dilemma. World
Bank Policy Research Working Paper No. 4952.
Raschky, P. and H. Weckhannemann (2007). Charity hazard—A real hazard to natural disaster
insurance? Environmental Hazards 7(4), 321–329.
Rep. Combest (Texas) (1994, October). Concurring in the senate amendment to h.r. 4217, federal crop insurance reform and department of agriculture reorganization act of 1994, with an
amendment.
Rosenstone, S. J. (1996). Third parties in America: Citizen response to major party failure. Princeton University Press.
Seidl, J. (2010).
Obama keeps promise:
Usda gives $630 million to farmers.
theblaze.com.
http://www.theblaze.com/news/2010/09/15/
usda-distributes-election-year-farm-aid/.
Sheriff, G. (2005). Efficient waste? why farmers over-apply nutrients and the implications for
policy design. Review of Agricultural Economics, 542–557.

31

Shields, D. A. (2010, December). A Whole-Farm Crop Disaster Program: Supplemental Revenue Assistance Payments (SURE). Technical Report R40452, Congressional Research Service,
Washington, D.C.
Stuart, D., R. Schewe, and M. McDermott (2014). Reducing nitrogen fertilizer application as a climate change mitigation strategy: Understanding farmer decision-making and potential barriers
to change in the us. Land use policy 36, 210–218.
Svensson, J. (2000). When is foreign aid policy credible? aid dependence and conditionality.
Journal of development economics 61(1), 61–84.
Svensson, J. (2003). Why conditional aid does not work and what can be done about it? Journal
of development economics 70(2), 381–402.
United States Agency for International Development (2014).
Foreign Assistance Fast
Facts. https://eads.usaid.gov/gbk/data/fast_facts.cfm. [Online; accessed
September 25, 2014].
U.S. General Accounting Office (1989). DISASTER ASSISTANCE: Crop Insurance Can Provide
Assistance More Effectively Than Other Programs. Technical report, United States General
Accounting Office.
U.S. Government Accountability Office (1980, June). Federal Disaster Assistance: What Should
The Policy Be? Number PAD-80-39. Washington, D.C.: Government Printing Office.
U.S. Troop Readiness, Veterans’ Care, Katrina Recovery, and Iraq Accountability Appropriations
Act of 2007 (2007). Pub. L. No. 110-28, §9001, 121 Stat. 213.
Variyam, J. N., J. L. Jordan, and J. E. Epperson (1990). Preferences of citizens for agricultural
policies: evidence from a national survey. American Journal of Agricultural Economics 72(2),
257–267.
Weber, J. G. and N. Key (2012, jan). How Much Do Decoupled Payments Affect Production?
An Instrumental Variable Approach With Panel Data. American Journal of Agricultural Economics 94(1), 52–66.
Weber, J. G., N. Key, and E. O ’donoghue (2016). Does Federal Crop Insurance Make Environmental Externalities From Agriculture Worse? Journal of the Association of Environmental and
Resource Economists 3(September), 707–742.
Weiss, D. and J. Weidman (2013). Disastrous spending: Federal disaster-relief expenditures rise
amid more extreme weather. Center for American Progress Report.
32

Williamson, V., T. Skocpol, and J. Coggin (2011). The tea party and the remaking of republican
conservatism. Perspectives on Politics 9(01), 25–43.

33

Figures
Figure 1: Crop Insurance Premium Subsidy Rates from 1990-2011

Notes: Each line illustrates the national subsidy rate for individual yield and individual revenue insurance plans at
each coverage level under the assumption that the farmer does not combine multiple crops under one insurance policy.
Data Source: USDA Risk Management Agency Summary of Business files.

34

Figure 2: Share of Insurable Acres Covered by Crop Insurance from 1990-2011

35

Figure 3: Indemnity and disaster payments over time

Notes: Disaster payment series represents payments to producers of crops for which insurance is available.

36

Figure 4: Absolute mean changes in percent voting for third party candidate

Notes: Illustrates mean absolute changes between 1988 and 2008, accounting for national trends and county fixed
effects. Darker areas indicate larger changes. Shown only for counties included in the regression sample.

37

Tables
Table 1: Summary statistics

Percent of population who are farm proprietors
Percent employed in forestry or agriculture
Farm income as percent of total income
Number of policies
Acres insured (thousands)
Premiums net of subsidies (thousands)
Subsidies (thousands)
Liability (millions)
Indemnity (thousands)
Disaster payments (thousands)

(1)
Mean

(2)
Std. Dev.

(3)
Min

(4)
Max

(5)
Obs

3.71
1.03
3.50
420
66
673
883
18
1,236
460

3.96
2.35
8.22
602
98
1,233
1,775
34
3,385
1,539

0
0
-314
0
0
0
0
0
0
-95

37
100
125
7,304
1,036
22,455
32,163
890
152,862
109,931

60,592
60,590
60,592
60,592
60,592
60,592
60,592
60,592
60,592
60,592

Sources: Regional Economic Information Systems, County Business Patterns, and David Leip’s Atlas of U.S. Presidential Elections. Unit of observation is a county-year. All monetary amounts are in 2011 dollars. Excludes counties
with fewer than 18 observations over the sample period and observations that are missing control variables. Total
number of counties in the sample is 2916.

38

Table 2: The relationship between insurance expenditure and disaster payments, OLS
(1)
Disaster aid this year (log)

(2)

(3)

(4)
0.009***
(0.001)

0.012***
(0.001)

0.007***
(0.001)
0.012***
(0.001)

0.009***
(0.001)

Disaster aid last year (log)
Farm proprietors (log)
Pct. employed in ag.
Population (log)
Per capita pers. inc. (log)
Total employment (log)

Dep. var. mean
Observations
R-squared

11.837
57,879
0.916

11.861
55,105
0.920

11.861
55,105
0.920

(5)

(6)

-0.283***
(0.093)
-0.004
(0.004)
-0.177
(0.124)
-0.676***
(0.115)
-0.035
(0.056)

0.012***
(0.001)
-0.217**
(0.096)
-0.004
(0.004)
-0.260**
(0.129)
-0.649***
(0.112)
-0.014
(0.057)

0.007***
(0.001)
0.011***
(0.001)
-0.216**
(0.096)
-0.004
(0.004)
-0.266**
(0.129)
-0.646***
(0.112)
-0.011
(0.057)

11.837
57,879
0.917

11.862
55,210
0.920

11.861
55,105
0.920

Significance levels: * 10 percent, ** 5 percent, *** 1 percent. Standard errors (in parentheses) clustered by county.
Outcome variable is log of farmers’ out-of-pocket expenditure on crop insurance in the county. All regressions include
county and year fixed effects. Specifications with controls also include farm income decile indicators, which are
omitted for readability. All control variables are lagged by one year.

39

Table 3: The effect of politics on disaster payments

Pct. voting for third party (std. dev.)

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

0.029
(0.019)

-0.014
(0.018)

0.319***
(0.049)

0.291***
(0.049)
-0.044
(0.173)
-0.012
(0.009)
0.557**
(0.249)
-0.590**
(0.272)
-0.395***
(0.134)

None
2.347
7.681
60,475
0.000

County
0.654
7.681
60,475
0.103

County, Year
41.846
7.681
60,475
0.663

County, Year
35.262
7.681
60,475
0.664

Number of farm proprietors (log)
Pct. employed in forestry/agriculture
Population (log)
Per capita personal income (log)
Total employment (log)

Fixed effects
F-statistic
Dep. var. mean
Observations
R-squared

Significance levels: * 10 percent, ** 5 percent, *** 1 percent. Standard errors (in parentheses) clustered by county.
The outcome variable is log of (total disaster payments in the county + 1). Specifications with controls also include
farm income decile indicators, which are omitted for readability. All characteristics controls are lags.

40

Table 4: The effect of disaster payments on out-of-pocket insurance expenditure, IV
(1)
(2)
Net premium (log)
Disaster payments (log)

-0.137**
(0.058)

-0.197***
(0.066)
-0.293***
(0.101)
-0.005
(0.005)
-0.023
(0.145)
-0.817***
(0.137)
-0.124*
(0.069)

-0.285**
(0.119)

-0.371***
(0.136)
-0.372**
(0.171)
-0.010
(0.007)
-0.146
(0.251)
-1.054***
(0.224)
-0.161
(0.115)

52.195
11.837
57,845

44.827
11.837
57,845

43.967
11.328
60,455

37.050
11.328
60,455

Number of farm proprietors (log)
Pct. employed in forestry/agriculture
Population (log)
Per capita personal income (log)
Total employment (log)

F-statistic
Dep. var. mean
Observations

(3)
(4)
Net premium + 1 (log)

Significance levels: * 10 percent, ** 5 percent, *** 1 percent. Standard errors (in parentheses) clustered by county.
Disaster payments are instrumented for with the share of voters voting for a third-party candidate in the most recent
presidential election. Outcome variables are specified at the top of each column. The net premium is the farmers’
out-of-pocket expenditure on crop insurance in the county. All regressions include county and year fixed effects.
Specifications with county characteristics controls also include farm income decile indicators, which are omitted for
readability. All control variables are lagged by one year.

41

Table 5: The effect of disaster payments on other measures of insurance coverage, IV

Disaster payments (log)
Number of farm proprietors (log)
Pct. employed in forestry/agriculture
Population (log)
Per capita personal income (log)
Total employment (log)

F-statistic
Dep. var. mean
Observations

(1)
Liability (log)

(2)
Policies (log)

(3)
Acres insured
(log)

(4)
Subsidy (log)

-0.185***
(0.067)
0.114
(0.100)
-0.006
(0.005)
0.704***
(0.151)
-0.406***
(0.133)
-0.194***
(0.071)

-0.186***
(0.052)
0.088
(0.079)
-0.004
(0.003)
0.341***
(0.119)
-0.530***
(0.104)
-0.142***
(0.051)

0.019
(0.041)
-0.284***
(0.071)
0.000
(0.003)
0.572***
(0.104)
-0.292***
(0.087)
-0.214***
(0.047)

-0.336***
(0.077)
-0.206**
(0.099)
-0.007
(0.005)
0.287*
(0.150)
-0.538***
(0.148)
-0.214***
(0.078)

37.816
15.026
60,004

37.816
4.698
60,004

38.327
9.470
59,396

37.816
11.925
60,004

Significance levels: * 10 percent, ** 5 percent, *** 1 percent. Standard errors (in parentheses) clustered by county.
Disaster payments are instrumented for with the share of voters voting for a third-party candidate in the most recent
presidential election. Outcome variables are specified at the top of each column. All regressions include year and
county fixed effects as well as farm income decile indicators, which are omitted for readability. All control variables
are lagged by one year.

42

Table 6: The effect of disaster payments on coverage level choice, IV

Disaster payments (log)
Number of farm proprietors (log)
Pct. employed in forestry/agriculture
Population (log)
Per capita personal income (log)
Total employment (log)

F-statistic
Dep. var. mean
Observations

(1)
50% (log)

(2)
55-65% (log)

(3)
70-75% (log)

(4)
80-90% (log)

0.203***
(0.064)
0.115
(0.083)
0.004
(0.003)
0.552***
(0.134)
0.286**
(0.122)
0.023
(0.064)

0.178***
(0.057)
0.630***
(0.080)
0.007**
(0.003)
0.602***
(0.122)
-0.099
(0.109)
-0.047
(0.054)

-0.374***
(0.100)
-0.437***
(0.126)
-0.037***
(0.008)
-1.094***
(0.203)
-0.388**
(0.198)
-0.034
(0.097)

-1.150***
(0.199)
-2.501***
(0.230)
-0.037***
(0.012)
-1.768***
(0.350)
-2.445***
(0.366)
0.043
(0.185)

37.050
3.237
60,455

37.050
3.579
60,455

37.050
2.912
60,455

37.050
0.997
60,455

Significance levels: * 10 percent, ** 5 percent, *** 1 percent. Standard errors (in parentheses) clustered by county.
Disaster payments are instrumented for with the share of voters voting for a third-party candidate in the most recent
presidential election. Outcome variables are the logged number of policies in the coverage levels indicated at the top
of each column. 1 has been added to all outcome variables prior to taking the log. All regressions include year and
county fixed effects, as well as controls for county characteristics. Farm income decile indicators are included in the
regression but are omitted from the table for readability. All control variables are lagged by one year.

43

Table 7: The effect of disaster payments on input spending and real outcomes, IV

Disaster payments (log)
Number of farm proprietors (log)
Pct. employed in forestry/agriculture
Population (log)
Per capita personal income (log)
Total employment (log)

F-statistic
Dep. var. mean
Observations

(1)
Labor cost (log)

(2)
Fertilizer
spending (log)

(3)
Price-weighted
mean yield
(log)

(4)
Cash receipts
(log)

-0.060**
(0.024)
0.140***
(0.033)
-0.001
(0.002)
0.211***
(0.052)
0.191***
(0.050)
0.018
(0.025)

-0.121***
(0.029)
-0.041
(0.035)
-0.006**
(0.002)
-0.398***
(0.061)
-0.063
(0.057)
0.011
(0.028)

-0.034**
(0.015)
-0.057***
(0.019)
-0.001
(0.002)
-0.156***
(0.029)
-0.033
(0.030)
0.004
(0.015)

-0.347***
(0.063)
0.248***
(0.069)
-0.004
(0.004)
-0.135
(0.109)
-0.108
(0.113)
-0.079
(0.057)

34.966
8.434
60,881

36.758
8.375
60,704

28.656
1.496
51,544

35.172
9.876
60,942

Significance levels: * 10 percent, ** 5 percent, *** 1 percent. Standard errors (in parentheses) clustered by county.
Disaster payments are instrumented for with the share of voters voting for a third-party candidate in the most recent
presidential election. All regressions include year and county fixed effects, as well as controls for county characteristics. Farm income decile indicators are included in the regression but are omitted from the table for readability. All
control variables are lagged by one year.

44

Appendix (For Online Publication Only)
Crop Insurance and Disaster Aid Payment Calculations
Individual farmers’ disaster payments are calculated in much the same way as a crop insurance
indemnity payment.29 Equation (4) illustrates the basic structure of an insurance indemnity or a
disaster payment.
max[0, Ȳ − Y ]
P ayment = P̄
× Ȳ} ×
,
(4)
| {z
Ȳ
|
{z
}
Protection

Trigger

where P̄ is the price guarantee, Ȳ is the yield guarantee, and Y is the actual yield. The yield
guarantee equals the farmer’s average actual yield over the past 4–10 years.30
As the left half of equation (4) shows, the protection level for both crop insurance and disaster
assistance equals the price guarantee multiplied by the yield guarantee. The right half of Equation (4) illustrates the triggering mechanism: farmers begin to receive payments once the actual
yield falls below the yield guarantee.
Farmers choose the price and yield guarantees (P̄ × Ȳ ) that determine their crop insurance
indemnity payment. They typically choose 100% of the USDA-calculated expected market price
as the price guarantee. The indemnity payment trigger can be determined by a) individual yield,
b) individual revenue, c) mean county yield, or d) mean county revenue. Farmers cannot take
out multiple insurance plans for the same plot. However, farmers who have multiple land parcels
within the same county can choose to combine them under a single policy, as long as the same crop
is grown on each one. This lowers the farmers’ premium as well as the probability that the farmer
receives an indemnity payment.
Within these plan types, farmers choose the covered yield—Ȳ in equation (4)—as a percentage
of their historical yield ranging from 50% to 90% in 5% increments.31 For example, if a farmer
chooses a 65% coverage level in an individual yield plan, he does not receive payments until his
actual yield (Y ) falls to more than 35% below his historical baseline.
The trigger for free-to-the-farmer disaster payments is legislated by Congress. However, as
with crop insurance, its basis is determined by the yield shortfall. Historically, Congress has set
the yield guarantee (Ȳ ) to 65% of a farm’s historical-average yield. The price guarantee (P̄ ) is
often set at 60% of the market price, but it has been set as low as 45% in some years. To encourage
29

Only the Supplemental Revenue Assistance Program (SURE) differs substantively from the following description.
Despite program differences, SURE provides similar incentives for farmers to under insure. See Shields (2010) for
details on SURE.
30
In cases where insurance is based on the county’s rather than the individual’s yield, the yield guarantee is the
expected county yield, as calculated from historic data.
31
Not all coverage levels are available for all plan types and in all years. For a more comprehensive overview of the
U.S. crop insurance market, see Babcock (2012).

45

future uptake of crop insurance, the legislation provides a higher price guarantee for disaster aid to
farms with crop insurance vis-à-vis farms who could have purchased crop insurance but did not.
Because disaster payments “top up” indemnities, crop insurance coverage does not crowd out
disaster payments until crop revenue, indemnity payments, and disaster payments add up to 95%
of expected revenue. The following table shows the production loss at which indemnity payments
begin to crowd out disaster payments one-for-one due to the 95% rule.
Table 8: Crop loss at which the 95% rule binds for a given coverage level
(1)
Coverage Level

(2)
Crop Loss (%)

85
80
75
70
65
60
55

50–100
58–100
66–100
73.5–100
81–100
89–100
96.5–100

Calculated based on a 60% replacement rate starting at 35% crop loss.

Crop Insurance Pricing
As discussed earlier, approved crop insurance providers are restricted to offering a uniform set of
products at uniform prices. The prices are, in turn, set by the Risk Management Agency (RMA)
of the USDA. In this section, we discuss the key features of RMA’s price-setting methodology
in more detail. Although a full overview of the methodology is far beyond the scope of this
paper, the omitted nuances do not affect our overall assertion that price-setting in crop insurance is
overwhelmingly formulaic and thus extremely unlikely to be affected by disaster aid expectations
or politics, especially at a sub-national level.32
RMA’s main goal in setting crop insurance prices is to achieve an expected loss ratio (indemnities divided by gross premiums) of 1.33 This is feasible because crop insurance providers are
reimbursed for administrative and overhead costs separately, removing the need to load premiums.34 In this section, we discuss how rates are set for plans that insure individual yield (“Actual
Production History” or APH plans), which were the most popular plans during the time period of
32

For more details, interested readers should consult Coble et al. (2010) or RMA’s actuarial publications, available
through http://www.rma.usda.gov/pubs/, including the “Rate Methodology Handbook Actual Production
History” (http://www.rma.usda.gov/pubs/2008/ratemethodology.pdf).
33
Prior to the 2008 Farm Bill, the RMA had to achieve an expected loss ratio of 1.075 (Coble et al., 2010).
34
Administrative and overhead costs are likewise formulaic and are a function of the insurer’s portfolio of plans.

46

our study. APH prices also form the basis for plans that insure individual revenue (“Crop Revenue Coverage” or CRC plans and “Revenue Assurance” or RA plans). CRC and RA plans are on
average the second most popular crop insurance products in our sample and in recent years have
surpassed APH plans in their popularity. Together, these individual yield and revenue protection
plans accounted for 83% of insurance liability and 91% of insured acres during the 1990–2011
time period, on average. Other insurance plans rely on different rate-making methodologies, all of
which are nevertheless as formulaic as those for APH plans.
To price the plans, the RMA first determines a “base rate” for each county-crop combination
in each year, using the 65% coverage level as the baseline. The base rates form the backbone of
the crop insurance pricing formula and are calculated from that county’s insured individuals’ loss
experiences going back as far as 1975. Observations at or above the 80th percentile of losses are
considered “catastrophic” and are excluded from the calculation of the county base rate.35 To arrive
at the final base rate, RMA uses a spatial smoothing algorithm, combining a weighted average of
the county’s own calculated rate with those of its neighbors.
Another key component of the pricing formula is the “reference yield”, which is roughly the
expected yield across all producers of a given crop in a given area. The reference yield is based
on the county’s historic yield experience, accounting for the fact that average yields have been
increasing over time. The fluctuations around the trend are then used to construct the expected
distribution of losses, which also plays a key role in crop insurance pricing. Unlike the county
base rate, the reference yield is constructed using National Agricultural Statistics Service (NASS)
data, which include yields of both insured and uninsured farmers.
Next, the RMA sets the formula for how base rates should be translated into the price paid
for insuring a particular plot, using observable characteristics such as the growing practice, the
plot’s own yield history relative to the county’s, whether the crop is irrigated or not, whether the
land is considered high-risk, etc. In addition, adjustment factors for additional insurance coverage,
such as prevented or delayed planting protection, are calculated. Finally, the RMA calculates
“coverage differential” factors to translate the 65% coverage level price into prices for higher or
lower coverage levels. The pricing formula does not vary geographically, while the adjustment
factors and coverage differentials do. Unlike the base rate and reference yield, the pricing formula
and other above-mentioned factors rarely change from year to year.
Importantly, this formulaic approach is applied uniformly to all counties and crops that are
part of the insurance program, leaving little room for discretion. Unsurprisingly, this sometimes
results in significant outliers. Several rules are in place to handle such cases. With few exceptions,
for example, the rate that any producer would pay for the same coverage cannot change by more
than 20% between years. In extreme cases, usually involving poor data quality, a more direct
35

Catastrophic loads are incorporated into prices during a later step.

47

intervention is warranted, and rates are reviewed by underwriting experts. Although we do not
have exact information on how often this happens, such expert reviews appear to be rare. Most
importantly, there is no evidence, anecdotal or otherwise, that politics or disaster aid expectations
have ever played a role in these reviews.

Simulating the Samaritan’s Dilemma in Crop Insurance
In this section, we describe the methodology and results of our simulation of farmer insurance
choice when there is a possibility for disaster payments. For simplicity, we assume that the farmer
is choosing only between plans that insure individual revenue, which we model as the farmer’s
total annual income. We assume that the farmer’s income is normally distributed with a mean of
$50,000 and standard deviation of $25,000. The farmer can take out subsidized insurance against
this risk. Specifically, he can choose coverage levels ranging from 50% to 90%, in increments of
5%, as in the federal crop insurance program. The coverage levels are relative to expected income.
Each coverage level can be thought of as the amount of guaranteed income relative to expected
income. This means, for example, that if the farmer chooses a coverage level of 75%, he will begin
receiving insurance indemnities once his income falls to 0.75 ∗ $50, 000 = $37, 500. The payouts
will restore his wealth to $37, 500.
We assume that crop insurance prices are actuarially fair from the insurer’s point of view and
are subsidized from the farmer’s point of view. We use the subsidy rates from the 2001 and later
insurance years. Specifically, the subsidy rate for a 50% coverage level plan in our simulation is
0.67 or 67%; for 55 and 60%, it is 0.64; for 65 and 70%, it is 0.59; for 75%, it is 0.55; for 80%,
it is 0.48; for 85%, it is 0.38. Plans with 90% coverage are not subsidized. The farmers can also
choose a fully subsidized “catastrophic” insurance plan that only covers half the losses after the
farmer’s income falls to below 50% of the mean.36 However, because the 50% coverage plans
cover all losses beyond a 50% loss and are generously subsidized, the catastrophic insurance plans
are never chosen in our simulation.
Disaster payments are given on top of insurance payments, up to 95% of the farmer’s expected
income. Like income, they are variable, following a normal distribution with some expected value
µ and standard deviation σ. Disaster payments are negatively correlated with income with a correlation coefficient of ρ. We proceed by simulating a range of these three features of ad hoc
disaster payments: (1) how generous they are, as measured by the expected disaster payment,
µ ∈ [$5, 000, $30, 000], in increments of $2, 500, (2) how variable they are, as measured by their
standard deviation, σ ∈ [$5, 000, µ], in increments of $2, 500, and (3) how correlated they are with
income, as measured by the correlation coefficient, ρ ∈ [−0.9, −0.1], in increments of 0.1. In
36

Technically, farmers have to pay a small flat administrative fee for these plans. However, we ignore this in the
simulation.

48

theory, all three of these variations should play an important role in the effect of disaster payments
on crop insurance choice.
1−α
We assume that the farmer has constant relative risk aversion (CRRA) utility, given by w1−α ,
where w is total income (net of premium payments, indemnities, etc) and α is the degree of risk
aversion. To generate the results shown below, we use a relative risk aversion coefficient of 1.5
(Chetty, 2006), although larger and smaller values of α do not change our results in a meaningful
way.
To implement the simulation, we draw 10,000 joint realizations of income and disaster payments under each scenario described above. We truncate any negative incomes and negative disaster payments at zero. We also restrict disaster payments to be less than or equal to the difference
between expected income and realized income, and assume that the farmer receives no disaster
payments if realized income exceeds expected income. We use the resulting data to numerically
calculate actuarially fair insurance prices, subsidized insurance prices, and the farmer’s expected
utility under different coverage levels. Finally, we calculate which coverage level maximizes the
farmer’s expected utility in that scenario.
In our simulation, the crowdout of insurance by disaster payments is substantial. To summarize
the results in a way that is consistent with the analysis in the paper, we regress the calculated log
of out-of-pocket spending on the expected amount of disaster payments (in logs), the correlation
between disaster payments and income, and the standard deviation of disaster payments (also in
logs). The results of these regressions are shown in Table A10. Across all 594 scenarios, a onepercent increase in expected disaster payments lowers the amount of out-of-pocket expenditure on
insurance by 0.78 percent (Column 1). That number remains virtually unchanged when we control
for the correlation between disaster payments and income (Column 2) and rises to 0.84 when we
also control for the variability of disaster payments (Column 3). A higher correlation between
disaster payments and income, which implies a lower correlation between disaster payments and
losses significantly raises the out-of-pocket expenditure on insurance, as does a higher standard
deviation of disaster payments. Overall, the amount of crowd out we find in the simulation is on
average even higher than what we find empirically.

49

Appendix Tables

Table A1: Laws providing disaster assistance for farmers, 1989-2009
Disaster Assistance Act of 1988 (P.L. 100-387, August
11, 1988)
Dire Emergency Supplemental Appropriations for Natural Disasters and Operation Desert Shield/Desert
Storm (P.L. 102-229, December 12, 1991)
1997 Emergency Supplemental Appropriations Act for
Recovery from Natural Disasters, and for Overseas
Peacekeeping Efforts, Including Those in Bosnia (P.L.
105-18, June 12, 1997)
Emergency Supplemental Appropriations Act of 1994
(P.L. 103-211, February 12, 1994)

Disaster Assistance Act of 1989 (P.L. 101-82, August
14, 1989)
Dire Emergency Supplemental Appropriations Act,
1992; Hurricane Andrew, Typhoon Omar, Hurricane
Iniki, etc. (P.L. 102-368, September 23, 1992)
Emergency Supplemental Appropriations for Relief
from the Major, Widespread Flooding in the Midwest
Act of 1993 (P.L. 103-75, August 12, 1993)
Agricultural, Rural Development, FDA, and Related
Agencies Appropriations Act, 1995 (P.L. 103-330,
September 30, 1994)
Agricultural, Rural Development, FDA, and Related
Agencies Appropriations Act, 1997 (P.L. 104-180, August 6, 1996)
Supplemental Appropriations Act of 1993 (P.L. 103-50,
July 2, 1993)
Omnibus Appropriations Act of 1999 (P.L. 105-277,
October 21, 1998)
Agricultural, Rural Development, Food and Drug Administration, and Related Agencies Appropriations Act,
FY2000 (P.L. 106-78, October 22, 1999)
Agriculture Risk Protection Act of 2000 (P.L. 106-224,
June 20, 2000)
1999 Emergency Supplemental Appropriations Act
(P.L. 106-31, May 21, 1999)

Omnibus Consolidated Rescissions and Appropriations
Act of 1996 (P.L. 104-134, April 26, 1996)
Omnibus Consolidated Appropriations Act, 1997 (P.L.
104-208, September 30, 1996)
1998 Supplemental Appropriations and Rescissions Act
(P.L. 105-174, May 1, 1998)
Agricultural, Rural Development, Food and Drug Administration, and Related Agencies Appropriations Act,
FY2001 (P.L. 106-387, October 28, 2000)
Consolidated Appropriations Act for FY2000 (P.L. 106113, November 29, 1999)
Emergency Supplemental Act for FY2000 (Title II of
the Military Construction Appropriations Act, 2001)
(P.L. 106-246, July 13, 2000)
Supplemental Appropriations Act, 2001 (P.L. 107-20,
July 24, 2001)
Consolidated Appropriations Resolution, FY2003 (P.L.
108-7, February 20, 2003)

FY2001 Supplemental Authorization for Agriculture
(P.L. 107-25, August 13, 2001)
Military Construction Appropriations and Emergency
Hurricane Supplemental Appropriations Act, 2005 (P.L.
108-324, October 13, 2004)
U.S. Troop Readiness, Veterans’ Care, Katrina Recovery, and Iraq Accountability Appropriations Act, 2007
(P.L. 110-28, May 25, 2007)

Department of Defense, Emergency Supplemental Appropriations to Address Hurricanes in the Gulf of Mexico, and Pandemic Influenza Act, 2006 (P.L. 109-148,
December 30, 2005)
Consolidated Appropriations Act, 2008 (P.L. 110-161,
December 26, 2007)

American Recovery and Reinvestment Act (ARRA),
2009 (P.L. 111-5, Feb. 17, 2009)

50

Table A2: Examples of crop disaster assistance programs
Crop Disaster Assistance
Apple & Potato Quality Loss
Disaster - Cane Sugar
Disaster Assistance - Big Horn River

1999 Citrus Losses In California
Crop Hurricane Damage Program
Disaster - Hurricane Hugo
Disaster Reserve Flood Compensation Program
Disaster – Non-Program Crops
Emergency Assistance Program
Florida Hurricane Citrus Disaster
Hawaii Sugar Disaster

Disaster Supplemental Appropriation
Disaster – Program Crops
Emergency Conservation Program
Florida Sugarcane Disaster Assistance Program
Hurricane Indemnity Program
Louisiana Sugarcane Disaster - Hurricane
North Carolina Crop Hurricane Damage Program
Quality Losses Program
Specialty Crop Hurricane Disaster
Sugar Beet Disaster Program
Tobacco Disaster Assistance

Karnal Bunt Fungus Payment
Multi-Year Crop Loss Disaster Assistance
Pasture Flood Compensation
Single-Year Crop Loss Disaster Assistance
Supplemental Revenue Assistance Program
Tree Assistance Programs

51

Table A3: The effect of past disaster payments on insurance coverage, IV

Disaster payments last year (log)
Number of farm proprietors (log)
Pct. employed in forestry/agriculture
Population (log)
Per capita personal income (log)
Total employment (log)
F-statistic
Dep. var. mean
Observations

(1)
Net
premium
(log)

(2)
Liability
(log)

(3)
Policies
(log)

(4)
Acres
insured
(log)

(5)
Subsidy
(log)

-0.138**
(0.066)
-0.305***
(0.096)
-0.003
(0.004)
-0.209
(0.129)
-0.676***
(0.120)
-0.072
(0.061)

-0.268***
(0.069)
0.102
(0.106)
-0.004
(0.005)
0.494***
(0.153)
-0.252*
(0.136)
-0.176**
(0.071)

-0.350***
(0.070)
0.067
(0.097)
-0.002
(0.004)
0.099
(0.137)
-0.362***
(0.130)
-0.142**
(0.061)

-0.189***
(0.054)
-0.314***
(0.081)
0.001
(0.003)
0.522***
(0.115)
-0.292***
(0.100)
-0.265***
(0.053)

-0.507***
(0.096)
-0.229*
(0.121)
-0.002
(0.006)
-0.106
(0.172)
-0.256
(0.174)
-0.186**
(0.087)

34.626
11.837
57,843

38.367
15.026
60,002

38.367
4.698
60,002

36.776
9.470
59,394

38.367
11.925
60,002

Significance levels: * 10 percent, ** 5 percent, *** 1 percent. Standard errors (in parentheses) clustered by county.
Disaster payments are instrumented for with the share of voters voting for a third-party candidate in the most recent
presidential election. Outcome variables are specified at the top of each column. All regressions include year and
county fixed effects as well as farm income decile indicators, which are omitted for readability. All control variables
are lagged by one year.

52

Table A4: The effect of disaster payments after 1995, IV

Disaster payments (log)
Number of farm proprietors (log)
Pct. employed in forestry/agriculture
Population (log)
Per capita personal income (log)
Total employment (log)
F-statistic
Dep. var. mean
Observations

(1)
Net
premiums
(log)

(2)
Liability
(log)

(3)
Policies
(log)

(4)
Acres
insured
(log)

(5)
Subsidy
(log)

-0.392***
(0.099)
0.019
(0.149)
-0.001
(0.005)
-0.018
(0.238)
-1.324***
(0.245)
-0.405***
(0.127)

-0.400***
(0.102)
0.120
(0.141)
-0.006
(0.005)
0.188
(0.236)
-0.908***
(0.226)
-0.320**
(0.131)

-0.343***
(0.083)
0.138
(0.114)
-0.001
(0.005)
0.088
(0.185)
-0.761***
(0.186)
-0.281***
(0.102)

-0.241***
(0.067)
-0.245**
(0.097)
0.001
(0.004)
0.184
(0.148)
-0.675***
(0.153)
-0.275***
(0.086)

-0.588***
(0.132)
-0.224
(0.177)
-0.008
(0.007)
-0.402
(0.292)
-1.249***
(0.302)
-0.400**
(0.169)

27.359
12.036
42,317

23.882
15.306
44,214

23.882
4.800
44,214

24.665
9.697
43,625

23.882
12.432
44,214

Significance levels: * 10 percent, ** 5 percent, *** 1 percent. Standard errors (in parentheses) clustered by county.
Disaster payments are instrumented for with the share of voters voting for a third-party candidate in the most recent
presidential election. Outcome variables are specified at the top of each column. All regressions include county and
year fixed effects and controls for county characteristics. Coefficients on farm income decile indicators are omitted for
readability. All control variables are lagged by one year.

53

Table A5: Estimated effects when controlling for third-party voting two elections ago, IV
(1)
Net premiums
(log)

(2)
Liability (log)

(3)
Policies (log)

(4)
Acres insured
(log)

(5)
Subsidy (log)

Panel A: Controlling for third-party voting two elections ago
Disaster payments (log)
F-statistic
Dep. var. mean
Observations

-0.298***
(0.088)

-0.197**
(0.086)

-0.140**
(0.058)

0.061
(0.053)

-0.290***
(0.085)

37.495
11.927
50,024

30.751
15.163
52,176

30.751
4.775
52,176

30.754
9.603
51,581

30.751
12.185
52,176

Panel B: Estimates for panel A sample without controlling for third-party voting two elections ago
Disaster payments (log)
F-statistic
Dep. var. mean
Observations

-0.334***
(0.095)

-0.261***
(0.095)

-0.188***
(0.066)

0.027
(0.055)

-0.388***
(0.101)

36.085
11.927
50,024

29.269
15.163
52,176

29.269
4.775
52,176

29.787
9.603
51,581

29.269
12.185
52,176

Significance levels: * 10 percent, ** 5 percent, *** 1 percent. Standard errors (in parentheses) clustered by county.
Disaster payments are instrumented for with the share of voters voting for a third-party candidate in the most recent
presidential election. Outcome variables are specified at the top of each column. All regressions include county and
year fixed effects and controls for county characteristics (omitted for readability). All control variables are lagged by
one year.

54

Table A6: The effect of disaster payments on insurance decisions, no farm counties, IV

Disaster payments (log)
F-statistic
Dep. var. mean
Observations

(1)
Net premium (log)

(2)
Policies (log)

(3)
Acres insured (log)

(4)
Subsidy (log)

-0.145**
(0.062)

-0.176***
(0.051)

0.031
(0.042)

-0.290***
(0.071)

44.215
11.837
50,417
Labor cost (log)

38.328
9.476
51,794
Price-weighted
mean yield (log)
-0.036***
(0.013)

38.083
11.928
52,303
Cash receipts (log)

31.581
1.524
45,173

35.847
9.932
53,064

Disaster payments (log)

-0.021
(0.021)

38.083
4.736
52,303
Fertilizer spending
(log)
-0.094***
(0.025)

F-statistic
Dep. var. mean
Observations

36.244
8.473
53,033

38.057
8.416
52,877

-0.332***
(0.060)

Significance levels: * 10 percent, ** 5 percent, *** 1 percent. Standard errors (in parentheses) clustered by county.
Disaster payments are instrumented for with the share of voters voting for a third-party candidate in the most recent
presidential election. Outcome variables are specified at the top of each column. Sample excludes counties where more
than 5% of the population was employed in farming at any point in time during our sample period. All regressions
include county and year fixed effects and controls for county characteristics, which are not shown for readability. All
control variables are lagged by one year.

55

Table A7: The effect of disaster payments on insurance decisions, counties with 22 observations,
IV

Disaster payments (log)
F-statistic
Dep. var. mean
Observations

Disaster payments (log)
F-statistic
Dep. var. mean
Observations

(1)
Net premium (log)

(2)
Policies (log)

(3)
Acres insured (log)

(4)
Subsidy (log)

-0.236***
(0.077)

-0.176***
(0.054)

0.030
(0.040)

-0.403***
(0.089)

34.157
12.177
52,670
Labor cost (log)

32.424
9.882
52,932
Price-weighted
mean yield (log)
-0.029**
(0.015)

32.475
12.325
53,004
Cash receipts (log)

-0.064**
(0.026)

32.475
5.090
53,004
Fertilizer spending
(log)
-0.147***
(0.034)

32.324
8.513
53,048

32.237
8.584
53,028

25.323
1.502
48,489

32.154
10.086
53,052

-0.341***
(0.064)

Significance levels: * 10 percent, ** 5 percent, *** 1 percent. Standard errors (in parentheses) clustered by county.
Disaster payments are instrumented for with the share of voters voting for a third-party candidate in the most recent
presidential election. Outcome variables are specified at the top of each column. Sample restricted to counties that
were present in each of the 22 years of the sample. All regressions include county and year fixed effects and controls
for county characteristics, which are not shown for readability. All control variables are lagged by one year.

56

Table A8: The effect of disaster payments on insurance decisions, Including House Committees in
the IV

Disaster payments (log)
F-statistic
Dep. var. mean
Observations

(1)
Net premium (log)

(2)
Policies (log)

(3)
Acres insured (log)

(4)
Subsidy (log)

-0.144**
(0.066)

-0.133***
(0.029)

-0.068*
(0.038)

-0.239***
(0.052)

12.240
11.328
60,455

12.240
4.724
60,455

12.240
9.308
60,455

12.240
11.837
60,455

Significance levels: * 10 percent, ** 5 percent, *** 1 percent. Standard errors (in parentheses) clustered by county.
Disaster payments are instrumented for with the share of voters voting for a third-party candidate in the most recent
presidential election, dummy variables indicating whether the county’s Representative is on the House Agriculture
committee or the House Appropriations commitee, whether the committee member is a member of the majority party,
and whether the Representative is the chair of the committee. All regressions include county and year fixed effects and
controls for county characteristics, which are not shown for readability. All control variables are lagged by one year.

57

Table A9: The effect of disaster payments with 1 added prior to taking logs, IV

Disaster payments (log)
Number of farm proprietors (log)
Pct. employed in forestry/agriculture
Population (log)
Per capita personal income (log)
Total employment (log)
F-statistic
Dep. var. mean
Observations

(1)
Liability (log)

(2)
Policies (log)

(3)
Acres insured
(log)

(4)
Subsidy (log)

-0.373***
(0.109)
-0.175
(0.152)
-0.012*
(0.006)
0.628***
(0.218)
-0.719***
(0.206)
-0.302***
(0.106)

-0.212***
(0.054)
0.042
(0.078)
-0.005
(0.003)
0.287**
(0.118)
-0.565***
(0.107)
-0.147***
(0.052)

-0.112*
(0.063)
-0.533***
(0.101)
-0.005
(0.004)
0.399***
(0.155)
-0.496***
(0.124)
-0.293***
(0.063)

-0.487***
(0.111)
-0.417***
(0.141)
-0.011*
(0.006)
0.240
(0.209)
-0.802***
(0.211)
-0.307***
(0.108)

37.050
14.915
60,455

37.050
4.724
60,455

37.050
9.308
60,455

37.050
11.837
60,455

Significance levels: * 10 percent, ** 5 percent, *** 1 percent. Standard errors (in parentheses) clustered by county.
Disaster payments are instrumented for with the share of voters voting for a third-party candidate in the most recent
presidential election. Outcome variables are specified at the top of each column. 1 has been added to all dependent
variables prior to taking the log. All regressions include county and year fixed effects and controls for county characteristics. Coefficients on farm income decile indicators are omitted for readability. All control variables are lagged by
one year.

58

Table A10: The relationship between out-of-pocket insurance spending and disaster expectations

Expected disaster payment (log)

(1)

(2)

(3)

-0.784***
(0.023)

-0.784***
(0.017)
0.637***
(0.034)

-0.841***
(0.021)
0.637***
(0.032)
0.085***
(0.016)

594
0.599

594
0.772

594
0.782

Corr. between dis. pay. and income
Std. dev. of disaster payments (log)
Observations
Adjusted R-squared

Significance levels: * 10 percent, ** 5 percent, *** 1 percent. Robust standard errors in parentheses. Dependent
variable is log of out-of-pocket spending on insurance.

59

