                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




      SHIFTING COLLEGE MAJORS IN RESPONSE TO ADVANCED PLACEMENT
                             EXAM SCORES

                                        Christopher Avery
                                          Oded Gurantz
                                         Michael Hurwitz
                                         Jonathan Smith

                                       Working Paper 22841
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w22841


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   November 2016




Christopher Avery receives funding from The College Board to support his work as Co-Principal
Investigator of a research collaboration between the College Board and the Center for Education
Policy Research at the Harvard Graduate School of Education. The contents of this paper
represent the views of the authors and not of their corresponding institutions, nor of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2016 by Christopher Avery, Oded Gurantz, Michael Hurwitz, and Jonathan Smith. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Shifting College Majors in Response to Advanced Placement Exam Scores
Christopher Avery, Oded Gurantz, Michael Hurwitz, and Jonathan Smith
NBER Working Paper No. 22841
November 2016
JEL No. I2,I23,J24

                                           ABSTRACT

Mapping continuous raw scores from millions of Advanced Placement examinations onto the 1 to
5 integer scoring scale, we apply a regression discontinuity design to understand how students’
choice of college major is impacted by receiving a higher integer score despite similar exam
performance to students who earned a lower integer score. Attaining higher scores increases the
probability that a student will major in that exam subject by approximately 5 percent (0.64
percentage points), with some individual exams demonstrating increases in major choice by as
much as 30 percent. These direct impacts of a higher score explain approximately 11 percent of
the unconditional 64 percent (5.7 percentage points) gap in the probability of majoring in the
same subject as the AP exam when attaining a 5 versus a 4. We estimate that a substantial
portion of the overall effect is driven by behavioral responses to the positive signal of receiving a
higher score.

Christopher Avery                                    Michael Hurwitz
Harvard Kennedy School of Government                 College Board
79 JFK Street                                        1919 M Street NW
Cambridge, MA 02138                                  Suite 300
and NBER                                             Washington, DC 20036
christopher_avery@hks.harvard.edu                    mhurwitz@collegeboard.org

Oded Gurantz                                         Jonathan Smith
Stanford University                                  College Board
ogurantz@stanford.edu                                1919 M Street NW
                                                     Suite 300
                                                     Washington, DC 20036
                                                     jsmith@collegeboard.org
1. Introduction

       A student’s choice of college major may have long-lasting implications, including on

future earnings. The average difference in lifetime earnings between the top-paying and lowest-

paying majors is estimated to be several million dollars (Carnevale, Cheah, and Hanson, 2015),

and there is growing evidence that at least some portion of the connection between college major

and wages is causal (Hastings, Neilson, and Zimmerman, 2013; Kirkebøen, Leuven, and

Mogstad, forthcoming). Despite these seemingly strong labor market incentives, there remains a

mismatch between demand and supply of workers in some relatively lucrative fields. For

example, a 2012 Federal Government report estimates a ten-year shortfall of 1 million college

graduates with STEM (“Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics”) majors.1 As

these findings suggest, some students may not be choosing their college majors optimally, either

because they lack adequate information on the relative benefits and challenges of majors in

specific fields, or because they enter college with inadequate academic preparation for a

preferred major (Betts, 1996; Oreopoulos and Dunn, 2013; R. Stinebrickner and Stinebrickner,

2012; Wiswall and Zafar, 2015a, 2015b).

       In addition to the earnings potential associated with each field of study,2 the previous

literature emphasizes the importance of heterogeneous tastes and predilections on a student’s

choice of major. Morgan, Gelbgiser, and Weeden (2013) find in their analysis of Educational

Longitudinal Survey (ELS) data that specific occupational plans reported by students prior to

entering college yield much sharper predictions of their college majors than test scores and other

observable performance data. Similarly, Altonji, Arcidiacono, and Maurel (2015) suggest that a

combination of major-specific abilities and individual preferences drive the choice of major for

1
 https://www.whitehouse.gov/sites/default/files/microsites/ostp/pcast-engage-to-excel-final_2-25-12.pdf
2
 See for example, (Arcidiacono, Hotz, & Kang, 2012; Beffy, Fougère, & Maurel, 2011; Long, Goldhaber, &
Huntington-Klein, 2015; Shu, 2013; T. Stinebrickner & Stinebrickner, 2013; Wiswall & Zafar, 2015a; Zafar, 2011)


                                                       2
most students, while Wiswall and Zafar (2015a) estimate that 80% of the variation in major-

specific tastes remains unexplained by observable characteristics.

          While this literature suggests that each student’s chosen field of study can be highly

personal and driven by factors in place before entering college, there is also a small body of

evidence that the choice of major is subject to external factors that can be shaped by policy. For

instance, peers (Ost, 2010), early exposure to a subject via required coursework (Fricke,

Grogger, and Steinmayr, 2015) and the final grade achieved by a student in an introductory

course (Goldin, 2015) can also have strong influence on a student’s subsequent course of study.

Several recent papers assess the effects of explicit financial incentives in directing students to

particular fields of study. Denning and Turley (2015) find that the “SMART” Program, which

provides US Department of Defense scholarships to college juniors and seniors pursuing STEM

majors, significantly increased the probability of completing college with a major in those fields,

though Evans (2015) finds no significant effects in Ohio. Similarly, Castleman, Long, and

Mabel (2015) find that the Florida State Access Grant (FSAG) program significantly increased

the probability of completing college with a STEM major even though FSAG funding was not

tied in any way to the choice of major.3

         In this paper we focus on the role of Advanced Placement (AP) exam scores and their

signals, which reflect a nationally-recognized college-level curriculum taken by hundreds of

thousands of high school students each year, in encouraging students to choose a college major

in a subject of interest. In particular, to isolate the causal impact of different AP exam scores

among students with similar mastery of the content and skills of an AP course, we compare

students with very similar performance on the AP exam, but who receive different AP scores by

falling on either side of the cut score that separates an AP integer score of 5 from an AP integer
3
    In related work, Stange (2011) finds that differential tuition policy can alter the demand for a particular degree.


                                                              3
score of 4, the cut score that separates an AP 4 from an AP 3, and so on. We investigate two

channels by which a higher reported AP exam score, among students with otherwise comparable

mastery of the course content and skills can increase the probability that the student complete a

college major in a field of study connected to that AP course. First, a higher AP score can

coincide with an increase in college credits (and/or preferential course placement), both towards

graduation requirements and towards completion of a particular major at a given college.

Second, students may have a behavioral response to a higher AP score, such that they perceive

themselves to have more ability in the field, or use the high score as a guidepost for choosing

initial courses or major.

     As in our previous and related study, which finds a causal effect of AP exam scores on time

to degree completion (Smith, Hurwitz, and Avery, 2015), we apply a regression discontinuity

design to AP exam scores from millions of students who graduated high school between 2004

and 2009. Students and colleges only observe an integer exam score between 1 and 5 but we

rely on the underlying continuous scores that map to the integer score. These data allow us to

compare the majors of students who just barely attain a 3, for example, relative to those just shy

of the threshold who attain a 2. Isolating the impact of attaining a higher score by comparing

identical students distinguishes our paper from previous work, which establishes the strong

predictive component of AP scores and major (Mattern, Shaw, and Ewing, 2011). To be clear,

our analysis compares two essentially identical students who have both elected to take an AP, but

does not measure the effect of exposure to or quality of the AP curriculum on major choice.

Participating in AP courses may have strong and independent causal impacts on student major

(and other outcomes), but, in these analyses, we are not able to separate this effect from other

unobserved factors that might impact both AP exam performance and student major.




                                                4
     Similar to previous work in the area, we show a strong positive relationship between AP

integer scores and choice of college major. For example, students in our sample who attain a 5

on an AP exam – the highest possible score – are 5.7 percentage points (64 percent) more likely

to major in the same subject as the AP exam than students who attain a 4 on the exam. However,

when comparing students whose raw score barely received them a 5 compared to those who just

missed a score of 5, we find a 0.64 percentage points (5 percent) increase in majoring in the same

subject as the AP exam. This implies that approximately 11 percent of the increase in the

probability of majoring in the same subject as the AP exam can be explained not by differences

in students but rather, the direct impact of receiving a higher integer score. We also see causal

effects that are smaller in magnitude by attaining a 3 over a 2 and 4 over a 3. AP and its scoring

impacts millions of students each year across the entire nation and is delivered prior to the

beginning of college, which is unique among causal studies on major choice. Further, for

students with nearly identical performance on the AP Exam (adjacent scores on the continuous

scale) we find evidence that the effect of an increase in AP score on the choice of college major

is primarily driven by the behavioral effect of the positive signal communicated by the difference

in integer score.

     Along with our above primary result, we also find several other results about how AP

scores influence a student’s choice of college major. First, our estimates do not detect any strong

heterogeneous effects, suggesting that the causal impacts on major choice hold across students

differing on gender and underrepresented minority status. Second, the strong impact of a 5 is

attentuated when students also receive additional high AP scores, implying that the power of a an

additional signal depends on how many other positive signals the student has received. Finally,

although students who attain higher AP scores on STEM exams are, on average,considerably




                                                5
more likely to major in STEM (e.g. students scoring a 5 on a STEM AP exam are 42 percent

more likely than students scoring a 4 on a STEM AP exam), the impact of a higher AP integer

score among students with otherwise comparable AP exam performance shifts students across

STEM disciplines, which we discuss later in the paper. In other words, factors, many of which

are unobservable, such as quality of AP instruction, students’ mastery of the required content and

skills, or student interest and motivation in a subject, likely explain the strong positive

relationship between AP integer scores and the student’s likelihood of majoring in that AP

discipline, rather than the unique signalling effect of a higher integer score to a student who has

otherwise similar content and skill mastery to a student who received a lower integer score.

       This paper is organized as follows.       Section 2 describes the Advanced Placement

program, scoring and literature.     Sections 3 and 4 describe our data and methodology,

respectively. Section 5 presents our main findings on the response to relatively higher AP

scores, along with the exploration of underlying mechanisms, including credit policies and

behavioral responses to positive signals. Section 6 investigates some of the broader impacts of

our findings, including heterogeneous effects, the impact of multiple signals, and changes in

STEM degree production. Section 7 concludes.


2. AP Background & Literature Review

      The history of the Advanced Placement Program is rooted in the philosophies that college-

level academic opportunities should be extended to high-achieving high school students and that

demonstration of proficiency in such coursework should exempt college students from re-taking

courses. (See Smith et al., for more details) Collaborating with high school teachers and college

professors, the AP program develops curricula that are reflective of the content typically taught

in introductory-level college courses and exams are constructed to certify whether students have



                                                6
mastered the content and skills required for course exemption. Since its introduction in the

1950s, the AP program has extended its reach beyond college preparatory schools and well-

funded public schools, and currently, more than 9 out of 10 public school students in the United

States have access to at least one AP exam at their schools (Theokas & Saaris, 2013).4 In 2015,

high school students took nearly 4.5 million AP exams in 36 subjects. Exams take place over a

two-week period in May with only one administration per subject per year, and scores are

released several months later.5 The exact number of AP exams has varied over time, as some

exams were retired due to low participation rates and new exams were introduced as a result of

high student demand. This paper only considers the 19 most popular subject exams, with at least

100,000 exam takers between 2004 and 2009 (see Appendix Table 1 for details on all 34 exams).

         AP scores are reported to students and colleges on a 1 through 5 scale, where 1 translates

into “no recommendation” and 5 translates into “extremely well-qualified”. The integer scores

are based on students’ raw scores, which reflect performance on multiple choice and free-

response sections. Because the AP exams are criterion-based, cut scores are established based on

earning a pre-determined number of points that predict college-performance at varying levels and

not on relative performance. The exams are designed so students earning a score of 3 on one test

administration have an identical mastery of material as students earning a 3 on a separate

administration.6

       In order to receive credit, course exemption and placement, students must submit AP

scores to the institutions at which they enroll. There exists enormous variation in how AP exam

scores are treated, both across postsecondary institutions and across exams within postsecondary

4
  The College Board official statistics are slightly lower at around 60 percent. (See
http://apcentral.collegeboard.com/apc/public/program/index.html)
5
  Approximately 0.3 percent of students retake an AP exam.
6
  Continuous raw scores range from 0 to 180 points, though there is considerable variation in the scoring range and
maximum across exams.


                                                         7
institutions. Most students enrolling at four-year institutions attend colleges that award credits

toward graduation if students meet certain threshold minima- generally a 3 or 4 on the standard

1-5 scale. Along with receipt of college credit, the student is generally eligible to enroll

immediately in the sequent course. Colleges independently decide how many credits students

receive for meeting AP thresholds, the sequent courses for which they are eligible, and whether

scores exceeding the credit-granting thresholds are appropriate for the awarding of additional

credits and course exemptions.

2.1. AP Literature Review

      Our paper contributes to a small, but expanding body of literature that separates out the

predictive effects of AP participation and performance from the causal effects of receiving

higher AP integer scores.          A substantial prior literature documents a positive relationship

between early college credit and choice of major (Dodd, Fitzpatrick, De Ayala, & Jennings,

2002; Keng & Dodd, 2008; Morgan & Klaric, 2007; Murphy & Dodd, 2009; Tai, Liu, Almarode,

& Fan, 2010).7 More recently, Mattern, Shaw, and Ewing (2011) find that students who take a

particular AP exam are much more likely to major in that subject: students who take AP

Computer Science are 4.5 times more likely to major in computer science than students who did

not take the AP course. These large estimates rest on a selection on observables identification

strategy.

      Sources of randomization in the context of AP research are hard to come by, and many of

the most compelling studies examining the long and short term consequences of AP course and


7
 There also exists a series of studies that demonstrate a strong positive correlation between AP participation, AP
exam scores and subsequent academic performance across a range of measures including college attendance
(Chajewski, Mattern, & Shaw, 2011) and success in subject performance (Patterson & Ewing, 2013), overall
performance (Mattern, Marini, & Shaw, 2013), and college completion (Dougherty, Mellor, & Jian, 2006; Hargrove,
Godin, & Dodd, 2008; Mattern et al., 2013; Morgan & Klaric, 2007). There is a similar line of research on dual
enrollment. For example, see Karp, Calcagno, Hughes, Jeong, and Bailey (2007).


                                                        8
exam taking have relied on a selection on observables research design (Evans, 2013; Long,

Conger, & Iatarola, 2012; Murphy & Dodd, 2009).8 Two notable exceptions are our own study

linking AP scores to college graduation outcomes (Smith, Hurwitz and Avery, forthcoming) and

Jackson (2010), who finds that the introduction of a program that paid teachers and students for

success on AP examinations increased SAT/ACT scores and college matriculation. Despite the

convincing case for causality, Jackson is unable to generalize about the relative contributions of

improved teaching, increased exposure to rigor and the direct effects of the fact that some

students may have earned higher AP scores as a result of this incentive program. In what follows,

we isolate the effect of higher AP scores and demonstrate its effects on choice of major.



3. Data and Descriptive Statistics

3.1.College Board Data

        This paper uses student-level data from the 2004-09 graduating high school cohorts

collected from two main sources, College Board (CB) data on AP examinees and National

Student Clearinghouse (NSC) data. CB maintains a database of all students who take at least one

AP exam. This database contains not only the students’ AP exam scores on the 1-5 integer scale,

but their underlying continuous scores on most exams taken between 2004 and 2009. From these

two pieces of information, we identify the exact continuous scores that sharply form the

boundaries of the scaled scores.9 In addition to student performance on each AP exam, the CB

data also contain a host of student demographic information, such as a student’s gender,


8
  There are currently some randomized AP evaluations underway, which will be very informative, but they are
limited in their scope of exams and populations (Long, Conger, & McGhee, 2014).
9
  Data on raw scores are available only for exams taken during the 2003-04 school year or later. Therefore some AP
test takers, particularly in the 2004 and 2005 cohorts, will not have raw scores that can be mapped to their scaled
scores taken in sophomore or junior year of high school. The few exams without an accompanying raw score are
removed from our analyses,


                                                         9
race/ethnicity, and parental income.10 We also observe student SAT scores, if they take the

exam. We frequently divide our analyses into separate results for STEM and non-STEM AP

exams, which are listed in Appendix Table 1. AP exams used in this paper that are considered

STEM include Biology, Calculus, Chemistry, Environmental Sciences, Physics, and Statistics.

3.2.National Student Clearinghouse, CIP Codes, and IPEDS

         CB data are then merged with the NSC data. As of 2015, over 3,600 postsecondary

institutions participate in NSC, which collects postsecondary enrollment information on more

than 98 percent of students enrolled in public and private colleges within the United States.11 In

this study, we track a student’s postsecondary trajectory including enrollment and degree

completion. We observe students college trajectories for six years after they graduate high school

for the 2004-2007 cohorts, five years for the 2008 cohort, and four years for the 2009 cohort.

         The majors in the NSC data are provided only for graduating students, and we focus

exclusively on majors associated with a bachelor’s degree. NSC provides full six-digit

Classification of Instructional Program (CIP) code information,12 which we simplify by focusing

on the first two digits.13 Two-digit CIP codes translates into general fields such as biology,

history, or English.

         In order to assess whether college majors are impacted by different AP scores for similar

exam performance, we match each AP subject to the closest two-digit CIP code, documented in

Appendix Table 2. In some cases the match is fairly exact; for example, students taking AP

10
   Parental income is collected on the SAT registration forms, and so some AP test takers who did not participate in
the SAT will have missing demographic information. Even among SAT participants, some students fail to respond
to these questions.
11
   Due to data privacy laws and potential complications with student matching, the actual NSC coverage may be a
bit lower than 98 percent rate (Dynarski, Hemelt, & Hyman, 2015).
12
   The CIP codes are a taxonomic scheme created by the U.S. Department of Education to ensure a uniform system
of tracking across colleges.
13
   CIP codes are not provided for the 2004 cohort and approximately one-third of institutions in other cohorts but are
instead in text form that we unify into CIP codes. Since there is the chance for classification error, we test the
sensitivity of the results by only using the students with a CIP code. Results hold and are in the appendix.


                                                         10
Biology are linked to the CIP code related to Biological Sciences. In other cases we are required

to group AP exams, as both Chemistry and Physics are most closely linked to the two digit CIP

code of Physical Sciences.14 In addition, we consider whether AP exams alter whether students

major in the broader field of STEM majors. We select all CIP codes where the first two digits

correspond to our STEM AP exams, namely 11, 14, 15, 26, 27, and 40. Although we do not

capture all STEM majors with this approach, we do capture most STEM degrees at four-year

universities.15

         Finally, we append to our data several variables from the Integrated Postsecondary

Education Data System (IPEDS). These include the average standardized test scores (ACT and

SAT) of incoming students and whether the college is public or private.16

3.3. AP Credit Policies

         We use AP credit policies from two sources: the Annual Survey of Colleges (ASC) and

data collected by the authors from college websites. Administered annually by the College Board

to nearly 4,000 colleges, the 2004 survey included information on the minimum credit-granting

scores by AP subject (only to be removed after 2005). We supplement these data, by


14
   The only deviation from this approach that we adopt is a grouping of AP Calculus and Statistics with majors in
either math/statistics or engineering, primarily because relatively few students major in math and engineering is far
more prevalent among test takers in these subjects. Also, 4 percent of students double major. If one of the two
majors is related to the AP exam, students are counted as majoring in that subject. Results are not sensitive to
excluding double majors (see Appendix Table 5).
15
   This is most problematic for students without CIP codes (but a textual description of major), of which we exclude
in robustness tests. Other commonly used STEM classification systems typically include a relatively small number
of CIP codes in the two-digit fields of 1 (Animal and Plant Sciences), 3 (Natural Resource Conservation), 29
(Military Technologies), 30 (Multi-disciplinary Studies), 41 (Science Technologies), and 51(Pharmaceutical
Sciences), along with a small number of other specific majors. As most majors in these broad two-digit disciplines
are not STEM-related, their inclusion was deemed incorrect. In alternate analyses not presented here, we show that
our STEM results in Table 9 are robust to using only schools that report six-digit STEM codes and using alternate
STEM classifications, such as U.S. Immigration and Enforcement lists of STEM programs that qualify foreigners
for expedited work visas.
16
   To estimate average composite SAT scores, we add the 25th and 75th percentiles of the Math and Critical Reading
sections, as reported by IPEDS, and divide by 2. For colleges that only report ACT scores to IPEDS, we use an SAT
conversion table found at http://research.collegeboard.org/sites/default/files/publications/2012/7/researchnote-2009-
40-act-sat-concordance-tables.pdf


                                                         11
constructing an enhanced “policy sample.” To accomplish this, we collected the more nuanced

AP credit and placement data directly from the websites of the 500 largest four-year institutions

in the country, as measured by full time equivalent students. This inclusion rule captures a wide

swath of postsecondary institutions: both selective and non-selective colleges, along with a

representative mix of public and private colleges, and represents approximately 82% of students

who take an AP exam. We create a binary “AP Credit” variable for each combination of AP

exam and threshold at each college. We code the AP Credit variable as a “1” for each exam-

college-threshold combination if a college provides any beneficial advantage at that threshold,

including credit towards graduation, credit towards major, or placement into any advanced

course.17 For example, some colleges provide 4 units of credit for a scaled score of “at least a 3.”

In this example, the AP credit variable would be coded as “1” for an AP scaled score of 3 and

“0” for any other AP scaled score (2, 4, or 5). As another example, a college may provide 4

units of credit for a score of 3 and 8 units of credit for a score of 4 on a given AP exam. In this

example we would code the AP Credit variable as “1” for a scaled score of 3, “1” for a scaled

score of 4, and a “0” for a scaled score of 5. Appendix Table 1 provides summary statistics of

the credit policies across these 500 colleges.

           We highlight several limitations in the use of the AP credit data that we collected for

these 500 colleges in the summer and fall of 2015. First, these policies reflect current practices

at these colleges, whereas our data applies to students who graduated from high school between

2004 and 2009. Even so, we find that at least 70% of colleges have identical minimum credit-

granting policies from 2004 (derived from ASC data) and in 2015 (from our manual data

collection), and so we conduct sensitivity analyses on the subset of colleges and thresholds with

identical minimum credit-granting thresholds for AP credit in 2004 and 2015. (See section 5.3
17
     Note that we use the word “credit” but in some instances it is only placement with no credit.


                                                            12
for results) Second, the coding of our binary AP credit variables does not account for a variety

of nuances in policies across colleges. For example, some colleges may place caps on AP credits

used towards college graduation, and/or provide conditional credit for scores on certain AP

exams based on a student’s choice of major.                  For this reason, we intentionally adopt a

conservative approach through expansive coding rules in the creation of the AP Credit variables

– ensuring that imprecision in the coding of these variables will induce downward bias since

some fraction of students will not be receiving credit despite being coded as having done so in a

relevant AP credit variable. In the case of shifts in major that are driven by a behavioral response

to higher AP scores, these caveats about the coding of the AP credit variables should have no

impact on our estimates.



3.4.Descriptive Statistics

        We present summary statistics of students in our analytic sample in Table 1. We find that

approximately 69 percent of the sample is white, 43 percent are male, and 50 percent had a

parent who attended at least some college. On average, students earned an 1176 on the SAT,

took almost 3 AP exams, and scored an average of 2.7 on the exams. As shown in Smith,

Hurwitz and Avery (2016), student demographics vary by AP exam.

        Table 2 lists the probability that a student with a given AP score on an AP exam chooses

the college major most closely associated with that subject, and then more generally in any

STEM field.18 Consistent with previous research, there is a systematic increase in the probability

of choosing the most related college major for every field. Using AP Biology as one example,

the probability of majoring in biology monotonically increases with each integer score, such that


18
  These probabilities look similar when conditioning on graduates. Our primary analyses does not condition on
graduating and so we only present these statistics on the entire sample of graduates and non-graduates.


                                                       13
students who receive a 5 are nearly five times as likely to major in the subject as students who

receive a 1. Similar patterns exist across all the exams, though the exact magnitude varies,

demonstrating the strong predictive power of AP scores in major choice. The second set of

columns show similar patterns on the likelihood of majoring in any STEM field, regardless of

whether it is directly tied to the particular AP subject. As the interests, abilities, and supportive

structures of students with a higher scaled score on a given AP exam are (presumably)

systematically different than those of students with a lower scaled score on that same test, the

values in Table 2 can be viewed as unrealistically large upper bounds on the causal effect of an

increase in scaled score on the choice of college major. In general the relationships between AP

integer scores and the probability of majoring in STEM are stronger for the STEM than for the

non-STEM exams. We still observe a strong correlation between integer scores in English

Language or World History and majoring in a STEM field, though we would not assume that the

curricular content in these courses has any particular impact on scientific knowledge.

           Taking the previous table one step further, Table 3 reports the distribution of college

majors for students with scaled score of “3” or higher on each of 19 most popular AP exams,

indicating a conspicuous correlation between AP exam performance and choice of college

major.19 Typically, the most popular college major for students who score 3 or higher on a

particular AP exam is the major most closely associated with that exam. For example, students

with scaled score of 3 or higher in AP Biology were more than twice as likely to major in

Biology (18.9%) than in any of the other tabulated subjects.

           The two previous tables demonstrate the predictive power of AP scores in determining

major for all students. The next section focuses in on students just around the integer thresholds



19
     Students with scaled scores of “3” or higher on more than one AP exam are counted multiple times in this table.


                                                           14
so to compare students who are identical across all dimensions and to estimate the impact of

receiving higher AP scores, independent of differences in student attributes.




4. Methodology

            In this section, we describe the methodology to estimate the effect of a marginal change

in AP exam scores on major choice. This notation and methodology is similar to that of Smith,

Hurwitz and Avery (forthcoming). Each student i on AP exam j receives a continuous score Cij.

This continuous score maps into the scaled score, Tij as follows20:

                                                  1 if Cij  t 2j
                                              
                                              2   if t 2j  Cij  t 3j
                                              
                                        Tij  3   if t 3j  Cij  t 4j
                                              4   if t 4j  Cij  t 5j
                                              
                                                 5 if t 5j  Cij

where t j are the thresholds for each scaled score n on exam j. For each value of n  2,3,4,5 ,
        n




we create two variables. The first is the forcing variable:

                                        Dist ijn  C ij  t nj

which captures how far student i’s score on exam j is from threshold n. A Distijn  0 implies that

the student has a scaled scores of at least an n. This leads to the second variable for each value

of n, the dichotomous threshold variable:

                                              1 if Dist ijn  0
                              Threshold ijn  
                                              0 if Dist ijn  0




20
     Technically, Tij, varies by year but for ease of exposition, we omit a year subscript.


                                                                 15
        After generating these variables, our basic empirical framework is shown by the standard

regression discontinuity equation presented in equation (1), where Xij is a vector of fixed effects

for the student’s year of high school graduation and the interaction of the AP exam subject and

year the exam is taken.



           ijn  0  1 Threshold
                                 ijn  2 Distijn  3 Threshold
                                                               ijn  Distijn  X ij   ijn
                  n    n                n            n
     Outcome
                                                                                                        (1)

We are primarily interested in the estimate of  1n , which is the coefficient on Thresholdijn that

represents the discontinuous effect of being above the AP scaled n threshold on the outcome of

interest. In practice, we separately estimate the effects of each scaled threshold.

        The dependent variable in equation (1) is often an indicator variable for an outcome at

each threshold n, which is typically whether a student majors in the same subject or the same

field as the AP exam subject. In order to capture trends in the forcing variable that exist on either

side of the boundary, we fit a local linear regression with a triangular kernel. The triangular

kernel puts more weight on the observations closest to the threshold. In all regressions, we use a

bandwidth of 10, which is roughly equal to the optimal bandwidth suggested by Imbens and

Kalyanaram (2012).21

      Researchers implementing regression discontinuity designs may confront challenges if

score manipulation or gaming takes place in the vicinity of thresholds. In this context, such

manipulation is essentially impossible, as grading standards and score thresholds vary from year

to year and are never reported to students. Still, as reported in Section 5.1, we perform empirical

tests to discount these threats, verifying that the density of raw scores is continuous in the

vicinity of the thresholds. We also run covariate balancing tests with similar specifications to
21
  We test the sensitivity to bandwidth and kernel choices and find no measurable differences. These robustness
tests are presented in Appendix Table 4. We obtain the IK-estimated optimal bandwidth using software designed by
Calonico, Cattaneo, and Titiunik (2014).


                                                       16
equation (1), but using a covariate as the outcome, once again finding no indication of

manipulation of raw scores near scaled score thresholds.



5. Main Results

5.1.Testing the Assumptions of Regression Discontinuity

      In Figure 1, we show the density of raw scores near each threshold. For each of the 19

exams in each of the years the exam is offered, the threshold is centered at zero, and then the raw

scores from the stacked exams are collapsed into one point bins. Continuous density in the

vicinity of each of the 1/2, 2/3, 3/4 and 4/5 thresholds is evident in this figure.22

      Covariate balancing tests in Table 4 generally show balance across the thresholds. Among

the 52 separate covariate balancing tests shown in this table, 7 yield statistically significant (at

the 0.05 level) parameter estimates, and these 7 precisely estimated differences are extremely

small in magnitude.23

5.2.Main Regressions

      Figure 2 presents our primary set of results on whether receiving higher AP exam scores

causes students to major in the same subject as the AP exam. There are clear, observable

differences in student major at the thresholds, particularly as students cross into AP scores of 4

22
   The formal approach recommended by (McCrary, 2008) to test for continuous density around thresholds may not
be appropriate in light of the scoring rubric of most AP exams. Raw scores generally extend out to four decimal
places, but most raw scores are simply unattainable based on the combination of correct and incorrect responses.
Moreover, the distances between consecutive attainable raw scores appear to differ within AP exams, as does the
probability of achieving these raw scores based on combinations of points earned/deducted from the multiple choice
and free response sections. To illustrate, among students who took the 2008 administration of AP Biology and were
just on the cusp of 2/3 threshold, 18 had forcing variable values of -0.0435, followed by one student who had a
forcing variable value of exactly 0, twelve students with forcing variable values of 0.0008, and so on. As is also case
when the data are discrete (See Frandsen (2014)), this type of clustering, which is obviously not reflective of score
manipulation, presents a challenge to the traditional McCrary test.
23
   The covariates are highly correlated with one another, which contributes to the number that are not balanced.
Running a seemingly unrelated regression to jointly test for balance shows similarly small imbalances on the 2/3 and
3/4 thresholds, though there is no evidence of imbalance on the 4/5 threshold, where we have our most prominent
results.


                                                          17
or 5. Table 5 provides regression estimates for the magnitude of these effects, with each

coefficient from a separate regression that represents the causal effect of receiving a higher AP

score on the corresponding threshold. Results in the first row show parameter estimates for the

full sample, with separate results in subsequent rows for the set of STEM and non-STEM exams.

Results for STEM and non-STEM exams are also shown graphically in Figure 3.

     The first coefficient shows that receiving a score of 2 over a 1 on the sampled AP exams

does not shift students’ college majors into the AP exam field. This finding is unsurprising

because scores of 1 and 2 are both considered non-passing scores and colleges rarely offer credit

for either score (though, a 1 could be construed as an extremely negative signal and result in a

disincentive to major in the subject). Each successive integer jump above the 1/2 margin leads to

a larger boost in the probability that a student will choose a major in the same subject as the AP

exam. Across all sampled exams, jumps in the probability that the student major matches that

AP exam subject increases by approximately 0.2 pp (3.3 percent), 0.4 pp (4.7 percent), and 0.6

pp (5.2 percent) from receiving AP scores of 3, 4 and 5 respectively. Subject-by-subject results

are presented in Appendix Table 3 and demonstrate that there appears to be a distribution of

effects, with upper bound estimates in the range of two percentage points (and 30 percent). This

is more succinctly demonstrated in Figure 4, which plots the coefficient estimates of the 19

exams at each threshold. There is a clear pattern of positive results, particularly at the 4/5

threshold and in the non-STEM subjects.

     When AP exams are separated into STEM and non-STEM exams, two different stories

emerge. Receiving a higher integer AP score on a STEM exam tends to yield a statistically

insignificant change in student major, except at the 4/5 threshold, where students are 0.5 pp (3.4

percent) more likely to major in the AP subject. By contrast, coefficients for non-STEM exams




                                               18
are statistically significant at all margins other than the 1/2 threshold and are larger than the

STEM results.

     In a set of robustness tests, we repeat the analysis reported in Table 5, while imposing some

changes in the underlying empirical specification. Appendix Table 4 reports the results of

analysis with different choices of bandwidth, kernel, the choice of controls and the number of

higher order expressions of the forcing variable (thereby altering the functional form). Appendix

Table 7 reports the results of analyses using different rules for inclusion and exclusion of

students from the sample, restricting analysis in turn to: students who graduated from high

school in the 2005-2007 cohorts so that all students are tracked for 6 years (Panel 1); students

who majored in a field where the CIP codes were provided by NSC and not hand coded by the

researchers (Panel 2); and students with a unique rather than a “double” major (Panel 3). All

results are similar to those reported in Table 5.



5.3. Mechanisms

     Higher AP scores may alter college major through multiple mechanisms, which we explore

in two subsections.     First, we separately explore the contributions of endogenous college

enrollment and graduation; the former of which we rule out and the latter of which is only

marginally altered by a higher AP integer score among students with otherwise similar exam

performance. Second, we decompose the estimates into the mechanical effect of credit receipt

versus the behavioral response to a strong signal. We find strong support that the behavioral

responses to higher AP scores are the primary drivers of our estimates, though we cannot

discount the possibility that credit-granting policies are playing a small role in the shifting of

majors.




                                                    19
5.3.1. College Enrollment and Graduation

      The first four columns of Table 6 indicate whether strategic college enrollment results from

the receipt of a higher AP score despite similar performance to students with a lower AP score.

The first two columns show little evidence of such trivial differences in student performance

shifting college choice, with small and often insignificant effects on school quality, as measured

by average SAT or Barron’s ranking.24 To further allay any concerns that our primary results are

being driven by shifts in college choice, we repeat the primary analyses from Table 5 in two

distinct ways. First, we re-fit our main models using only students taking AP exams in their

senior year (column 3), after college enrollment decisions have already been made, and we

continue to find positive and statistically significant results comparable to those shown in Table

5. We then re-fit our main models using college fixed-effects specification (column 4), and,

again, our results are unchanged from those shown in Table 5.

      Finally, we test whether students with virtually similar exam performance, but different

integer scores, endogenously choose colleges that offer credit for the scores they attain. Column

5 of Table 6 tests whether students are more likely to enroll at a college that college offers

additional credit for a higher AP score. We find no statistical evidence to support this at the

integer score thresholds, other than a small negative coefficient on the 3/4 threshold which

paradoxically suggests that a student is less likely to attend a college if that college offers the

student additional credit for a score of 4 over a 3. Combined, the first five columns suggest that

there is no evidence that endogenous college enrollment is driving the main results.




24
  We also test other measures of college quality, including each Barron’s ranking individually, college graduation
rates, and other potentially relevant measures, such as attending school out of state. We similarly find insignificant
results, which are available upon request. Our earlier paper (Smith et al., forthcoming) studies this possibility in
more detail and similarly finds no evidence that AP scores influence the choice of colleges by students.


                                                          20
      As we only can identify a student’s choice of major for those students listed with a BA

degree in the NSC data, the results in Table 5 could conceivably reflect an effect of AP credit on

college graduation rather than on the choice of college major. Column 6 of Table 6 shows small

increases in six-year completion rates at the 2/3, 3/4 and 4/5 thresholds, which is consistent with

Smith, Hurwitz and Avery (forthcoming).25 However, when we condition on bachelor’s

completion (column 7), we find nearly identical point estimates to those shown in Table 5. This

provides reassuring evidence that we can isolate the effects of higher AP exam scores on shifting

college major from the documented effects on the production of more college majors.

5.3.2. Signal versus College Credit

      With the mechanism(s) largely unexplained as of yet, we explore two alternatives: college-

specific credit policies that reduce major course requirements, which we label “mechanical,” or

the behavioral response to higher scores. The behavioral response may be a result of positive

affirmation of a student’s ability to succeed in a subject, but could be reaffirmed by other actors

driving the decision process, such as parents, counselors, or even the college itself.                         An

alternative behavioral response may simply be that students use the high score as a guidepost to

in the course selection process, with no impact on self-confidence.

      We exploit the rich variety in AP credit policies across postsecondary institutions and

compare students on the 4/5 thresholds (for example) who attend institutions where a score of 5

results in additional credit to similar students who attend institutions where no such credit is

offered. Note that students with higher scores at colleges that give credit for those scores may

benefit from the mechanical and behavioral impact of higher scores. Students only benefit from



25
  We can only use 2004-2007 in these analyses. Using the full sample and four-year graduation rates, results are
consistent with Smith, Hurwitz, and Avery (forthcoming) - strong effects on the 2/3 and 3/4 thresholds, where
college credit is often at stake.


                                                        21
the behavioral impact of higher scores if their higher scores do not come with credit and thus, we

can compare the relative impacts across sets of institutions.

     To separate the behavioral from the mechanical effects, we reproduce in column 1 of Table

7 our main results using only our “policy sample” of 500 largest colleges, for which we collected

detailed AP credit policy information. The results mimic those for the full sample in Table 5. The

second column then show results for the subsample of colleges that offer additional

credit/placement for scores above versus below a particular scaled score threshold, whereas

column 3 shows effects at colleges which do not offer credit/placement (henceforth referred to

credit for the sake of brevity). Thus, column 3 represents the pure behavioral effect, whereas the

estimated effects reported in Column 2 represent a combination of behavioral and mechanical

effects from receiving an increased AP integer score.

     We find statistically significant increases in the probability of a matched college major due

to the pure behavioral effect at the 3/4 and 4/5 thresholds. The behavioral effect is slightly

smaller than the combined behavioral and mechanical effect at the 2/3 and 3/4 thresholds and

slightly larger than the combined effect at the 4/5 threshold. The evidence in Table 7 suggests a

strong behavioral effect from receiving higher AP integer scores, particularly at the 4/5 threshold

where the signal is strongest and changes in credit receipt are uncommon. However, we are

unable to rule out completely the possibility that the mechanical effect of receiving a higher AP

score plays a small role in influencing a student’s choice of college major.

     Recall, the main results show no impact on major selection among students of similar exam

performance who receive an integer score of 2 rather than 1. This implies that the signaling

effect of a score of 1, as opposed to 2, does not cause students to shy away from majoring in the

AP subject. Since there is almost never credit on the line, the impact (or lack thereof) should be




                                                22
considered behavioral and not mechanical. Given the strongest impact on the 4/5 margin and the

null impact on the 1/2 margin, students are responding to positive signals and not responding to

negative signals.

      We further investigate the behavioral and mechanical effects of receiving higher AP integer

scores separately for STEM and Non-STEM AP exams. The middle set of columns in Table 7

report the results for STEM AP exams. We find a strong behavioral effect from receiving a score

of 5 over a 4 on STEM AP exams. We report the results for non-STEM AP exams on the right of

Table 7. In these specifications, we estimate that effects on college major that are of similar

magnitudes, regardless of whether or not the higher scaled AP score earns the student more

college credit. The consistent similarity between these two sets of estimates suggests that the

effect of an increased AP score on the choice of major is primarily behavioral in nature.26

5.3.3. Robustness Tests of the Behavioral Effect

      As AP policies may have changed over time, we test the robustness of these results by

using only the set of colleges and subjects whereby the minimum credit granting AP exam score

as reported in ASC in 2004 matches the data we collected from the colleges’ websites in 2015.27

Using the approximately 70% of exams that agree perfectly between the sources, estimates are

largely unchanged and can be found in Appendix Table 6.

      We next consider whether the behavioral effect is in fact students responding to higher

scores or rather, students responding to college-specific credit policies, even when students are

on the cusp of an AP integer margin where there is no difference in credit. As an example, a

college may give additional credit for a 3 (over a 2) and 5 (over a 4) in a subject but not a 4 (over

26
   Subject-by-subject results are in Appendix Table 3, but are individually too imprecise to distinguish between these
two mechanisms. In general, we find positive effects irrespective of whether the college does or does not have an AP
policy at the threshold.
27
   The ASC data contains only the minimum credit-granting thresholds and it is unclear whether colleges interpret
that to include instances of placement without credit, which is our approach in collecting data on the policy sample.


                                                         23
a 3). In this setting, does the student infer from the college-specific policy that scores of 3 and 4

represent the same level of preparation in that AP subject? If this scenario played out in the data,

we might expect null findings at these colleges for the impact of receiving higher AP scores.

Removing students attending these types of colleges from the analyses may expose even larger

behavioral responses among students attending colleges where the student is not primed to

interpret scores of 3 and 4 (for example) as representing identical ability.

        To address this issue, we restrict attention to colleges that have uniform credit policies in

two senses. First, we look at the subsample of college-exam combinations for which the college

does not offer credit for any AP scaled score. Repeating the analysis from Table 5 for this

subsample provides a clean test of the behavioral effect described above. Not only is there no

mechanical effect from credit, but students cannot infer anything from lack of credit offered at

one score versus another.28 As shown in the first row of Table 8, the estimated effect of an

increase in AP score at the 3/4 and 4/5 thresholds is positive and of similar magnitude to our

estimated effects from earlier results. However, these coefficients are also imprecisely estimated

because of the relatively small subsample for college-exam pairs where there is no possibility of

AP credit.

        Second, we repeat this analysis, for the subset of college-exam combinations where

students receive credit at each of the 3, 4, and 5 thresholds. Once again, as reported in Row 2 of

Table 8, the estimated effects of increased AP scaled score on choice of college major are

positive, generally large in magnitude, but still somewhat imprecisely estimated.

          Finally, some colleges have a blanket policy on their credit policies across all subjects, for

example, by awarding credit for scoring a 3 on all exams with no additional credits offered at

higher integer scores. Assuming students are aware of the blanket policy, they may not infer
28
     This is somewhat rare but the most common exams include AP Environmental Science and AP World History.


                                                       24
anything from the absence of credit increases on the other margins. Using only the subsample of

colleges that have these blanket policies, we find consistent evidence, as reported in Rows 3 and

4 of Table 8 with the main results. Combined, these analyses provide evidence supporting the

general accuracy of our earlier estimates in that students are responding to the positive signal,

and this behavioral response is not dampened from the unique college-specific credit policies

where they enroll.



6. Additional Results

      In this section we examine three sets of additional results pertinent to our findings:

heterogeneous results across important demographic groups, how students respond to multiple

signals, and overall impacts on STEM degree attainment.

6.1 Heterogeneous Effects of AP Credit

      In this subsection we investigate whether AP credits have heterogeneous effects by types of

student or college. On the student side, we are especially interested in the effects of AP credits

on subgroups, such as women, low-income families, and minority students traditionally

underrepresented in STEM fields (Turner & Bowen, 1999; Zafar, 2011). We report the results of

our analyses for each of these subgroups in the first eight rows of Table 9.                     One immediate

challenge is that these subgroups of students are underrepresented in our AP samples (as

evidenced by the fairly small sample sizes for these groups), thereby limiting the precision of our

estimated effects for each of these subgroups. Subject to this caveat, we find only limited

evidence of differential responses for any subgroup of students, regardless of the threshold or

field, in the probability of majoring in the AP subject in response to a higher AP score.29


29
  There is some evidence in Table 7 of larger estimated coefficients for “White” students than for other subgroups
of students. However, the estimated effects for Asian and other minority students (Black and Hispanic) are also


                                                        25
      We consider separately the possibility of an interaction between SAT score and AP exam

score. Specifically, when we split the sample into three SAT score ranges, as reported in Rows 9

through 11 of Table 9, we find similar estimated effects of AP score on college major for each of

these subsamples. These results suggest that a change in AP scores has a similar effect on all

students, regardless of that student’s academic ability (as measured by SAT score).

      On the college side, we split the sample by average SAT of all enrolled students at the

colleges and report the results in Rows 12 through 14 of Table 9. Once again, we find little

evidence of differential effects across the subsamples of colleges. These results suggest that the

effects of higher AP scores are not localized to certain types of colleges.

6.2 Multiple Signals

         In this section, we address how students shift majors when they receive multiple signals

of ability. Students differ substantially in the number of AP exams taken and their performance

on these exams, and both of these factors likely influence the extent to which an additional score

of 5 (for example) alters student major. In the presence of many other positive signals through

high AP exam scores, we hypothesize that receiving an additional AP score of 5 (for example) is

less likely to shift a student’s major into the focal AP exam subject relative to the effect such a

signal might have on the student with no additional AP signals.

         In Table 10, we present the results of a pooled regression in which the threshold dummy

variable in Equation 1 is interacted with student’s average performance on all other AP exams,

while including fixed effects that control for the exact combination of AP exams taken by the

student. We focus on the 4/5 margin because it is this threshold on which we find the largest



positive and the standard errors are sufficiently larger that it does not seem plausible to conclude that there are
differential effects across these groups. Similarly, the estimated effects at the 4/5 scaled score threshold appear to be
smaller for students from lowest-income families (less than $50,000 in family income) than for others, but this is not
the case at other score thresholds.


                                                           26
effects throughout the rest of the paper, and we only include the multiple exam takers in this

table. The first column of Table 10 demonstrates that the main effect of receiving a 5 over a 4 is

similar in magnitude for multiple-exam takers, compared to the entire sample of students.

        Interacting the average of a student’s other AP exams with the 4/5 Threshold indicator,

we find that magnitude of the shift in college major into the focal AP subject is highly sensitive

to the average of AP scores on the other exams taken by the student. For ease of interpretation,

the average AP score on other exams is centered at three, indicating that a student with an

average score of 3.0 on all other exams would be 0.9 percentage points more likely to major in

the AP subject with a score of 5 over a 4. Across all exams, the coefficient of -0.0029 in Row 2,

Column 2 suggests that each one point increase in average AP score on other AP exams mutes

the focal exam’s pull by about 0.3 percentage points. So for a student with an average of 4 on all

other AP exams, scoring a 5 over a 4 on an additional AP exam, would increase the probability

that she majors in that subject by about 0.6 percentage points (calculated as 0.0091-0.0029). It is

also clear from columns 3 and 4 that high average scores on other non-STEM exams have a

notably stronger muting effect than do high average scores on STEM exams.30

6.3. STEM Degree Attainment

        Both descriptive statistics in Table 2 and the causal estimates above imply that higher

scores increase the likelihood that a student majors in a specific subject. However, major choice

is typically a zero sum game – if a student majors in one subject, then she is likely forgoing the

opportunity to major in a different subject. This is a key differentiator between this study and our

previous study, which examined bachelor’s degree completion. We show that receiving a higher

integer score on the AP Biology exam increases the likelihood of majoring in Biology, but


30
  Regressions that interact the threshold variable with alternate definitions of alternate AP exam performance,
such as counts of the number of exams with scores of 3, 4, or 5, produce similar results.


                                                        27
STEM production increases only if the student’s counterfactual degree was in a non-STEM field,

such as English or social sciences, rather than an alternate STEM degree, such as chemistry. This

is important as a shortage of STEM majors is frequently cited as a deficit in our current

educational system, and multiple policy levers have been enacted to combat this problem.

       Table 11 suggests that, in general, we are unable to conclude that simply receiving a

higher AP score on a STEM AP exam, while having similar exam performance to students who

received the adjacent, lower AP exam integer score, positively impacts STEM major completion,

although we do observe a positive and statistically significant effect in the full sample at the 2/3

threshold. By contrast, we find some suggestive evidence that higher integer scores on non AP

STEM exams may draw students away from STEM fields in other non-STEM disciplines. These

results show that positive signals of high AP scores alone may not be enough to shift students

into STEM fields, as STEM-focused students may enter college with stronger major intentions.

Yet it is important to remember that exposure to any subject may have independent effects on

majoring in that subject (Fricke, Grogger, and Steinmayr, 2015) and this includes exposure to

STEM curriculum in the promotion of STEM degrees, which we cannot test here.



7. Discussion and Conclusion

      This paper shows that students incorporate signals of their relative academic performance

in determining an important human capital decision: choice of college major. Although high

school graduates have received countless sources of feedback over their lifetime, our results

suggest that performance labels provided late in secondary school can have large impacts of

subsequent educational investment decisions. We find that this is predominately a behavioral

response and is strongest when the students have few other competing signals of academic




                                                28
excellence on AP exams. This result is consistent with recent research by Papay, Willett, and

Murnane (forthcoming), who find that students are more likely to attend college when they have

a positive label that summarizes their score performance on a standardized test, as well as with

the broader literature on the effects of positive signals of ability.31

       The impacts on student major found in this research, in combination with the decrease in

time to degree found in our previous study, show that that AP scores affect the postsecondary

choices and outcomes of different students in different ways. Our earlier study finds that at the

minimum credit-granting margin (generally the 2/3 scaled score margin), students receiving the

higher integer score, despite otherwise similar performance on that AP exam, are more likely to

complete a BA degree in four years, principally because credit receipt generally reduces the

minimum credits for BA completion. By contrast, this study finds that the AP integer score

primarily influences the choice of college major for students at the higher scaled score cutoff of

4/5 on most exams, when performance on that AP exam is otherwise similar to students who

simply fell on the other side of the cut score. Although the magnitudes of these effects are

generally less than 1 percentage point per test, they are not negligible by comparison to the

cross-sectional correlations between AP score and college major. On average, the signaling

effect of the higher score explains approximately 16 percent of the difference in the probability

of majoring in the subject for students who receive a 5 versus a 4. Also, given the national scope

of AP, small magnitudes in parameter estimates translate into thousands of students in each high

school cohort.

       Our results highlight that timely signals of academic preparation can impact major choice,

yet we generally find statistically significant evidence of changes in college major within the


31
  See for example, Diamond and Perrson (2016), Foote, Schulkind and Shapiro (2015), Jackson (2015), Kosfeld &
Neckermann (2011), Fryer, Levitt & List (2008) and Steele and Aronson (1995).


                                                     29
broader classifications of “STEM” vs. “Non-STEM”, not across these broad classifications. Our

estimates of the effect of a higher integer score on an AP STEM exam and the probability of

choosing a STEM major are consistently positive (Table 11), even though they lack statistical

precision. That is, there may be small positive effects of AP integer scores on the choice of a

STEM major that are beyond the power of the tests we can perform on existing data.

      Why might we find differences in the effects of ability signals between STEM and non-

STEM AP exams? Signaling effects may be weaker for STEM AP takers because these students

may have already received many alternate and perhaps competing signals of preparation in that

AP subject. For example, STEM AP takers may have received more consistent feedback from

frequent tests that use grading standards on which the student might place more weight. In other

words, students may perceive their evaluations in these subjects to have greater objectivity. This

then suggests that developing skills in rigorous high school courses can help promote STEM

completion. In addition, STEM students tend to take more AP exams, which we show mitigates

any one signal, and so it is certainly possible that variations on signal strength and timeliness in

STEM fields can have sizable impacts. Stinebrickner and Stinebrickner (2013) find that

“students enter school quite optimistic about obtaining a science degree, but that relatively few

students end up graduating with a science degree, … [primarily due to] misperceptions about

their ability to perform well academically in science.” As AP takers enter college amongst the

most highly prepared students in the nation, these results underscore the challenge of carrying

out a plan to complete a major in a STEM field. Interventions that help students navigate

introductory courses, perhaps through counseling or psychological supports (e.g., Walton and

Cohen (2011)) may help retain these high-achievers in STEM fields.




                                                30
       Overall, the results in this paper suggest that positive signal of students’ ability can change

their major, and that timely provision of signals might produce larger shifts in outcomes. For

example, providing students similar feedback earlier within their high school careers might

increase subsequent effort or spur additional course-taking within desired fields. More research

that identifies what aspects of various signals students find salient could help identify ability

signals that yield the largest changes in student behavior. This may be a particularly desirable

strand of research because these signals are nearly costless as compared to more traditional

methods of producing STEM majors, such as outreach activities or financial incentives. As there

are many opportunities for individuals and organizations to incentivize strategic goals, such as

efforts to increase STEM majors, these results in this paper show promising evidence of low-cost

signaling interventions to shift the distribution of college majors.




References

Altonji, J. G., Arcidiacono, P., & Maurel, A. (2015). The Analysis of Field Choice in College and Graduate
          School: Determinants and Wage Effects Handbook of the Economics of Education Volume 5,
          Chapter 7.
Arcidiacono, P., Hotz, V. J., & Kang, S. (2012). Modeling college major choices using elicited measures of
          expectations and counterfactuals. Journal of Econometrics, 166(1), 3‐16.
          doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jeconom.2011.06.002
Beffy, M., Fougère, D., & Maurel, A. (2011). Choosing the Field of Study in Postsecondary Education: Do
          Expected Earnings Matter? Review of Economics and Statistics, 94(1), 334‐347.
          doi:10.1162/REST_a_00212
Betts, J. R. (1996). What do students know about wages? Evidence from a survey of undergraduates.
          Journal of Human Resources, 31(1), 27‐56.
Calonico, S., Cattaneo, M. D., & Titiunik, R. (2014). Robust Data‐Driven Inference in the Regression‐
          Discontinuity Design. Stata Journal, 14(4), 909‐946.


                                                    31
Carnevale, A., Cheah, B., & Hanson, A. (2015). The Economic Value of College Majors. Retrieved from
         Washington DC: https://cew.georgetown.edu/report/whats‐it‐worth‐the‐economic‐value‐of‐
         college‐majors/
Castleman, B. L., Long, B. T., & Mabel, Z. A. (2015). Financial barriers to studying STEM in college: Causal
         effect estimates of need‐based grants on the pursuit and completion of courses and degrees in
         STEM fields.
Chajewski, M., Mattern, K., & Shaw, E. J. (2011). Examining the role of Advanced Placement exam
         participation in 4‐year college enrollment. Education Measurement: Issues and Practice, 30, 16‐
         27.
Denning, J. T., & Turley, P. (forthcoming). Was That SMART? Institutional Financial Incentives and Field
         of Study. Journal of Human Resources.
Diamond, R. and P. Perrson (2016). "The Long‐Term Consequences of Teacher Discretion in Grading of
         High‐Stakes Tests," SIEPER Discussion Paper No. 16‐003.
Dodd, B. G., Fitzpatrick, S. J., De Ayala, R. J., & Jennings, J. A. (2002). An investigation of the validity of AP
         grades of 3 and a comparison of AP and non‐AP student groups (College Board Research Report
         No. 2002‐9). Retrieved from New York, NY:
         http://apcentral.collegeboard.com/apc/public/repository/ap05_research_validit_49428.pdf
Dougherty, C., Mellor, L., & Jian, S. (2006). The relationship between Advanced Placement and college
         graduation. Education, 501, 1‐35.
Dynarski, S. M., Hemelt, S. W., & Hyman, J. M. (2015). The missing manual: Using National Student
         Clearinghouse data to track postsecondary outcomes. Educational Evaluation and Policy
         Analysis, 37, 53S‐79S.
Evans, B. (2013). How do college students use Advanced Placement credit?
Evans, B. (2015). SMART Money: Do Financial Incentives Encourage College Students to Study Science?
Foote, A., Schulkind, L., & Shapiro, T. M. (2015). Missed signals: The effect of ACT college‐readiness
         measures on post‐secondary decisions. Economics of Education Review, 46, 39‐51.
Frandsen, B. R. (2014). Party Bias in Union Representation Elections: Testing for Manipulation in the
         Regression Discontinuity Design When the Running Variable is Discrete.
Fricke, H., Grogger, J., & Steinmayr, A. (2015). Does exposure to economics brig new majors to the field?
         Evidence from a natural experiment (NBER Working Paper 21130). National Bureau of Economic
         Research. Cambridge, MA.
Fryer, R. G., Jr., Levitt, S. D., & List, J. A. (2008). Exploring the Impact of Financial Incentives on
         Stereotype Threat: Evidence from a Pilot Study. American Economic Review, 98(2), 370‐375.
         doi:doi: 10.1257/aer.98.2.370
Goldin, C. (2015). Gender and the Undergraduate Economics Major: Notes on the Undergraduate
         Economics Major at a Highly Selective Liberal Arts College. Retrieved from Harvard University.
Hargrove, L., Godin, D., & Dodd, B. (2008). College outcomes comparisons by AP and non‐AP high school
         experiences. Higher Education. (Research Rep. No. 2008‐3). Retrieved from New York, NY:
         https://research.collegeboard.org/sites/default/files/publications/2012/7/researchreport‐2008‐
         3‐college‐outcomes‐ap‐non‐ap‐high‐school‐experiences.pdf
Hastings, J. S., Neilson, C. A., & Zimmerman, S. D. (2013). Are Some Degrees Worth More Than Others?
         Evidence from College Admission Cutoffs in Chile, NBER Working Paper No. 19241. Retrieved
         from National Bureau of Economic Research:
Imbens, G. W., & Kalyanaram, K. (2012). Optimal bandwidth choice for the regression discontinuity
         estimator. Review of Economic Studies, 142(2), 615‐635.
Jackson, K. (2010). A little now for a lot later: An evaluation of a Texas Advanced Placement incentive
         program. Journal of Human Resources, 45(3), 591‐639.



                                                       32
Jackson, J. S. (2015). Does an Early College Readiness Signal Discourage College Application and
         Enrollment? Journal of Research on Educational Effectiveness, 8(3), 380‐399.
Karp, M. M., Calcagno, J. C., Hughes, K. L., Jeong, D. W., & Bailey, T. (2007). The postsecondary
         achievement of participants in dual enrollment: An analysis of student outcomes in two states.
         Retrieved from St. Paul, MN: http://ccrc.tc.columbia.edu/publications/dual‐enrollment‐student‐
         outcomes.html
Keng, L., & Dodd, B. G. (2008). A comparison of college performances of AP and non‐AP student groups in
         10 subject areas (College Board Research Report 2008‐7). Retrieved from New York, NY:
         http://research.collegeboard.org/publications/content/2012/05/comparison‐college‐
         performances‐ap‐and‐non‐ap‐student‐groups‐10‐subject
Kirkebøen, L., Leuven, E., & Mogstad, M. (forthcoming). Field of Study, Earnings, and Self‐Selection.
         Quarterly Journal of Economics.
Kosfeld, M., & Neckermann, S. (2011). Getting More Work for Nothing? Symbolic Awards and Worker
         Performance. American Economic Journal: Microeconomics, 3(3), 86‐99.
Long, M. C., Conger, D., & Iatarola, P. (2012). Effects of high school course‐taking on secondary and
         postsecondary success. American Educational Research Journal, 49(2), 285‐322.
Long, M. C., Conger, D., & McGhee, R. J. (2014). Evaluation of the Sustainability and Effectiveness of
         Inquiry‐Based Advanced Placement Science Courses: Evidence from an In‐Depth Formative
         Evaluation & Randomized Controlled Study.
Long, M. C., Goldhaber, D., & Huntington‐Klein, N. (2015). Do Completed College Majors Respond to
         Changes in Wages? Economics of Education Review, 49, 1‐14.
Mattern, K., E. Shaw, & Ewing, M. (2011). Advanced Placement Exam Participation: Is AP Exam
         Participation and Performance Related to Choice of College Major? (College Board Research
         Report 2011‐6). Retrieved from New York, NY:
         https://research.collegeboard.org/sites/default/files/publications/2012/7/researchreport‐2011‐
         6‐ap‐participation‐performance‐major‐choice.pdf
Mattern, K. D., Marini, J. P., & Shaw, E. J. (2013). Are AP students more likely to graduate from college on
         time (College Board Research Report 2013‐5). Retrieved from New York, NY:
         https://research.collegeboard.org/sites/default/files/publications/2014/1/research‐report‐
         2013‐5‐are‐ap‐students‐more‐likely‐graduate‐college.pdf
McCrary, J. (2008). Manipulation of the running variable in the regression discontinuity design: A density
         test. Journal of Econometrics, 142(2), 698‐714.
Morgan, S. L., Gelbgiser, D., & Weeden, K. A. (2013). Feeding the pipeline: Gender, occupational plans,
         and college major selection. Social Science Research, 42(4), 989‐1005.
Morgan, R., & Klaric, J. (2007). AP students in college : An analysis of five‐year academic careers (College
         Board Research Report 2007‐4). Retrieved from New York, NY:
         https://research.collegeboard.org/sites/default/files/publications/2012/7/researchreport‐2007‐
         4‐ap‐students‐college‐analysis‐five‐year‐academic‐careers.pdf
Murphy, D., & Dodd, B. G. (2009). A Comparison of college performance of matched AP and non‐AP
         student groups (College Board Research Report No. 2009‐6). Retrieved from New York, NY:
         https://research.collegeboard.org/sites/default/files/publications/2012/7/researchreport‐2009‐
         6‐comparision‐college‐performance‐matched‐ap‐non‐ap‐student‐groups.pdf
Oreopoulos, P., & Dunn, R. (2013). Information and College Access: Evidence from a Randomized Field
         Experiment. The Scandinavian Journal of Economics, 115(1), 3‐26.
Ost, B. (2010). The Role of Peers and Grades in Determining Major Persistence in the Sciences.
         Economics of Education Review, 29(6), 923‐934.




                                                    33
Papay, J. P., Willett, J. B., & Murnane, R. J. (forthcoming). How performance information affects human‐
         capital investment decisions: The impact of test‐score labels on educational outcomes. Journal
         of Human Resources.
Patterson, B. F., & Ewing, M. (2013). Validating the use of AP exam scores for college course placement
         (Research Rep. No. 2013‐2). Retrieved from New York, NY:
         https://research.collegeboard.org/sites/default/files/publications/2013/7/researchreport‐2013‐
         2‐validating‐AP‐exam‐scores‐college‐course‐placement.pdf
Rogers, T., & Feller, A. (2016). Discouraged by Peer Excellence: Exposure to Exemplary Peer Performance
         Causes Quitting. Psychological Science, 27(3), 365‐374. doi:10.1177/0956797615623770
Shu, P. (2013). Are the 'Best and Brightest' Going into Finance? Career Choice and Skill Development of
         MIT Graduates.
Smith, J., Hurwitz, M., & Avery, C. (forthcoming). Giving Credit Where it is Due: Advanced Placement
         Exam Scores and College Outcomes. Journal of Labor Economics.
Stange, K. (2015). Differential Pricing in Undergraduate Education: Effects on Degree Production by
         Field. Journal of Policy Analysis and Management, 34(1), 107‐135.
Steele, C. M., & Aronson, J. (1995). Stereotype threat and the intellectual test performance of African
         Americans. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 69(5), 797‐811.
         doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/0022‐3514.69.5.797
Stinebrickner, R., & Stinebrickner, T. R. (2012). Learning about Academic Ability and the College Dropout
         Decision. Journal of Labor Economics, 30(4), 707‐748.
Stinebrickner, T., & Stinebrickner, R. (2013). A Major in Science? Initial Beliefs and Final Outcomes for
         College Major and Dropout. Review of Economic Studies, 81(1), 426‐472.
Tai, R. H., Liu, C. Q., Almarode, J. T., & Fan, X. (2010). Advanced placement course enrollment and long‐
         range educational outcomes. In P. M Sadler, G. Sonnert, R. H. Tai, & K. Klopfenstein (Eds.), AP: A
         critical examination of the Advance Placement program (pp. 109‐118). Cambridge, MA: Harvard
         Education Press.
Theokas, C., & Saaris, R. (2013). Finding America’s Missing AP and IB Students. Retrieved from
         http://edtrust.org/resource/finding‐americas‐missing‐ap‐and‐ib‐students
Turner, S., & Bowen, W. (1999). Choice of Major: The Changing (Unchanging) Gender Gap. Industrial and
         Labor Relations Review, 59(2), 289‐313.
Walton, G. M., & Cohen, G. L. (2011). A Brief Social‐Belonging Intervention Improves Academic and
         Health Outcomes of Minority Students. Science, 331(6023), 1447‐1451.
         doi:10.1126/science.1198364
Wiswall, M., & Zafar, B. (2015a). Determinants of College Major Choice: Identification using an
         Information Experiment. Review of Economic Studies, 82, 791‐824.
Wiswall, M., & Zafar, B. (2015b). How Do College Students Respond to Public Information about
         Earnings? Journal of Human Capital, 9(2), 117‐169.
Zafar, B. (2011). How do College Students Form Expectations? Journal of Labor Economics, 29(2), 301‐
         348.




                                                    34
Table 1: Summary Statistics
                                                Mean         Std. Dev.    Min       Max
Student Demographics
 White                                               69.3%         0.46         0         1
 Asian                                               10.7%         0.31         0         1
 Black                                                6.8%         0.25         0         1
 Latino/Hispanic                                      9.2%         0.29         0         1
 Male                                                43.2%         0.50         0         1
 Parental Education (0: HS; 1: Some college)         49.6%         0.50         0         1
 Income Less Than $50k                               13.0%         0.34         0         1
 Income $50k‐$100k                                   19.1%         0.39         0         1
 Income Great Than $100k                             18.0%         0.38         0         1
Exam Scores
 SAT                                                  1176          173     400       1600
 Number of AP Exams Taken                              2.8          2.0       1         18
 Number of STEM AP Exams Taken                         1.0          1.0       0          8
 Average AP Exam Score                                 2.7          1.1       1          5
 Average Raw Score                                    59.2         28.6       0      179.3

N                                               3,148,598
Notes: Summary statistics are calculated using de‐duplicated, individual‐level data. Full
sample includes all students who took one of the 19 most taken AP exams. Some students
do not provide demographics.




                                                35
Table 2: Probability of Majoring in core CIP code or STEM by AP Exam Subject
                                                      Major in Core Subject                                            Major in STEM
AP Score                                  1          2          3          4         5                1          2           3           4       5
Biology                                 5.4%       9.5%       13.7%     18.5%      24.6%            8.0%       14.4%      20.9%        28.7%   40.9%
Calculus AB                             4.4%       7.1%       9.2%      12.0%      18.4%            11.8%      17.5%      21.3%        26.0%   35.4%
Calculus BC                             8.7%       11.7%      14.8%     18.3%      26.4%            20.4%      25.9%      30.8%        35.8%   46.4%
Chemistry                               1.9%       3.5%       4.7%       6.5%      9.6%             14.7%      24.6%      32.1%        40.2%   51.7%
English Language & Comp.                1.0%       1.9%       3.4%       5.5%      8.1%             5.6%       10.4%      15.0%        18.3%   20.6%
English Literature & Comp.              0.9%       2.0%       3.8%       6.4%      9.8%             5.6%       10.2%      14.5%        17.4%   18.5%
Environmental Science                   2.2%       3.9%       5.5%       7.6%      11.3%            4.6%       7.6%       10.7%        15.7%   26.1%
European History                        1.2%       1.9%       3.7%       6.5%      9.8%             7.1%       10.9%      14.4%        18.0%   20.2%
French Language and Culture             2.0%       3.9%       6.4%       9.0%      10.9%            11.4%      15.0%      17.7%        18.3%   18.7%
Macroeconomics                          7.0%       9.4%       11.1%     13.0%      16.8%            8.4%       13.6%      17.6%        23.6%   32.4%
Microeconomics                          7.9%       10.0%      11.6%     14.5%      17.8%            8.5%       12.3%      16.9%        22.9%   34.3%
Physics B                               1.4%       2.3%       3.6%       5.0%      8.7%             15.2%      22.7%      30.4%        38.8%   49.8%
Physics C: Mechanics                    1.9%       2.9%       3.8%       5.1%      9.3%             20.9%      31.0%      38.0%        45.2%   55.9%
Psychology                              4.6%       5.8%       7.1%       9.1%      11.2%            4.4%       6.8%        9.1%        13.1%   20.3%
Spanish Language                        2.1%       4.0%       5.3%       6.4%      7.4%             12.4%      15.1%      15.2%        14.7%   14.4%
Statistics                              1.9%       3.6%       6.3%      11.9%      22.4%            5.9%       9.6%       14.8%        24.1%   39.5%
US Gov and Politics                     5.0%       8.0%       11.1%     14.7%      18.1%            6.1%       11.1%      16.0%        20.6%   24.9%
US History                              0.6%       1.4%       2.5%       4.2%      7.0%             7.0%       12.1%      16.0%        19.9%   23.3%
World History                           0.5%       1.1%       2.2%       4.0%      6.5%             6.8%       11.0%      16.0%        20.4%   24.7%
Notes: Each cell indicates the probability of majoring in the two‐digit CIP code categorization most closely associated with the AP exam.




                                                                           36
Table 3: Probability of Majoring in CIP cody by AP Exam Subject, Student Scoring 3 or Higher

                                                                                        College Major
                                         English
                                       Language                                                   Foreign      Biological
                                           and                                                  Languages,         and                   Engineering/Ma
                                    Literature/Le                 Social                     Literatures, and Biomedical Physical thematics and
AP Exam                                   tters      History     Sciences     Psychology        Linguistics     Sciences      Sciences      Statistics
CIP CODE                                   23           54          45            42                16              26            40          14/27
Biology                                   2.6%         2.0%        8.7%          4.9%              2.3%          18.9%          2.7%           7.8%
Calculus AB                               2.0%         1.5%        7.9%          3.6%              2.1%           9.7%          3.1%          13.4%
Calculus BC                               1.5%         1.4%        9.1%          3.0%              2.1%          11.4%          4.7%          21.7%
Chemistry                                 1.5%         1.4%        7.8%          3.1%              2.0%          14.2%          6.7%          18.2%
English Language & Comp.                  4.8%         2.5%       10.0%          4.9%              2.8%           7.4%          1.9%           6.6%
English Literature & Comp.                5.4%         2.7%       10.0%          4.9%              2.8%           7.3%          1.9%           6.0%
Environmental Science                     3.2%         2.6%       11.5%          4.5%              2.1%           7.6%          1.9%           5.7%
European History                          4.5%         5.7%       13.5%          4.0%              3.1%           7.0%          2.1%           6.5%
French Language and Culture               4.8%         3.1%       14.3%          4.8%              7.9%           8.3%          2.5%           6.5%
Macroeconomics                            2.3%         2.4%       13.4%          3.3%              2.0%           8.2%          2.4%          11.7%
Microeconomics                            2.1%         2.2%       14.3%          3.1%              2.0%           7.7%          2.4%          11.8%
Physics B                                 1.6%         1.4%        7.9%          2.6%              1.7%           9.4%          5.2%          20.4%
Physics C: Mechanics                      1.1%         1.0%        7.3%          1.7%              1.3%           7.6%          6.2%          29.9%
Psychology                                3.2%         1.9%        8.5%          9.2%              2.2%           7.1%          1.4%           4.9%
Spanish Language                          2.9%         1.9%       11.0%          5.0%              6.3%           6.9%          1.6%           5.7%
Statistics                                2.2%         1.8%       10.0%          4.4%              2.0%           7.8%          2.3%          11.8%
US Gov and Politics                       3.5%         3.7%       13.5%          3.9%              2.4%           7.6%          2.2%           8.2%
US History                                4.0%         4.0%       12.2%          4.3%              2.8%           7.9%          2.2%           7.8%
World History                             3.6%         3.7%       11.4%          4.1%              2.7%           7.9%          2.2%           7.9%
Notes: Each cell indicates the probability of majoring in the two‐digit CIP code categorization. Bolded and underlined cells are the outcome major
used in all regressions.




                                                                          37
Table 4: Covariate Balancing Tests

                                                                                               Parent Educ: Less Parent Educ: HS     Parent Educ:                      Income $50k‐     Income >
                            Male          White         Asian         Black        Hispanic        Than HS          graduate         BA or higher    Income < $50k         $100k          $100k     Took SAT      SAT Score
                                                                                                                    1/2 Threshold
Above Threshold            0.0017        ‐0.0009        0.0015        0.0002        ‐0.0005         ‐0.0004            ‐0.0001           0.0017          0.0002            ‐0.0014       ‐0.0004      0.0004        0.1553
                          (0.0018)      (0.0017)       (0.0012)      (0.0010)      (0.0012)        (0.0011)           (0.0013)          (0.0018)        (0.0013)          (0.0014)      (0.0013)     (0.0014)      (0.5107)
N                         1473612       1473612        1473612       1473612       1473612         1473612            1473612           1473612         1473612           1473612       1473612      1473612       1195599

                                                                                                                    2/3 Threshold
Above Threshold            ‐0.0010       ‐0.0020        0.0013        ‐0.0005       0.0015+         0.0000             0.0028**          ‐0.0021         0.0011            0.0014       ‐0.0022*      0.0015        0.7791*
                          (0.0014)      (0.0013)       (0.0009)      (0.0006)      (0.0008)        (0.0007)           (0.0010)          (0.0014)        (0.0009)          (0.0011)      (0.0011)     (0.0011)      (0.3811)
N                         2383844       2383844        2383844       2383844       2383844         2383844            2383844           2383844         2383844           2383844       2383844      2383844       1972409

                                                                                                                    3/4 Threshold
Above Threshold           ‐0.0034*      ‐0.0035**       0.0017+      ‐0.0008+       0.0012+         ‐0.0007            0.0014            0.0010          ‐0.0006           ‐0.0003       0.0022+      0.0009       ‐0.9662**
                          (0.0014)      (0.0012)       (0.0010)      (0.0005)      (0.0007)        (0.0006)           (0.0009)          (0.0013)        (0.0008)          (0.0011)      (0.0012)     (0.0010)      (0.3649)
N                         2472178       2472178        2472178       2472178       2472178         2472178            2472178           2472178         2472178           2472178       2472178      2472178       2113990

                                                                                                                    4/5 Threshold
Above Threshold            ‐0.0016       ‐0.0011        0.0032*       ‐0.0004       ‐0.0012         ‐0.0001            ‐0.0002           0.0020          ‐0.0001           0.0016        ‐0.0003      0.0020+       0.6089
                          (0.0016)      (0.0015)       (0.0012)      (0.0005)      (0.0007)        (0.0006)           (0.0009)          (0.0016)        (0.0009)          (0.0013)      (0.0015)     (0.0011)      (0.4268)
N                         1679162       1679162        1679162       1679162       1679162         1679162            1679162           1679162         1679162           1679162       1679162      1679162       1485920
Notes. + p<0.10, * p<0.05, ** p<0.01, *** p<0.001. All students in the sample first attended a four‐year college within 180 days of high school graduation. An observation is a student AP exam. Results based on local linear
regressions with triangular kernels of bandwidth 10 that include fixed effects for AP exam‐year and high school graduation year. Other variables include the Distance from the threshold and the interaction of Distance and
Above Threshold. Standard errors clustered by individual.




                                                                                                              38
Table 5: Effect of Attaining Higher AP Exam Scores on Major

                                    Outcome = Majored in Same Subject as AP Exam
Threshold:                       1/2            2/3              3/4              4/5
                                                    Full Sample
Above Threshold                ‐0.0003        0.0018**         0.0038**         0.0064**
                              (0.0007)       (0.0006)         (0.0007)         (0.0011)
Mean at Cutoff                  4.2%           5.4%             8.1%            12.2%
N                             1473612        2383844          2472178          1679162
                                                   Only AP STEM Exams
Above Threshold                ‐0.0006           0.0011           0.0022              0.0053**
                              (0.0012)          (0.0013)         (0.0015)            (0.0019)
Mean at Cutoff                   5.4%             7.5%            10.8%               15.7%
N                               626287           770240           803432              635615
                                                Only AP Non‐STEM Exams
Above Threshold                ‐0.0001           0.0022**       0.0045**              0.0073**
                              (0.0008)          (0.0007)       (0.0008)              (0.0012)
Mean at Cutoff                   3.3%             4.4%           6.8%                 10.0%
N                               847325          1613604        1668746               1043547
Notes. + p<0.10, * p<0.05, ** p<0.01. All students in the sample first attended a four‐year college
within 180 days of high school graduation. An observation is a student AP exam. Results based on
local linear regressions with triangular kernels of bandwidth 10 that include fixed effects for AP
exam‐year and high school graduation year. Other variables include the Distance from the
threshold and the interaction of Distance and Above Threshold. Standard errors clustered by
individual. Means at cutoff are based on all students within one point below the designated
threshold.




                                                      39
Table 6: Potential Mechanisms for Impacts of Higher AP Exam Scores on College Major
                                (1)                (2)                (3)               (4)               (5)                            (6)                 (7)
                                                               College Choice                                                               College Graduation
                                             Barrons Most,                                          Schools Offers
                        College's Average Highly, or Very     Major in Subject; Major in Subject;      Credit at                   Bachelor in Six     Major in Subject;
                                SAT           Competitive    Senior Exams Only     College FE         Threshold                        Years          College Graduates
                                                                                      1/2 Threshold
Above Threshold               0.4266             0.0026            ‐0.0001           ‐0.0004               ‐‐                         ‐0.0037+              ‐0.0000
                             (0.3993)           (0.0017)          (0.0010)          (0.0007)               ‐‐                         (0.0021)             (0.0010)
Mean At Cutoff                 1140              59.0%               5.3%             4.2%                 ‐‐                          75.0%                 6.2%
N                            1427550            1473612             928304          1473612                ‐‐                          831234               982436

                                                                                          2/3 Threshold
Above Threshold               0.4230              0.0009              0.0013              0.0020**           0.0001                    0.0027+              0.0022**
                             (0.3131)            (0.0013)            (0.0009)            (0.0006)           (0.0015)                  (0.0014)             (0.0008)
Mean At Cutoff                 1173               69.4%                6.3%                5.4%              59.3%                     82.0%                 7.1%
N                            2325531             2383844             1475603             2383844            1956213                   1386828              1768736

                                                                                          3/4 Threshold
Above Threshold               0.6023+             0.0026*             0.0033**            0.0035**          ‐0.0031*                   0.0029*              0.0044**
                             (0.3219)            (0.0011)            (0.0010)            (0.0007)           (0.0015)                  (0.0013)             (0.0009)
Mean At Cutoff                 1213               78.7%                9.1%                8.1%              55.6%                     85.7%                10.0%
N                            2421632             2472178             1553288             2472178            2045180                   1435783              1966483

                                                                                          4/5 Threshold
Above Threshold               0.9922*             0.0006              0.0042**            0.0068**           0.0019                    0.0032*              0.0076**
                             (0.4087)            (0.0012)            (0.0014)            (0.0011)           (0.0014)                  (0.0014)             (0.0012)
Mean At Cutoff                 1258               85.8%               13.3%               12.2%              20.4%                     88.7%                14.5%
N                            1650548             1679162             1057689             1679162            1402697                    953759              1401213
Notes. + p<0.10, * p<0.05, ** p<0.01. All students in the sample first attended a four‐year college within 180 days of high school graduation. An observation is a
student AP exam. Results based on local linear regressions with triangular kernels of bandwidth 10 that include fixed effects for AP exam‐year and high school
graduation year. Other variables include the Distance from the threshold and the interaction of Distance and Above Threshold. Standard errors clustered by
individual.




                                                                                   40
Table 7: Effect of Attaining Higher AP Exam Scores on Major ‐ Credit or Signal?
                                        Policy Sample                                   STEM AP Exams                              Non‐STEM AP Exams
                                          With AP     Without AP                            With AP    Without AP                       With AP   Without AP
                                All         Policy      Policy              All               Policy      Policy               All       Policy      Policy
                                                                                         2/3 Threshold
Above Threshold              0.0021**      0.0028**       0.0012             0.0014         0.0030      ‐0.0012             0.0025**       0.0026**      0.0022+
                            (0.0007)      (0.0009)       (0.0011)           (0.0014)       (0.0018)    (0.0023)            (0.0008)       (0.0010)      (0.0012)
Mean At Threshold              5.4%          5.4%           5.4%               7.6%           7.9%        7.2%                4.3%           4.1%          4.6%
N                            1956213       1164325        791888             638044         391487       246557             1318169        772838        545331
                                                                                        3/4 Threshold
Above Threshold              0.0036**      0.0042**       0.0028*            0.0019        0.0027      0.0010               0.0044**       0.0049**      0.0037**
                            (0.0008)      (0.0011)       (0.0012)           (0.0016)      (0.0022)    (0.0023)             (0.0009)       (0.0012)      (0.0014)
Mean At Threshold              8.1%          8.2%           8.0%              11.1%         11.8%       10.3%                 6.7%           6.6%          6.8%
N                            2045180       1137975        907205             674183        363711      310472               1370997        774264        596733

                                                                                        4/5 Threshold
Above Threshold              0.0068**      0.0053*        0.0072**           0.0069**      0.0024      0.0085**             0.0069**       0.0080*       0.0066**
                            (0.0012)      (0.0026)       (0.0013)           (0.0021)      (0.0041)    (0.0024)             (0.0014)       (0.0032)      (0.0015)
Mean At Threshold             12.4%         12.5%          12.4%              16.2%         15.2%       16.6%                 9.9%          10.0%          9.9%
N                            1402697       277830         1124867            540619        130449      410170               862078         147381        714697
Notes. + p<0.10, * p<0.05, ** p<0.01. All students in the sample first attended a four‐year college within 180 days of high school graduation. Policy sample
includes 500 colleges where credit policies are collected. Colleges are defined as "with a policy" if there is any alteration in the units or courses offered at the
threshold. An observation is a student AP exam. Results based on local linear regressions with triangular kernels of bandwidth 10 that include fixed effects for AP
exam‐year and high school graduation year. Other variables include the Distance from the threshold and the interaction of Distance and Above Threshold.
Standard errors clustered by individual. Means at cutoff are based on all students within one point below the designated threshold.




                                                                                 41
Table 8: Effect of Attaining Higher AP Exam Scores on Major ‐ Credit or Signal with Uniform Credit Policies

Threshold:                                                          Sample                                                                                             2/3             3/4             4/5
No Credit Given for Exam at Any Threshold                           311 school‐exam combinations (106 schools) that give no credit at Above Threshold                ‐0.0011         0.0084+         0.0047
                                                                    any threshold. Environmental Science, World History, and European                               (0.0050)        (0.0045)        (0.0050)
                                                                    History are 1/2 of the sample.                                    N                               34048           56323           62216
Credit Given for All Thresholds                                     435 school‐exam combinations (203 schools) that given credit at the Above Threshold              0.0087*         0.0099+         0.0074
                                                                    2/3, 3/4, and 4/5 thresholds. Biology, Chemistry, Spanish Language,                             (0.0042)        (0.0054)        (0.0078)
                                                                    and French Language are 4/5 of the sample.                          N                             58256           50920           31721
Uniform Credit Policy Across AP Subjects                                                                                                   Above Threshold           0.0009          0.0022          0.0088**
                                                                    71 schools that offer AP credit at either the 2/3 or 3/4 threshold for                          (0.0019)        (0.0020)        (0.0029)
                                                                    every exam                                                             N                         283142          315673          222507
Uniform Credit Policy Across AP Subjects (2/3 Threshold Only)                                                                                 Above Threshold        0.0019          0.0026          0.0083*
                                                                                                                                                                    (0.0021)        (0.0023)        (0.0033)
                                                                    52 schools that offer AP credit at the 2/3 threshold for every exam       N                      233759          256960          180238
Notes. + p<0.10, * p<0.05, ** p<0.01. All students in the sample first attended a four‐year college within 180 days of high school graduation. Analyses use credit policy sample, whereby policies are collected
for 500 colleges. An observation is a student AP exam. Results based on local linear regressions with triangular kernels of bandwidth 10 that include fixed effects for AP exam‐year and high school graduation
year. Other variables include the Distance from the threshold and the interaction of Distance and Above Threshold. Standard errors clustered by individual.




                                                                                                      42
Table 9: Effect of Attaining Higher AP Exam Scores on Major ‐ Heterogeneity
                                                               All AP Exams                                STEM AP Exams                           Non‐STEM AP Exams
Threshold:                                           2/3            3/4         4/5                   2/3       3/4       4/5                   2/3       3/4      4/5
Male                                              0.0023*        0.0033**    0.0067**               0.0022     0.0028    0.0055*              0.0022* 0.0037** 0.0078**
                                                 (0.0010)       (0.0011)    (0.0015)               (0.0020) (0.0021) (0.0027)                (0.0010) (0.0012) (0.0018)
N                                                 1024316        1140410     836630                 369339     418061    359260               654977     722349   477370
Female                                            0.0016*        0.0040**       0.0062**            0.0001      0.0016      0.0050+           0.0022* 0.0050** 0.0068**
                                                 (0.0008)       (0.0010)       (0.0015)            (0.0016)    (0.0019)    (0.0027)          (0.0009) (0.0011) (0.0017)
N                                                 1359528        1331768        842532              400901      385371      276355            958627   946397   566177
White                                             0.0020**       0.0040**       0.0075**            0.0012      0.0026      0.0051*           0.0024** 0.0047** 0.0091**
                                                 (0.0007)       (0.0009)       (0.0013)            (0.0015)    (0.0017)    (0.0023)          (0.0008) (0.0010) (0.0015)
N                                                 1656577        1789749        1204179             538372      573035      449550            1118205 1216714 754629
Asian                                             0.0023         0.0028         0.0029              0.0000      0.0016      0.0040            0.0037* 0.0036+ 0.0022
                                                 (0.0017)       (0.0019)       (0.0025)            (0.0034)    (0.0037)    (0.0044)          (0.0018) (0.0021) (0.0029)
N                                                 308939         345783         273790              119323      137425      125712            189616   208358   148078
Minority (Black/Hispanic)                         0.0023         0.0041+        0.0026              0.0051      ‐0.0002     0.0026            0.0013       0.0056* 0.0026
                                                 (0.0017)       (0.0023)       (0.0036)            (0.0040)    (0.0053)    (0.0082)          (0.0018)     (0.0025) (0.0038)
N                                                 323417         239491         134227               83214       63093       36986            240203       176398    97241
Income < $50k                                     0.0045*        0.0046*        ‐0.0020             0.0059      0.0031      ‐0.0047           0.0039* 0.0055* ‐0.0003
                                                 (0.0018)       (0.0023)       (0.0036)            (0.0038)    (0.0048)    (0.0068)          (0.0019) (0.0025) (0.0041)
N                                                 299503         248206          144763              91086       79173       52964            208417   169033    91799
Income $50k ‐ $100k                               0.0017         0.0038*        0.0098**            0.0016      0.0031      0.0137**          0.0018       0.0043* 0.0080**
                                                 (0.0014)       (0.0016)       (0.0025)            (0.0029)    (0.0034)    (0.0046)          (0.0015)     (0.0018) (0.0029)
N                                                 485175         483721         308762              153935      153702      115658            331240       330019   193104
Income > $100k                                    0.0001         0.0051**       0.0089**            ‐0.0008     0.0036      0.0090*           0.0006       0.0058** 0.0090**
                                                 (0.0014)       (0.0015)       (0.0021)            (0.0027)    (0.0030)    (0.0039)          (0.0016)     (0.0017) (0.0025)
N                                                 474661         557844         409834               157629     179685      151643            317032       378159   258191

Took One AP                                       ‐0.0007        0.0035         0.0041              ‐0.0025     ‐0.0017     ‐0.0016           0.0003       0.0070* 0.0090
                                                 (0.0017)       (0.0025)       (0.0047)            (0.0034)    (0.0045)    (0.0075)          (0.0019)     (0.0030) (0.0057)
N                                                  328563        225638         101150               114393      86042       45804            214170       139596    55346
Took Two or More AP                               0.0023**       0.0038**       0.0066**            0.0017      0.0026+ 0.0058**              0.0025** 0.0044** 0.0073**
                                                 (0.0007)       (0.0008)       (0.0011)            (0.0014)    (0.0015) (0.0020)             (0.0007) (0.0008) (0.0013)
N                                                 2055281        2246540        1578012             655847      717390   589811               1399434 1529150 988201
Bottom Third SAT                                  0.0024*        0.0062**       0.0030              0.0033      0.0023      0.0025            0.0021+ 0.0080** 0.0033
                                                 (0.0010)       (0.0019)       (0.0041)            (0.0024)    (0.0039)    (0.0084)          (0.0011) (0.0021) (0.0045)
N                                                 834173         434741         131157              218393      123701       41141            615780   311040    90016
Middle Third SAT                                  0.0005         0.0035**       0.0052*             ‐0.0010     0.0021      0.0019            0.0012       0.0043** 0.0077**
                                                 (0.0011)       (0.0012)       (0.0022)            (0.0021)    (0.0024)    (0.0037)          (0.0012)     (0.0014) (0.0026)
N                                                 798336         908774         469918               280039     296351      184270            518297       612423   285648
Top Third SAT                                     ‐0.0003        0.0016         0.0083**            ‐0.0014     0.0002      0.0096**          0.0005       0.0023+ 0.0076**
                                                 (0.0017)       (0.0012)       (0.0014)            (0.0028)    (0.0024)    (0.0025)          (0.0022)     (0.0014) (0.0016)
N                                                  339900        770475         884845               143872     265633      331807            196028       504842   553038
Bottom Third College Quality (Avg. SAT)           0.0030**       0.0026*        0.0064**            0.0052*     ‐0.0011     0.0065            0.0021* 0.0042** 0.0063*
                                                 (0.0009)       (0.0013)       (0.0023)            (0.0021)    (0.0028)    (0.0044)          (0.0009) (0.0014) (0.0026)
N                                                 975176         734177         341542              278649       220467     123894            696527   513710   217648
Middle Third College Quality (Avg. SAT)           0.0016         0.0039**       0.0083**            0.0002      0.0037      0.0094*           0.0023* 0.0040** 0.0079**
                                                 (0.0011)       (0.0013)       (0.0020)            (0.0023)    (0.0026)    (0.0037)          (0.0012) (0.0014) (0.0023)
N                                                 822881         838322         493909              270060      274458      192741            552821   563864   301168
Top Third College Quality (Avg. SAT)              ‐0.0001        0.0043**       0.0054**            ‐0.0025     0.0029      0.0028            0.0014       0.0051** 0.0071**
                                                 (0.0015)       (0.0013)       (0.0015)            (0.0024)    (0.0023)    (0.0027)          (0.0019)     (0.0015) (0.0018)
N                                                  527474        849133         815097               204439     293389      309072            323035       555744   506025
Notes. + p<0.10, * p<0.05, ** p<0.01. Each estimate is a separate regression that is restricted to the identified sample. All students in the sample first attended a four‐year
college within 180 days of high school graduation. An observation is a student AP exam. Results based on local linear regressions with triangular kernels of bandwidth 10 that
include fixed effects for AP exam‐year and high school graduation year. Other variables include the Distance from the threshold and the interaction of Distance and Above
Threshold. Standard errors clustered by individual.




                                                                                      43
Table 10: Impact of Earning Multiple High Scores on AP Exams
                                                                     Multiple AP     Other Exam = Average of exam scores
                                                                       Takers                   (Centered at 3)
                                                                         (1)             (2)          (3)          (4)
Above 4/5 Threshold (Primary Exam)                                    0.0068***       0.0091*** 0.0077***       0.0093***
                                                                     (0.0011)          (0.0013)     (0.0014)    (0.0014)
Above 4/5 Threshold (Primary Exam)*Other Exam                             ‐‐         ‐0.0029***        ‐‐            ‐‐
                                                                          ‐‐          (0.0008)         ‐‐            ‐‐
Above 4/5 Threshold (Primary Exam)*Other STEM Exam                        ‐‐             ‐‐         ‐0.0011+         ‐‐
                                                                          ‐‐             ‐‐         (0.0007)         ‐‐
Above 4/5 Threshold (Primary Exam)*Other Non‐STEM Exam                    ‐‐             ‐‐            ‐‐        ‐0.0030***
                                                                          ‐‐             ‐‐            ‐‐         (0.0008)

N                                                                     1578216         1578012       1256934       1449178


Notes. + p<0.10, * p<0.05, ** p<0.01. All students in the sample first attended a four‐year college within 180 days of high
school graduation. An observation is a student AP exam but only for students near the 4/5 threshold on at least one exam.
Results based on local linear regressions with triangular kernels of bandwidth 10 that include fixed effects for AP exam
subject of the forcing variable, AP exam‐year and high school graduation year. These regressions also contain fixed effects
for the exact set of total AP exams taken by the student. Other variables include the Distance from the threshold and the
interaction of Distance and Above Threshold. Standard errors clustered by individual.




                                                                        44
Table 11: Effect of Attaining Higher AP Exam Scores on Majoring in Any STEM Field

                                                     Outcome = Majored in STEM
Threshold:                           1/2                 2/3               3/4                 4/5
                                                             Full Sample
Above Threshold                     ‐0.0002            0.0021*           0.0001              ‐0.0021
                                   (0.0011)           (0.0010)          (0.0011)            (0.0014)
Mean at Cutoff                      11.7%              15.8%             20.2%               26.0%
N                                  1473612            2383844           2472178             1679162
                                                         Only AP STEM Exams
Above Threshold                     ‐0.0012            0.0028           0.0010               0.0006
                                   (0.0019)           (0.0019)         (0.0021)             (0.0026)
Mean at Cutoff                      15.5%              20.5%            26.7%                34.9%
N                                    626287            770240           803432               635615
                                                      Only AP Non‐STEM Exams
Above Threshold                     0.0005             0.0018          ‐0.0003              ‐0.0035*
                                   (0.0014)           (0.0012)        (0.0013)              (0.0017)
Mean at Cutoff                       9.0%              13.5%           17.1%                 20.4%
N                                   847325            1613604         1668746               1043547
Notes. + p<0.10, * p<0.05, ** p<0.01. All students in the sample first attended a four‐year college within
180 days of high school graduation. An observation is a student AP exam. Results based on local linear
regressions with triangular kernels of bandwidth 10 that include fixed effects for AP exam‐year and high
school graduation year. Other variables include the Distance from the threshold and the interaction of
Distance and Above Threshold. Standard errors clustered by individual. Means at cutoff are based on all
students within one point below the designated threshold.




                                                                            45
46
Figure 2 ‐ Main Results


                                              Percent Majoring in AP Field
                                        1/2 Threshold                                                      2/3 Threshold




                                                                  .04.045.05.055.06.065
     .03 .035 .04 .045 .05




                             -10   -5        0          5    10                            -10        -5        0          5    10
                                   Distance from Threshold                                            Distance from Threshold


                                        3/4 Threshold                                                      4/5 Threshold



                                                                  .09 .1 .11 .12 .13 .14
     .1
     .06 .07 .08 .09




                             -10   -5        0          5    10                            -10        -5        0          5    10
                                   Distance from Threshold                                            Distance from Threshold




                                                                                                 47
Figure 3 ‐ Main Results ‐ Stem and Non‐STEM Fields


                                                     Percent Majoring in AP Field
                                      3/4 Threshold, STEM AP Exams                                4/5 Threshold, STEM AP Exams
     .08 .09 .1 .11 .12 .13




                                                                            .18
                                                                            .16
                                                                            .14
                                                                            .12
                              -10        -5         0          5       10                 -10         -5        0          5       10
                                          Distance from Threshold                                     Distance from Threshold


                                    3/4 Threshold, Non-STEM AP Exams                            4/5 Threshold, Non-STEM AP Exams



                                                                            .11
     .08




                                                                            .1
     .07




                                                                            .07 .08 .09
     .06
     .05




                              -10        -5         0          5       10                 -10         -5        0          5       10
                                          Distance from Threshold                                     Distance from Threshold




                                                                                                 48
Figure 4. Subject by Subject Results




                                       49
Appendix Table 1: Distribution of Credit‐Granting Scores and Test Timing
                                    In       STEM        Total      Percent distribution of high school       Exists credit policy at score of X, relative
AP subject                        Sample     exam        obs.         years during which exam was               to X‐1 (for 500 in‐sample colleges):
                                                                     Fresh. Soph.        Jun.     Sen.              3              4               5
English Literature & Comp.            Y         N      1,641,172         0.0        0.1      5.9    94.0              61.3%         55.8%           17.1%
US History                            Y         N      1,438,063         0.0        5.9    86.8      7.3              62.9%         47.7%           12.5%
English Language & Comp.              Y         N      1,228,818         0.0        1.0    79.5     19.5             64.7%          52.6%           19.1%
Calculus AB                           Y         Y      1,120,442         0.0        0.8    14.8     84.4              71.2%         43.3%             7.3%
US Gov and Politics                   Y         N        847,245         0.2        3.2      8.5    88.2             65.7%          31.6%            4.8%
Biology                               Y         Y        690,772         0.4        6.4    34.4     58.8             64.3%          59.3%           26.5%
Psychology                            Y         N        510,673         0.0        1.7    26.5     71.8              64.9%         33.4%             3.8%
Spanish Language                      Y         N        472,437         1.3        8.8    33.8     56.1              76.6%         64.3%           38.6%
Chemistry                             Y         Y        444,396         0.0        4.1    48.5     47.3             66.5%          65.1%           32.0%
Statistics                            Y         Y        436,090         0.1        2.3    15.6     82.0             69.0%          30.4%            5.9%
European History                      Y         N        406,442         0.3       42.3    16.7     40.8              59.8%         44.4%           10.4%
Calculus BC                           Y         Y        330,823         0.1        1.2    18.0     80.7             75.5%          52.4%            8.8%
Macroeconomics                        Y         N        313,155         0.0        0.7      7.8    91.5             63.3%          35.2%             4.4%
World History                         Y         N        305,650         2.7       73.5    13.3     10.5              58.6%         42.3%           11.7%
Physics B                             Y         Y        276,199         0.1        1.4    31.4     67.1             62.6%          46.2%           12.3%
Environmental Science                 Y         Y        257,417         0.4        2.3    28.4     68.9             60.1%          33.2%            3.8%
Microeconomics                        Y         N        192,262         0.1        1.3    10.2     88.4             63.7%          35.0%            4.4%
Physics C: Mechanics                  Y         Y        142,707         0.0        0.5    10.8     88.7             58.7%          50.6%           11.0%
French Language and Culture           Y         N        106,032         0.5        3.3    23.8     72.4             76.7%          62.6%           37.0%
Art History                           N         ‐‐        94,143         0.1        6.3    27.6     66.0
Human Geography                       N         ‐‐        80,677        17.9       17.9    18.9     45.3
Spanish Literature                    N         ‐‐        76,242         0.4        4.8    26.5     68.2
Comparative Gov.and Politics          N         ‐‐        74,051         0.1        5.1    14.1     80.7
Computer Science A                    N         ‐‐        72,446         0.6       11.6    35.9     51.9
Physics C: E&M                        N         ‐‐        63,715         0.0        0.6      8.8    90.5
Studio Art 2‐D                        N         ‐‐        62,215         0.0        0.9    11.8     87.2
Studio Art Drawing                    N         ‐‐        61,579         0.0        1.1    14.2     84.7
Music Theory                          N         ‐‐        52,425         0.3        5.4    28.1     66.2
Computer Science AB                   N         ‐‐        25,564         0.3        8.8    36.0     54.8
German Language and Culture           N         ‐‐        24,368         0.8        4.3    20.9     74.0
Latin Vergil                          N         ‐‐        24,040         0.2        5.2    37.4     57.3
Latin Literature                      N         ‐‐        18,154         0.1        3.5    37.6     58.7
Studio Art 3‐D                        N         ‐‐        10,622         0.0        0.9    10.5     88.5
French Literature                     N         ‐‐        10,142         0.2        3.3    20.5     76.0
Chinese                               N         ‐‐         7,382         0.0        4.2    35.5     60.3
Italian Language and Culture          N         ‐‐         6,467         0.1        0.9    11.1     87.9
Japanese Lang. and Culture            N         ‐‐         3,949         0.0        2.1    20.1     77.9

Notes: Includes AP exams taken by the 2004‐2009 cohorts. On‐time students are those who began at a four‐year college within 180 days of high school
graduation. Credit policies collected from college websites in August and September of 2015 and include any mention of college credit or placement.




                                                                                                         50
Appendix Table 2: AP Subject, Classification of Instructional Program (CIP) Code, Major Crosswalk

AP Subject                     CIP Code       Assigned Major
STEM
 Biology                              26      Biological Sciences
 Calculus AB                      14, 15, 27  Engineering / Engineering Technologies / Mathematics
 Calculus BC                      14, 15, 27  Engineering / Engineering Technologies / Mathematics
 Chemistry                            40      Physical Sciences
 Environmental Science                26      Biological Sciences
 Physics (Mechanics)                  40      Physical Sciences
 Physics B                            40      Physical Sciences
 Statistics                       14, 15, 27  Engineering / Engineering Technologies / Mathematics
Non‐STEM
 English Language                     23      English Language and Literature/Letters
 English Literature                   23      English Language and Literature/Letters
 European History                     54      History
 French Language                      16      Foreign Languages, Literatures, and Linguistics
 Macroeconomics                       45      Social Sciences
 Microeconomics                       45      Social Sciences
 Psychology                           42      Psychology
 Spanish Language                     16      Foreign Languages, Literatures, and Linguistics
 US Government                        45      Social Sciences
 US History                           54      History
 World History                        54      History
Notes. CIP categories taken from 2010 NCES categorization (see
https://nces.ed.gov/ipeds/cipcode/browse.aspx?y=55).




                                                                       51
Appendix Table 3: Subject‐by‐Subject Selected Results
                                                                   2/3 Threshold                                                       3/4 Threshold                                                       4/5 Threshold
                                                                          Policy Sample                                                       Policy Sample                                                       Policy Sample

                                        Full Sample        All        With AP Policy      Without AP Policy   Full Sample      All         With AP Policy     Without AP Policy   Full Sample      All        With AP Policy   Without AP Policy
Biology ‐ Above Threshold                  0.0030        0.0026           0.0052               ‐0.0009           0.0075+     0.0072            0.0027              0.0148+           0.0117*     0.0114+          0.0110            0.0122
                                          (0.0039)      (0.0044)         (0.0057)             (0.0067)          (0.0043)    (0.0048)          (0.0060)            (0.0081)          (0.0055)    (0.0061)         (0.0093)          (0.0080)
N                                          134134        107805            61950                45855            135445      110575             70435               40140            106010       88085            34771             53314

Calc AB ‐ Above Threshold                  0.0018        0.0029           0.0031               0.0027           0.0002       0.0008            0.0031              ‐0.0011          0.0005       0.0025           ‐0.0147           0.0056
                                          (0.0024)      (0.0027)         (0.0034)             (0.0047)         (0.0026)     (0.0030)          (0.0044)            (0.0040)         (0.0033)     (0.0036)         (0.0094)          (0.0039)
N                                          237829        195003           124721                70282           248500       205351             99448               105903          212499       177148            25939            151209

Calc BC ‐ Above Threshold                  0.0037        0.0018           0.0020               0.0017           0.0074       0.0077            0.0170*             ‐0.0072          0.0058       0.0073           0.0035            0.0089
                                          (0.0062)      (0.0068)         (0.0082)             (0.0122)         (0.0056)     (0.0061)          (0.0079)            (0.0094)         (0.0057)     (0.0061)         (0.0125)          (0.0070)
N                                           54462         47121            33031                14090            84679        74005             45483               28522            92320        81275            17391             63884

Chemistry ‐ Above Threshold                0.0026        0.0007           0.0054               ‐0.0064          0.0016       ‐0.0003           0.0019              ‐0.0053          0.0016       0.0053           ‐0.0055           0.0145*
                                          (0.0031)      (0.0032)         (0.0042)             (0.0051)         (0.0038)     (0.0039)          (0.0049)            (0.0066)         (0.0051)     (0.0053)         (0.0078)          (0.0071)
N                                           71210         59320            35555                23765            67984        57690             40629               17061            51440        44526            20100             24426

Env Sci ‐ Above Threshold                  ‐0.0021       ‐0.0023          ‐0.0023              ‐0.0024          ‐0.0001      0.0008            0.0037              ‐0.0019          0.0036       0.0057           ‐0.0207           0.0082
                                          (0.0040)      (0.0045)         (0.0060)             (0.0067)         (0.0045)     (0.0050)          (0.0072)            (0.0070)         (0.0073)     (0.0080)         (0.0283)          (0.0084)
N                                           55311         45910            27781                18129            54626        45306             21157               24149            32135        26707             2263             24444

Physics B ‐ Above Threshold                0.0034        0.0057           0.0142**             ‐0.0038          0.0040       0.0033            0.0026              0.0042           0.0079       0.0089           0.0311*           ‐0.0002
                                          (0.0034)      (0.0036)         (0.0052)             (0.0049)         (0.0045)     (0.0046)          (0.0070)            (0.0060)         (0.0068)     (0.0071)         (0.0124)          (0.0086)
N                                           46392         39111            20730                18381            39348        33608             16740               16868            24366        21135             6478             14657

Physics M ‐ Above Threshold                ‐0.0047       ‐0.0047          ‐0.0021              ‐0.0066          0.0006       0.0004            ‐0.0044             0.0055           0.0116*      0.0111*          0.0109            0.0111
                                          (0.0038)      (0.0039)         (0.0059)             (0.0053)         (0.0040)     (0.0040)          (0.0059)            (0.0054)         (0.0055)     (0.0055)         (0.0081)          (0.0073)
N                                           42046         36594            16153                20441            47802        42023             21741               20282            38935        34465            12256             22209

Statistics ‐ Above Threshold               ‐0.0024       ‐0.0014          ‐0.0007              ‐0.0030          ‐0.0015      ‐0.0038           ‐0.0083             ‐0.0002          0.0092       0.0121+          0.0109            0.0127+
                                          (0.0025)      (0.0028)         (0.0034)             (0.0049)         (0.0034)     (0.0038)          (0.0057)            (0.0052)         (0.0058)     (0.0063)         (0.0150)          (0.0070)
N                                           128856        107180           71566                35614           125048       105625             48078               57547            77910        67278            11251             56027

English Language ‐ Above Threshold         0.0026*       0.0026+          0.0023               0.0032           0.0031+      0.0032+           0.0021              0.0047+          0.0123**     0.0103**         0.0090            0.0106**
                                          (0.0012)      (0.0013)         (0.0017)             (0.0023)         (0.0017)     (0.0018)          (0.0024)            (0.0028)         (0.0027)     (0.0029)         (0.0063)          (0.0033)
N                                          287384        236258           153217                83041           286089       235356            139639               95717           164779       134770            28218            106552




                                                                                                                       52
Appendix Table 3 ‐ Continued : Subject‐by‐Subject Selected Results
                                                                 2/3 Threshold                                                               3/4 Threshold                                                          4/5 Threshold
                                                                        Policy Sample                                                               Policy Sample                                                          Policy Sample
                                          Full Sample        All       With AP Policy    Without AP Policy       Full Sample         All         With AP Policy     Without AP Policy   Full Sample         All        With AP Policy   Without AP Policy
English Literature ‐ Above Threshold         0.0019+       0.0025*         0.0029+            0.0019                0.0026+        0.0025            0.0021              0.0032            ‐0.0004        ‐0.0016          0.0023            ‐0.0026
                                            (0.0011)      (0.0012)        (0.0016)           (0.0019)              (0.0014)       (0.0016)          (0.0020)            (0.0025)          (0.0026)       (0.0029)         (0.0059)          (0.0033)
N                                            399869        319268          185275             133993                424802         340753            215138              125615             215421         171874           36485            135389

European History ‐ Above Threshold           0.0086**      0.0077**        0.0072+             0.0084+              0.0049         0.0077*           0.0094+             0.0051            0.0199**       0.0202**         0.0231+            0.0196**
                                            (0.0026)      (0.0029)        (0.0039)            (0.0044)             (0.0035)       (0.0039)          (0.0051)            (0.0058)          (0.0055)       (0.0061)         (0.0134)           (0.0069)
N                                             68559         55106           30009               25097                76047          61374             35888               25486             48174          38916             7356              31560

French Language ‐ Above Threshold            0.0084        0.0098          0.0128              0.0067               ‐0.0021        ‐0.0016           0.0099             ‐0.0305+           ‐0.0005        0.0092           0.0321             ‐0.0088
                                            (0.0069)      (0.0076)        (0.0105)            (0.0107)             (0.0094)       (0.0105)          (0.0128)            (0.0182)          (0.0127)       (0.0141)         (0.0216)           (0.0186)
N                                             17678         14038            8261                5777                15946          12601              8960                3641             10597           8505             3810               4695

Macroeconomics ‐ Above Threshold             ‐0.0006       0.0006          ‐0.0005             0.0018               ‐0.0007        ‐0.0015           ‐0.0032             0.0002            0.0143*        0.0139*          0.0224             0.0127*
                                            (0.0046)      (0.0050)        (0.0066)            (0.0075)             (0.0048)       (0.0051)          (0.0070)            (0.0073)          (0.0057)       (0.0060)         (0.0198)           (0.0062)
N                                             80885         69407           35274               34133                87380          75690             37880               37810             70345          61749             8009              53740

Microeconmics ‐ Above Threshold              ‐0.0017       ‐0.0019         ‐0.0080             0.0031               0.0128*        0.0108+           0.0176+             0.0040            0.0084         0.0110           ‐0.0280            0.0168*
                                            (0.0058)      (0.0063)        (0.0076)            (0.0101)             (0.0060)       (0.0064)          (0.0091)            (0.0091)          (0.0075)       (0.0080)         (0.0237)           (0.0083)
N                                             51006         43268           22744               20524                58488          50329             24771               25558             45786          39964             6176              33788

Psychology ‐ Above Threshold                 0.0080*       0.0072+         0.0109*             0.0011               0.0167**       0.0175**          0.0237**            0.0129*           0.0107*        0.0118*          0.0229             0.0108*
                                            (0.0037)      (0.0041)        (0.0050)            (0.0071)             (0.0037)       (0.0040)          (0.0063)            (0.0053)          (0.0044)       (0.0048)         (0.0187)           (0.0050)
N                                             83580         68261           43955               24306               103015          85052             36421               48631             91387          76005             5491              70514

Spanish Language ‐ Above Threshold           ‐0.0008       0.0029          0.0053              ‐0.0021              0.0021         0.0002            0.0038              ‐0.0057           0.0020         0.0048           0.0066             0.0039
                                            (0.0038)      (0.0040)        (0.0049)            (0.0068)             (0.0040)       (0.0043)          (0.0057)            (0.0064)          (0.0046)       (0.0050)         (0.0080)           (0.0064)
N                                             60926         50185           33774               16411                67221          55441             34892               20549             56173          46388            17651              28737

US Government ‐ Above Threshold              ‐0.0011       0.0001          0.0008              ‐0.0015              0.0072*        0.0066+           0.0067              0.0064            0.0069         0.0044           ‐0.0035            0.0048
                                            (0.0029)      (0.0031)        (0.0038)            (0.0056)             (0.0032)       (0.0035)          (0.0056)            (0.0044)          (0.0045)       (0.0048)         (0.0230)           (0.0049)
N                                             200044       167771          106102               61669               204511         172642             72739               99903            132408         112365             6341             106024

US History ‐ Above Threshold                 0.0033**      0.0031**        0.0026              0.0036*              0.0044**       0.0041**          0.0039+             0.0044+           0.0063*        0.0064*          0.0128+            0.0051+
                                            (0.0011)      (0.0012)        (0.0016)            (0.0018)             (0.0015)       (0.0016)          (0.0020)            (0.0026)          (0.0025)       (0.0028)         (0.0069)           (0.0030)
N                                            290107        233817          124135              109682               274145         222966            134778               88188            159671         130979            21922             109057

World History ‐ Above Threshold              0.0014        0.0001          ‐0.0007             0.0007               ‐0.0004        ‐0.0001           0.0091*            ‐0.0124**          0.0059         0.0051           0.0075             0.0049
                                            (0.0018)      (0.0020)        (0.0027)            (0.0030)             (0.0027)       (0.0029)          (0.0040)            (0.0043)          (0.0044)       (0.0047)         (0.0110)           (0.0051)
N                                             73566         60790           30092               30698                71102          58793             33158               25635             48806          40563             5922              34641

Notes: Notes. + p<0.10, * p<0.05, ** p<0.01. All students in the sample first attended a four‐year college within 180 days of high school graduation. Results based on local linear regressions with triangular kernels of bandwidth 10 that include fixed
effects for AP exam‐year and high school graduation year. Other variables include the Distance from the threshold and the interaction of Distance and Above Threshold. Regressions use heteroskedasticity‐consistent standard errors.




                                                                                                                           53
Appendix Table 4: Effect of Attaining Higher AP Exam Scores on Majoring in AP Exam Subject ‐ Specification Robustness Tests


Kernel                           Tri           Rect          Rect             Tri          Rect           Rect            Tri           Rect          Rect            Tri           Rect          Rect            Tri           Rect          Rect            Tri           Rect          Rect
Functional Form                Linear         Linear         Quad           Linear        Linear          Quad          Linear         Linear         Quad          Linear         Linear         Quad          Linear         Linear         Quad          Linear         Linear         Quad
Bandwidth                         5              5            5                5             5             5              10             10            10             10             10            10             15             15            15             15             15            15
Individual Controls               N              N            N                Y             Y             Y               N              N            N               Y              Y             Y              N              N            N               Y              Y             Y

1/2 Threshold                 ‐0.0012        ‐0.0004       ‐0.0024+       ‐0.0012        ‐0.0004        ‐0.0025+       ‐0.0003       ‐0.0000        ‐0.0007        ‐0.0003        ‐0.0000       ‐0.0007        0.0002         0.0010+       ‐0.0009        0.0002         0.0009+        ‐0.0009
                             (0.0010)       (0.0009)      (0.0013)       (0.0010)       (0.0009)       (0.0013)       (0.0007)      (0.0006)       (0.0010)       (0.0007)       (0.0006)      (0.0010)       (0.0006)       (0.0005)      (0.0008)       (0.0006)       (0.0005)       (0.0008)

2/3 Threshold                 0.0020*        0.0017*       0.0024*        0.0020*        0.0017*        0.0024*        0.0018**      0.0023*** 0.0011              0.0019**       0.0023*** 0.0011             0.0024*** 0.0030*** 0.0014*                 0.0024*** 0.0030*** 0.0014*
                             (0.0009)       (0.0008)      (0.0012)       (0.0009)       (0.0008)       (0.0012)       (0.0006)      (0.0006)   (0.0008)           (0.0006)       (0.0006)   (0.0008)          (0.0005)   (0.0005)  (0.0007)               (0.0005)   (0.0005)  (0.0007)

3/4 Threshold                 0.0035*** 0.0037*** 0.0034*                 0.0036*** 0.0037*** 0.0034*                  0.0038*** 0.0037*** 0.0039*** 0.0038*** 0.0037*** 0.0040*** 0.0040*** 0.0049*** 0.0026**                                            0.0040*** 0.0049*** 0.0026**
                             (0.0010)   (0.0009)  (0.0014)               (0.0010)   (0.0009)  (0.0014)                (0.0007)   (0.0007)  (0.0010)  (0.0007)  (0.0007)  (0.0010)  (0.0006)  (0.0006)  (0.0008)                                           (0.0006)   (0.0006)  (0.0008)

4/5 Threshold                 0.0079*** 0.0065*** 0.0101*** 0.0079*** 0.0066*** 0.0101*** 0.0064*** 0.0063*** 0.0067*** 0.0065*** 0.0064*** 0.0068*** 0.0069*** 0.0071*** 0.0068*** 0.0069*** 0.0071*** 0.0068***
                             (0.0015)   (0.0014)  (0.0020)  (0.0015)  (0.0014)  (0.0020)  (0.0011)  (0.0010)  (0.0015)  (0.0011)  (0.0010)  (0.0015)  (0.0009)  (0.0008)  (0.0012)  (0.0009)  (0.0008)  (0.0012)
Notes. + p<0.10, * p<0.05, ** p<0.01, *** p<0.001. All students in the sample first attended a four‐year college within 180 days of high school graduation. An observation is a student AP exam. Results based on local linear regressions with fixed effects for AP exam‐year and high school
graduation year. Other variables include the Distance from the threshold and the interaction of Distance and Above Threshold. Standard errors clustered by individual.




                                                                                                                                                54
Appendix Table 5: Effect of Attaining Higher AP Exam Scores on Majoring in AP Exam Subject ‐ Subsample Robustness Tests
                                 1/2 Threshold             2/3 Threshold          3/4 Threshold                  4/5 Threshold
                                                                       2005‐2007 Cohorts
Above Threshold                      ‐0.0011                  0.0036***              0.0041***                       0.0079***
                                    (0.0011)                  (0.0009)               (0.0011)                        (0.0016)
                                      725515                  1203950                1241365                          822227

                                                                  Excluding Manual CIP Codes
Above Threshold                      ‐0.0003                   0.0010+              0.0037***                        0.0033***
                                    (0.0006)                  (0.0006)              (0.0006)                         (0.0009)
                                    1367893                   2200966               2277760                          1547630

                                                                    Removed Double Majors
Above Threshold                      0.0001                    0.0015*             0.0031***                         0.0059***
                                    (0.0007)                  (0.0006)             (0.0007)                          (0.0010)
                                    1458932                   2347437              2411761                           1619220
Notes. + p<0.10, * p<0.05, ** p<0.01, *** p<0.001. All students in the sample first attended a four‐year college within 180 days of high
school graduation. An observation is a student AP exam. Results based on local linear regressions with triangular kernels of bandwidth
10 that include fixed effects for AP exam‐year and high school graduation year. Other variables include the Distance from the threshold
and the interaction of Distance and Above Threshold. Standard errors clustered by individual.




                                                                  55
Appendix Table 6: Effect of Attaining Higher AP Exam Scores on Major ‐ Credit or Signal Robustness Test Using Alternative Source of Credit Policies
                                        Full Sample                                   STEM AP Exams                                     Non‐STEM AP Exams
                                           With AP    Without AP                         With AP     Without AP                                          Without AP
                              All            Policy     Policy               All          Policy         Policy                 All       With AP Policy   Policy
                                                                                          2/3 Threshold
Above Threshold             0.0021**         0.0025**    0.0011             0.0010        0.0016         ‐0.0000              0.0025**        0.0030**      0.0016
                           (0.0008)         (0.0010)   (0.0014)           (0.0017)       (0.0020)       (0.0031)             (0.0009)        (0.0010)     (0.0015)
Mean At Threshold            5.6%             5.5%       5.7%               8.0%           8.2%           7.8%                 4.5%            4.2%         4.8%
N                           1488769          981909     506860             465593         322190         143403              1023176           659719      363457
                                                                                          3/4 Threshold
Above Threshold             0.0032**         0.0042**    0.0019             0.0017        0.0035         ‐0.0001              0.0039**        0.0046**     0.0029+
                           (0.0009)         (0.0012)   (0.0014)           (0.0019)       (0.0027)       (0.0027)             (0.0010)        (0.0013)     (0.0016)
Mean At Threshold            8.2%             8.1%       8.2%              11.4%          11.9%          10.7%                 6.7%            6.6%         6.9%
N                           1540503          834237     706266             485698         248731         236967              1054805           585506      469299
                                                                                          4/5 Threshold
Above Threshold             0.0073**          0.0044    0.0079**           0.0101**       0.0069         0.0111**             0.0058**         0.0026      0.0064**
                           (0.0014)         (0.0032)   (0.0015)           (0.0025)       (0.0053)       (0.0029)             (0.0016)        (0.0039)     (0.0017)
Mean At Threshold            12.5%           12.1%      12.6%              16.5%          15.2%          16.8%                10.0%            9.5%        10.1%
N                           1037245          178498     858747             383588          78861         304727               653657            99637      554020
Notes. + p<0.10, * p<0.05, ** p<0.01. All students in the sample first attended a four‐year college within 180 days of high school graduation. Policy sample includes 500 colleges where credit
policies are collected. Colleges are defined as "with a policy" if there is any alteration in the units or courses offered at the threshold. An observation is a student AP exam. Results based on
local linear regressions with triangular kernels of bandwidth 10 that include fixed effects for AP exam‐year and high school graduation year. Other variables include the Distance from the
threshold and the interaction of Distance and Above Threshold. Standard errors clustered by individual. Means at cutoff are based on all students within one point below the designated
threshold.




                                                                                       56
