                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




         LAWS, EDUCATIONAL OUTCOMES, AND RETURNS TO SCHOOLING:
                EVIDENCE FROM THE FULL COUNT 1940 CENSUS

                                            Karen Clay
                                           Jeff Lingwall
                                         Melvin Stephens, Jr.

                                        Working Paper 22855
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w22855


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    November 2016




Jeff Lingwall's work was supported in part by a grant from the Kauffman Foundation. The authors
declare that they have no relevant or material financial interests that relate to the research described
in this paper. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2016 by Karen Clay, Jeff Lingwall, and Melvin Stephens, Jr.. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Laws, Educational Outcomes, and Returns to Schooling: Evidence from the Full Count 1940
Census
Karen Clay, Jeff Lingwall, and Melvin Stephens, Jr.
NBER Working Paper No. 22855
November 2016
JEL No. I26,J24,J31,N32

                                            ABSTRACT

This paper uses a new dataset on state compulsory attendance, continuation school, and child labor
laws with the 1940 full count Census of Population to estimate the returns to schooling for native-born
white men in the 1885-1912 birth cohorts. IV estimates of returns to schooling range from 0.064 to
0.079. Quantile IV estimates show that the returns to schooling were largest for the lowest quantiles,
and were generally monotonically decreasing for higher quantiles. These findings suggest that early
schooling laws may have contributed to the Great Compression by increasing education levels for
white men at the bottom of the distribution.


Karen Clay                                         Melvin Stephens, Jr.
Heinz College                                      University of Michigan
Carnegie Mellon University                         Department of Economics
5000 Forbes Avenue                                 341 Lorch Hall
Pittsburgh, PA 15213                               611 Tappan St.
and NBER                                           Ann Arbor, MI 48109-1220
kclay@andrew.cmu.edu                               and NBER
                                                   mstep@umich.edu
Jeff Lingwall
Truman State University
100 East Normal Avenue
Kirksville, MO 63501
jlingwall@truman.edu
1.      Introduction

Rising inequality is the subject of ongoing debate and scrutiny. Earnings inequality fell during
the Great Compression in the mid-twentieth century United States (Goldin and Margo 1992;
Kopczuk, Saez, and Song 2010). The reasons for the decline in inequality include technological,
structural, and human capital-related changes in the economy (Goldin and Katz 2008). Within
human capital, there were two complementary – and to some degree related – movements that
increased educational opportunities. The first was the adoption and refinement of compulsory
attendance, continuation school, and child labor laws.                  Together these laws were initially
designed to ensure common or grammar school levels of education, commonly six to eight years,
although subsequently these laws required some amount of high school attendance. The second
was the high school movement, which offered increasing numbers of older students access to
educational opportunities beyond those offered in local common or grammar schools. While
there has been considerable focus on the high school movement (Goldin and Katz 2011) and on
schooling laws affecting high school attendance (e.g., Acemoglu and Angrist 2000), much less
attention has been paid to changes in education below high school. Educational attainment for
cohorts affected by these earlier laws is potentially important because of its influence on the
lower parts of the educational distribution.


Drawing on the full count 1940 census and a new detailed coding of state compulsory
attendance, continuation school, and child labor laws, this paper examines the effects of these
schooling laws on educational outcomes and returns to schooling for native-born white men in
the 1885-1912 birth cohorts.1 These birth cohorts were 27-54 in 1940 and so were at the leading
edge of the Great Compression. The coding of the laws takes into account the numbers of years
of education required by compulsory attendance, continuation school, and child labor laws taken
together. The data on laws builds on work by previous authors (Lleras-Muney 2002 and Goldin


1
  This paper is limited to white men both for comparability to much of the prior literature and in recognition of the
fact that many institutional factors (e.g., Jim Crow laws, lagging school quality for blacks, and cultural norms
against work outside of the home for women) must be carefully addressed to accurately assess the impact of
schooling and child labor laws on the economic outcomes of blacks and women. Future work will examine the
impact of schooling laws for these groups.




                                                                                                                   2
and Katz 2011) by extending the coding of laws back to earlier time periods (pre-1910). For the
post-1910 period, we build on the work of Stephens and Yang (2014) by revisiting original
session laws and reconciling differences between these sources and the coding of the schooling
and child labor laws found in prior studies.


The paper exploits variation in the years of schooling requirements generated by changes in
compulsory schooling, continuation schooling, and child labor laws across states over time to
estimate the returns to schooling. Specifications are used that account for differential trends
across regions of birth to account for the fact that some regions such as the South lagged the rest
of the country in adopting these laws (Stephens and Yang 2014). First stage regressions show a
statistically significant increase in educational attainment due to the passage of these laws. We
find that these early compulsory schooling laws increased completion of six, seven, and eight
years of education, which is precisely the range over which the laws would be expected to bind.
The effect of having laws requiring seven or eight years of schooling was to increase education
by about 0.1 year.


Returns to schooling are estimated using instrumental variables (IV) estimation and by using
quantile IV methods to examine the effects of the laws across the weekly wage distribution.
Using these laws as instrumental variables, the paper finds positive and significant estimates of
the returns to schooling. Quantile IV estimates indicate that the returns to schooling were
positive for all but the top of the weekly wage distribution, were largest for the bottom of the
distribution, and declined fairly monotonically across the distribution. The results are robust to
dropping Southern born men for whom the trend in schooling laws and educational attainment is
growing most rapidly (Stephens and Yang 2014). In addition, while the sample is limited to
native-born men due to the state of birth based identification strategy, the results are robust for
those men with native-born parents.


This paper contributes to the literatures on the effects of school attendance laws on schooling,
returns to schooling, and inequality. It extends the previous literature on school attendance by
using new detailed coding of state compulsory schooling, continuation schooling, and child labor
laws that primarily affect children ages eight to fourteen, using the full count 1940 census, and



                                                                                                 3
by using both standard and quantile IV methods while accounting for differential regional trends.
The results are in line with Lleras-Muney’s (2002) results for the 1901-1925 birth cohorts using
the 1960 census. They are also in line with Margo and Finegan (1996), who examine older and
younger fourteen years olds in 1900; with Eisenberg (1988), who examines Iowa and
Pennsylvania; and with Puerta (2011) who uses difference in difference to examine adoption in
border townships and counties from 1850-1910.


This paper contributes to the literature on returns to schooling by showing that, for native-born
white men in the 1885-1912 birth cohorts, laws that focused on ages eight to fourteen generated
positive and significant returns to schooling. The literature on returns to schooling largely
focuses on laws affecting later birth cohorts and older ages. For example, Angrist and Krueger
(1991) consider the 1920-1949 birth cohorts, Staiger and Stock (1997) consider the 1930-1949
birth cohorts. A few papers have cohorts that overlap with ours. Goldin and Katz (2000) provide
OLS estimates for the 1850-1897 birth cohorts in Iowa.             Acemoglu and Angrist (2000),
Oreopolous and Salvanes (2011) and Stephens and Yang (2014) construct IV estimates for the
1910-1939, 1899-1982, and the 1905-1954 birth cohorts, respectively. This last set of papers
span very long time periods, provide average estimates of the return to schooling and are
primarily identified by changes in required education for children ages fourteen to eighteen.


This paper also contributes to the literature on inequality. Relatively few papers have examined
the returns to schooling across the earnings distribution. Our work is complementary to Goldin
and Katz’s important work on the high school movement. We examine the effects of laws
focused on school attendance of children who were ages eight to fourteen. Our quantile IV
estimates suggest that increased educational attainment at the sub-high school level likely
contributed to the narrowing of inequality, by increasing wages of individuals at the bottom of
the distribution more than individuals at other points in the distribution.


The paper is set out as follows. The next section provides background on the development of
compulsory attendance, continuation schooling, and child labor laws in the U.S. as well as trends
in education outcomes and economic inequality.        The following two sections discuss the data




                                                                                                4
and the empirical methodology, respectively. We then turn to a presentation of our empirical
results before concluding.


2.     Background


Compulsory Attendance, Child Labor, and Continuation Schooling Laws


Compulsory attendance laws commonly stated an age at which students had to begin attending
school, an age at which they could leave, and a minimum number of weeks a child had to attend.
Initial laws often used ages eight and fourteen as the entry and exit ages, respectively, and these
ages were lowered and raised over time. Many states exempted children for a variety of reasons
including those who had attended for a certain number of years or those who had completed a
specific schooling course (e.g., “the common school course”). Furthermore, numerous states
changed these exemptions over time. The online Data Appendix contains examples of the laws.


Compulsory attendance laws were often complemented with child labor laws that exempted
working children from full-time school attendance. These labor laws let employed children stop
attending school before the exit age found in the compulsory attendance law, usually after the
child had attained a certain level of education. Children were typically allowed to leave school to
work at age fourteen. A few states had earlier ages, but most of these states later raised the age
at which a working child was allowed to leave school. Child labor laws affecting school
attendance were one of many different kinds of laws targeting employed children. For example,
many states used age-based restrictions for employment in variety of industries, restricted work
hours, and regulated working conditions in a variety of ways. This paper focuses on child labor
laws that exempted children from full-time school attendance.


States often required these working children to attend continuation school, meaning part-time or
evening school that supplemented their employment. Like the compulsory attendance laws,
continuation school laws required attendance until a certain age, and often exempted children
with a certain number of years of education.




                                                                                                 5
Figure 1 shows when initial compulsory attendance laws, child labor laws affecting school
attendance, and continuation schooling laws went into effect across the U.S. states. The first
compulsory attendance law was passed in Massachusetts in 1852.2 Attention to and debate about
schooling heightened in 1871, as the Republican Party kicked off a “public school crusade.”3 By
1900 almost all states outside the South had schooling laws and by 1920 every state had a
compulsory attendance law.4           Following the enumeration of the 1900 Census, public awareness
that one-quarter of children were employed led to a flurry of state level child labor reforms
(Puerta 2011). As child labor laws were revisited, they began to integrate with compulsory
attendance laws, such as exempting working children from school attendance in some states.
Relatedly, while only a handful of states had continuation school laws before 1911, this number
increased rapidly in the late 1910s due to the vocational education requirements of the Smith-
Hughes Act of 1917 and additional public focus on child labor following World War I (Mayman
1933).5


Educational Outcomes
Figure 2 shows the trends in self-reported years of schooling for native-born white males from
the 1940 complete count census for the 1876-1912 birth cohorts. Educational attainment was
trending up throughout the education distribution. By the 1912 birth cohort, more than 80 percent
of respondents reported completing eight years of schooling, and many individuals reported at


2
  We differentiate compulsory attendance laws from the variety of compulsory instruction laws that dated back to
colonial times. For example, colonial instruction laws tasked town selectmen to ensure parents were raising literate
children but did not mandate school attendance. See Cook (1912) and Ensign (1921).
3
  See McAfee (1998).
4
  Although 1918 is the traditional date for the passage of the last compulsory attendance law (in Mississippi), it was
not until 1920 when all the Southern states had non-local option laws. See the online Data Appendix for further
notes on county option laws and statewide adoption. For simplicity, the District of Columbia will be referred to as a
state.
5
  Continuation schooling laws were of two types: either mandating that districts provide these schools (typically
upon reaching a minimum number of eligible students threshold) or giving districts the option of setting up these
schools and requiring attendance. Goldin and Katz (2002) combine both types of laws in their empirical analysis and
designate such laws as “permissible.” Following their approach, the analysis in this paper uses “permissible”
continuation schooling laws. The Smith Hughes Act required “… that at least one-third of the sum appropriated to
any state for the salaries of teachers of trade, home economics, and industrial subjects shall, if expended, be applied
to part-time school over fourteen years of age who have entered upon employment.”




                                                                                                                     6
least nine years of schooling. The effect of the high school movement is evident beginning
around the 1900 birth cohort.


Even allowing for some inflation of self-reported schooling, it is clear that the laws were unlikely
to have been binding for most children.6 The majority of children in the earliest cohorts were
already completing between six and eight years of schooling, which were the typical numbers of
years that students would complete by age fourteen. Relatively high schooling levels even with
voluntary attendance is consistent with historical evidence that laws were only passed after most
children were already attending school (Landes and Solmon 1972; Clay, Lingwall, Stephens
2012).


Economic Inequality
A number of sources including Goldin and Katz (1999, 2001, 2008), Kopczuk, Saez, and Song
(2010), and Lindert (2000) present detailed evidence on the decrease and then increase in
earnings inequality over the course of the twentieth century. Skill ratios fell in manual trades
from 1907 to 1929.             Wage differentials in manufacturing declined across most industries
between 1890 and 1940, as did the ratio of clerical worker wages to production workers. The
ratio of white collar to blue collar earnings fell from 1910 to 1960. The 1940s in particular
experienced a dramatic reduction in income inequality, earning the moniker “The Great
Compression” (Goldin and Margo 1992).


Goldin and Margo show that earnings differentials between white and blue-collar workers
decreased throughout the 1940s and 1950s. An increase in the supply of highly educated workers
was central to the compression. In the 1940s, the demand for high-school educated white males
relative to those without a high school education was lower than during any of the following
three decades. More importantly, the supply of college graduates increased substantially after the
war, lowering the relative price for college-level skills.




6
    As Goldin (1999) notes, respondents were not always accurately reporting educational attainment.




                                                                                                       7
These large post-war effects were preceded by pre-war wage compression among blue-collar
workers beginning as early as the 1920s. As we will show, increased returns to schooling for
these workers at the bottom of the wage distribution appear to have been one factor in the decline
in inequality. For some native-born white males, schooling laws, especially those focused on
primary school attendance, appear to have caused them to attend school longer than they might
have in the absence of the laws. To the extent this raised their earnings, school laws may have
contributed to a decrease in earnings inequality.


3.      Data


Attendance, Child Labor, and Continuation Schooling Laws
Data on compulsory attendance laws, child labor laws, and continuation schooling laws were
gathered from the session laws of individual states. This new database captures each compulsory
attendance age limit, years of schooling exemption, child labor exemption, continuation school
requirement, and continuation school exemption in force in each state and year from 1880 to
1930. Our work builds on prior compilations in the United States Bureau of Education (various
years), Goldin and Katz (2002), Lleras Muney (2002), Moehling (1996), Eisenberg (1988), and
Stephens and Yang (2014). It is worth noting that states were only coded as having a law once
the law covered all counties or required counties to specifically opt-out. This issue arises,
because a number of Southern states passed laws merely permitting counties to enact compulsory
attendance. Few counties actually made use of this law and passed compulsory attendance laws.
These opt-in states later passed universal laws that covered all counties. In a few cases, the laws
permitted counties to vote to opt-out of the law. In this coding convention, the year of passage
for some states is later than dates conventionally used in the literature.7 The dataset attached in
the online Data Appendix provides the dates, requirements, and original source for each law.


7
  For conventional dates of initial laws, see Department of Education, National Center for Educational
Statistics, Digest of Education Statistics, 2004. We differ from the prior literature in coding these initial laws:
Alabama (1917 rather than 1915 due to when the law went into effect); Arizona (1875 rather than 1899, due to
passage, then repeal, then re-passage of the law); Arkansas (1917 rather than 1909 due to limited geographic
applicability of the 1909 law); Florida (1919 rather than 1915 due to “opt in” laws); Georgia (1917 rather than 1916
due to when the law went into effect); Louisiana (1916 rather than 1910 due to limited geographic applicability of
the 1910 law); Mississippi (1920 rather than 1918 due to “opt in” laws); North Carolina (1913 rather than 1907 due




                                                                                                                  8
We follow Stephens and Yang (2014) and calculate the years of required attendance for each
state-year birth cohort. By using an iterative process that calculates whether attendance was
required at each year of life, based on the age limits and exemptions in place in that year, we
derive the cumulative years each child was required to be in school. The online Data Appendix
describes the steps in this calculation, showing the interaction between the various exemptions
and age limits regulating attendance. Continuation schooling requirements are determined
similarly. Assuming children entered school at the required age, attended each required year, left
to work once possible, and attended continuation school when required, this calculation gives the
number of years each child was obligated to attend.


Figure 3 plots the average number of years of required schooling by year of birth for compulsory
school attendance laws and for the combination of school attendance and continuation schooling
laws. Here, and in the main results, we treat compulsory school attendance and continuation
schooling laws together, as these laws formed part of the same comprehensive regulatory scheme
for the education of children. Continuation schooling laws complemented work permit laws that
excused working children from full-time school attendance, and often required part-time
attendance through the exact age limits faced by unemployed children. However, we also
present results that consider compulsory attendance and continuation laws separately. These
additional estimates show that continuation schooling laws only affected having more than eight
years of schooling, consistent with the margins on which these laws most likely would have
influenced educational attainment.




to “opt in” laws); South Carolina (1919 rather than 1915 due to “opt in” laws); Tennessee (1913 rather than 1905
due to county-by-county rollout of the laws); Texas (1916 rather than 1915 due to when the law went into effect,
ignoring an earlier temporary compulsory attendance law enacted during the 1870s); Virginia (1918 rather than 1908
due to “opt in” laws); and Washington (1886 rather than 1871 due to repeal of the 1871 law in 1873, and limited
applicability of the following 1877 law). See the online Data Appendix for further discussion, and the dataset
attached in the online Data Appendix for complete sources.




                                                                                                                9
Educational and Work Outcomes
The data are from the 1940 Preliminary Complete Count Census of Population Data available
from IPUMS USA (Ruggles et al 2015). The census contains information on individuals’ sex,
race, state of residence, state of birth, and age. Information on parental birthplace is available for
sample line individuals. The sample line is a five percent random subset of individuals in the
1940 Census for whom an additional set of questions was asked relative to the remaining
population. Given the focus on returns to schooling in this paper and for comparability for with
much prior research, the sample is limited to native-born white males, leaving a sample size of
roughly 20 million.8 The census also contains information on highest grade attended and on
wage income, but not on income from self-employment. Table 1 gives summary statistics for the
sample.


The analysis of educational outcomes draws on retrospective data on years of schooling from the
1940 Census which was the first census to ask about years of completed schooling and income.
Individuals were asked to report the highest grade completed. As Goldin (1999) notes, they were
not always reporting accurately. “I have recently demonstrated that the 1940 census greatly
overstates the proportion of Americans who were high school graduates.”9 To anticipate our
estimation strategy, if we assume the proportion of people in a given state overstating their
education is either constant or trending similarly within a region, the overstatement should have
limited impact on estimates of the effect of compulsory attendance laws on schooling outcomes.
We return to this issue in section 4.


Our sample covers the 1885-1912 birth cohorts, who were 27-54 at the time of the 1940
Census.10 This age restriction is intended to capture prime age working men and exclude older
men who might be retired or working part time. Our initial estimates of the impact of schooling
laws on educational attainment include all men in this age range, regardless of work status.


8
  Future work will examine the effects of these laws and other educational policy interventions by race and gender.
9
  Goldin (1999), p. S67.
10
   Year of birth is calculated as 1940-age-1, because the census was taken in April and most individuals had not yet
had their birthday. The 1940 Census does not include quarter of birth information that can be used to more
accurately compute year of birth in other Censuses.




                                                                                                                 10
To estimate the returns to schooling, some additional restrictions were imposed. First, we create
a “working men” sample, which we limit to those who report both positive earnings and positive
weeks worked in 1939.       Second, due to the relatively high levels of agricultural employment
during this period, including working on one’s own farm, earnings may be understated for a non-
negligible subset of men. This is because the 1940 Census did not collect information on self-
employment income. As such, we create a sample of “restricted working men” which further
requires that the men worked at least 40 weeks in 1939, worked but were not self-employed, and
did not live on a farm. Summary statistics for these samples are presented in Table 1.


The dependent variable in our returns to schooling specifications is the log of weekly wages.
The weekly wage is the ratio of annual wage and salary income to annual weeks worked, both of
which are measured for the prior calendar year (1939). Following Acemoglu and Angrist (2000),
annual earnings are censored at the 98th percentile, and values above the 98th percentile are
replaced with 1.5 times the 98th percentile value.


4.     Empirical Methodology


Our main specification for estimating the returns to schooling is


                          !!"# = !! + !! !"#$!"# + !! + !!" + !!"#                                 (1)


where !!"# is the log weekly wage of individual i, born in birth cohort c, and in state s, !"#$!"#
is their years of education, !! is a vector of state fixed effects, and !!" is a vector of birth cohort
fixed effects for each of the four census regions. All estimates have standard errors clustered at
the state-cohort level.


OLS estimates of equation (1) are typically regarded as being inconsistent, since years of
schooling is generally considered to be a choice variable that is likely correlated with the error
term in the weekly wage equation.        E.g., more motivated individuals tend to stay in school
longer and, to the extent that motivation leads to higher levels of productivity, are paid more by
employers. As such, specifications such as equation (1) are typically estimated using empirical


                                                                                                    11
methods that account for the endogeneity of education (e.g., Card 1999).


This paper uses an instrumental variables (IV) strategy to estimate the returns to schooling using
years of required schooling, based on state and year of birth, as an instrumental variable for
reported educational attainment. Our first stage specification is


                        !"#$!"# = !! + !! !"#$%"&'!" + !! + !!" + !!"#                                       (2)


where !"#$!"# is the educational attainment of individual i, born in birth cohort c, and in state s,
!"#$%"&'!" is the years of required attendance for someone born in state s in birth cohort c, !!
is a vector of state fixed effects, and !!" is a vector of birth cohort fixed effects for each of the
four census regions.


We estimate specifications where LawYears is a continuous variable and specifications where the
laws are specified as a set of indicator variables. We use indicator variables because the effect of
requiring one more year of schooling may not be linear throughout the distribution of required
years of schooling. One to five years of required schooling are grouped together into a single
dummy variable, because this primarily captures the initial adoption of laws. Older children at
the time the laws are adopted may be subject to a just one or two years of required attendance.
Separate dummy variables are included for six, seven, eight, and nine or more years of required
schooling.11 The distribution of required schooling is also presented in Table 1.


The effects of the laws are identified by variation in the timing of various statutes within state
and region over time. Region by year of birth cohort fixed effects are included so the
counterfactual is that the changes in state educational outcomes would have been the same as
other states in the same region. This is the specification used in Stephens and Yang (2014),
which examines educational outcomes in more recent Censuses. It is also similar to Lleras-
Muney (2002) and Goldin and Katz (2011) in using retrospective census data and including state


11
  Of the over 1.1 million observations in the nine or more years category, over 96 percent are required to attend
school for nine years while the remainder have a ten year requirement.




                                                                                                              12
and cohort fixed effects and regional controls.


A significant concern in the literature is that laws are being passed and educational outcomes are
rising, but the laws are not causing educational outcomes to rise. This is central to Landes and
Solmon’s (1972) critique and has been investigated by other authors, notably Lleras-Muney
(2002). Our estimation approach is designed to address this endogeneity by including both state
fixed effects and region-cohort effects, so changes within state over time are identifying effects
and states are being compared to other states in their region.


5.     Results


Impact of Laws on Educational Attainment


Table 2 presents the results of the continuous and categorical estimates of years of required
schooling on educational outcomes. The Table uses three samples: i) all native-born white men,
ii) native-born white men who reported positive earnings and positive weeks worked in the prior
year (“working men” sample), and iii) a restricted sample which also excludes the self-
employed, those who lived on a farm, and those who worked less than 40 weeks in 1939
(“restricted working men” sample). For each sample, two specifications of the laws are used.
The first uses a continuous measure of required years of schooling calculated based on the
prevailing compulsory attendance, child labor, and continuation school laws. The second
specification replaces the continuous measure with a set of indicators for the level of required
schooling.


The effect of years of required schooling, measured continuously (columns 1, 3, and 5 of Table
2), is positive, statistically significant, and similar across the three samples. However, when we
specify the years of required schooling using a set of indicators (columns 2, 4, and 6), the
relationship between schooling requirements and educational attainment is non-linear. Relative
to having no required years of schooling, the effects of being required to attend one to five years
of schooling and then moving to six required years are somewhat modest.               However, a
substantial increase in educational attainment is observed when the schooling requirement is



                                                                                                13
increased to seven years, followed by a modest increase in education when moving to an eight
year minimum before another large observed jump in acquired schooling when the requirement
is further raised to nine or more years.


Figure 4 provides detail of where the schooling laws impacted the education distribution. The
Figure shows results from regressing the categorical law variables on a series of binary outcomes
for whether the individual completed at least ! years of schooling, where ! is shown in the
horizontal axis. Thus, the Figure shows the impact of the laws on one minus the education CDF.
Full results are presented in Appendix Table 1. Each line in the Figure shows the effect for a
given categorical variable, while the estimates found at each point on the horizontal axis
represents the results from a different regression.


The results in Figure 4 show that laws requiring six, seven, and eight years of schooling increase
the number of individuals reporting they completed six, seven, or eight years of schooling. There
are much smaller effects for lower and higher levels of reported education. This is what we
would expect if the laws were binding. Laws requiring nine or more years of schooling increase
the number of individuals who reported completing nine or ten years of schooling. Laws that
only resulted in between one and five years of required education, mainly for cohorts in their
pre-teenage years when the laws were adopted, have less of an effect.12


Table 3 summarizes the literature on the effects of compulsory attendance and related laws on
educational outcomes. Similar to many – although not all – previous papers, our analysis finds
statistically significant but small effects of laws. This paper differs from previous papers in that
it uses a larger census sample, a more detailed coding of the laws regarding years of required


12
  Appendix Figure 1 provides similar graphs that treat the requirements of compulsory attendance and child labor
laws separately from those of the continuation school laws. The point estimates along with their standard errors are
shown in Appendix Table 2. For compulsory attendance and child labor laws in Panel A of Appendix Figure 1, the
pattern is similar to Figure 4. For continuation school in Panel B, one to two years required attendance has only
small effects at any level of completed schooling, while three to four years required attendance has large effects on
completion of nine to ten years of schooling, as expected from laws that often sought to provide some form of post-
primary education for working teenagers. Goldin and Katz (2011) also find significant effects of continuation school
laws on educational attainment after accounting for compulsory schooling and child labor laws.




                                                                                                                  14
schooling, a more flexible specification for estimating the effects of years of required schooling
on reported schooling, and somewhat earlier birth cohorts.


Estimates of the Returns to Schooling


Table 4 presents OLS and IV estimates of the returns to schooling for the two groups of working
men reported in Table 2: the working men sample (native-born white men who reported positive
earnings and weeks worked last year) and the restricted working men sample (native-born white
men who reported positive earnings, worked at least 40 weeks in 1939, working but were not
self-employed, and did not live on a farm).13 Each regression includes state of birth and region
by year of birth fixed effects. The first stage F-statistics, testing the joint null hypothesis for the
excluded instruments, are shown at the bottom of the table.14 All of the F-statistics exceed
conventional levels. The OLS estimates of the returns to schooling (columns 1 and 4) are quite
comparable to those found for similar specifications in subsequent Census years (Acemoglu and
Angrist 2000; Stephens and Yang 2014).


Given that the results in Table 2 indicate that the estimated impact of schooling laws on
educational attainment depends upon whether required schooling is specified as continuous or
categorical, we present results using both specifications of the instrument in Table 4. When a
continuous measure of schooling is used as the instrumental variable (columns 2 and 5), we find
estimated returns to schooling that are on the high side of prior estimates. Returns are
approximately 16% and 12%, and are roughly twice as large as the corresponding OLS
estimates. When schooling laws are allowed to have a non-linear relationship with educational
attainment (columns 3 and 6), we find estimated returns to schooling that fit in the range of prior
estimates. Returns are approximately 8% and 6% and are quite similar to the corresponding OLS
estimates.



13
   There is a modest impact of schooling on employment outcomes as reported in Appendix Table 8. Following the
prior literature, we do not implement sample selection corrections when estimating wage equations for prime age
white males.
14
   The first stage regressions are shown in Table 2.




                                                                                                            15
To gain insight into why the IV estimates differ dramatically depending on the specification of
required schooling (continuous vs. categorical) in the first stage, it is helpful to decompose the
IV estimator. When using a single instrumental variable, it is well-known that the IV estimator,
! !" , is equivalent to
                                                          !
                                                 ! !" =                                                         (3)
                                                          !
In the current context, ! is the reduced form estimated coefficient from regressing the log weekly
wage on required years of schooling, and ! is first stage estimated coefficient on required years
of schooling. Angrist and Imbens (1995) show that specifying a single instrumental variable as a
set of ! mutually exclusive indicators, the IV estimator can be written (in the current context) as
                        !
               !!
                                      ! !|!"#$%"&' = ! − ! !|!"#$%"&' = ! − 1
           !        =         !!                                                                                (4)
                                   ! !"#$|!"#$%"&' = ! − ! !"#$|!"#$%"&' = ! − 1
                        !!!

where !! are a set of weights, each of which lies between zero and one, inclusive, and
collectively sum to one. Thus, the IV estimator is a weighted average of a set of Wald estimators
where each Wald estimate is the estimated return from required years of schooling increasing
from ! − 1 to !.15


To evaluate the IV estimators using the above equations, we also need to examine the
corresponding reduced form estimates, which are shown in Appendix Table 3. A cursory
examination of the reduced form results appears to yield similar effects of the laws on the log
weekly wage. For the working men sample, the continuous instrument specification (column 1)
indicates that raising required schooling from zero years to nine years would increase the log
weekly wage by 0.0035*9=0.0315. An examination of the categorical specification yields a
comparable estimate of the impact of having nine years of required schooling relative to zero
years of 0.038.



15
  Our regression specification does not yield direct estimates of the numerator and denominators of the Wald
Estimates in equation (4). However, the differences between the expected values in (4) can be replaced with
differences in our estimated parameters for the impact of increasing required schooling from ! − 1 to ! years. Thus,
for expositional purposes, we frame our discussion in terms of equation (4). For a decomposition of the IV
estimator that directly uses our estimated parameters, see Angrist (1988).




                                                                                                                 16
The categorical reduced form coefficients, upon closer inspection, reveal a non-linear path
between zero and nine required years of schooling. For example, the reduced form coefficients
actually decline (slightly) between six and seven required years of schooling while doubling in
size between the one to five year and six year categories (column 2 of Appendix Table 3).
Essentially the opposite pattern occurs with the first stage coefficients (column 4 of Table 2).
Angrist and Imbens (1995) note that the weight, !! received by a given Wald estimate in the
computation of ! !" is proportional to the denominator of that Wald estimate. In other words, the
changes in ! − 1 to ! that receive the largest weight are the ones exhibiting the largest
incremental increase in the first stage. As the largest first stage changes occur from six to seven
years, which has a slightly negative corresponding reduced form, and from eight to nine years,
which has a large positive corresponding reduced form, it is easy to see why different
specifications of the instrument in the first stage (continuous vs. categorical) can lead to
substantially different IV estimates.


We present results using both the continuous and categorical specifications of required schooling
throughout most of the remainder of the paper for comparative purposes. Fortunately, our
substantially large sample does not constrain us to use a continuous specification for the
instrument in the first stage. Given the potentially large misspecification issues that may arise
when using the continuous specification, our preferred estimates are the ones in which we use a
categorical specification for required schooling in the first stage.


As a point of comparison, in Appendix Table 4 we present estimates of the impact of laws on
educational attainment and the returns to schooling using the previously available 1% public use
micro sample of the 1940 Census (Ruggles et al 2015).             The first stage F-statistics are far below
conventional levels which requires adjusting the resulting confidence interval for the use of weak
instruments.16 Although the point estimates are broadly consistent with the findings in Tables 2
and 4 for the working men sample, the resulting confidence intervals are very broad.                         In
particular, the results using the 1% Census sample are too imprecise to untangle the dramatic

16
   Since the schooling law instruments are “weak” when using the 1% 1940 Census sample, the confidence intervals
for the IV estimates are constructed using Moreira’s (2003) conditional likelihood ratio test. These confidence
intervals are computed using version 1.0.7 of the -rivtest- command for Stata (Finlay and Magnusson 2009).




                                                                                                             17
difference in the estimated returns to schooling when using the continuous vs. the categorical
specification of the instrumental variable.


Figure 5 shows returns to schooling across the distribution of (log) weekly wages by plotting the
results of quantile IV regressions for every fifth quantile using a 25 percent random subset of the
working men sample.17 Panel A of Appendix Table 5 shows the complete set of quantile IV
results for this sample. The instruments are the required years of schooling categorical variables
used in Table 4, columns 3 and 6. The returns to schooling are positive across the weekly wage
distribution and are largest for the bottom half of the distribution. The returns are relatively flat
at about 0.15 for the 5th to the 45th quantiles, decline monotonically to the 80th quantile, and
remain roughly constant near zero throughout the rest of the distribution. The substantially
larger estimates for those at the bottom of the earnings distribution indicates that the laws played
a role in reducing income inequality as measured in the 1940 Census.18 In addition, since the
wage structure recorded in the 1940 census was typical of the years before World War II, larger
returns to schooling for those in the lowest quantiles of the earning distribution may help explain
the pre-1940 decrease in skilled versus unskilled blue-collar inequality noted in Goldin and
Margo (1992).


Table 5 summarizes the literature on the returns to schooling. In contrast to some papers and
consistent with others, this paper finds positive and significant returns to schooling. This paper
differs from previous papers in that it uses a larger census sample, a more detailed coding of the
laws regarding years of required schooling, a more flexible specification for estimating the
effects of years of required schooling on reported schooling, and earlier birth cohorts. It also
differs in its focus on the quantile IV.

17
   A 25 percent random subset of the working men sample, which still contains over 3.3 million observations, is the
largest sample for which we could implement the computationally intensive quantile IV estimator on the restricted
access server housing the complete count census. The first stage, OLS, and IV estimates shown in Appendix Table
7 for the 25 percent random sample are quite comparable to those for the full working men sample found in Tables 2
and 4.
18
   Chernozhukov and Hansen (2008) use quantile IV to estimate the returns to schooling across the weekly wage
distribution of the using quarter of birth as an instrument and the Angrist and Krueger (1991) sample from the 1980
Census. They find the returns to schooling are rapid declining up to the 40th quantile, decline somewhat more
through the 60th quantile and are relatively flat beyond that.




                                                                                                                18
A relevant comparison for these findings is the recent paper by Stephens and Yang (2014) which
uses white men in similar age ranges from the 1960-1980 Censuses but finds insignificant, and
even wrong-signed, estimates of the returns to schooling. One possible reconciliation of these
seemingly disparate sets of findings is that birth cohorts examined in the current paper were
affected along different margins than those examined by Stephens and Yang. As is shown in
Figure 4, for the 1885-1912 birth cohorts examined in this paper, the schooling laws primarily
had an impact at later stages of common school in years six to eight. Indeed, none of the
Southern U.S. states had compulsory schooling laws for the oldest of these birth cohorts while
the youngest birth cohorts experienced laws in virtually all states. For the 1905-1954 birth
cohorts examined by Stephens and Yang, compulsory schooling was in place for nearly every
birth cohort, and most of the adjustments to schooling laws affected education at higher levels of
school.


Effects of Native-Born and Foreign-Born Parents


The historical literature (Tyack 1974, Ralph and Rubinson 1980) and a recent paper by Lleras-
Muney and Shertzer (2015) raise questions about the extent to which laws were binding for
children with foreign-born parents and for foreign-born children. Lleras-Muney and Shertzer
examine the impact of contemporaneous schooling and child labor laws on children ages six to
sixteen using the 1910-1930 Censuses. They estimate the effects of the laws on enrollment and
employment for three groups: native-born children with native-born parents, native-born children
with at least one foreign-born parent, and foreign-born children. The effects of the laws are
larger for foreign-born children than for either of the two native-born children groups and were
nearly identical for both native-born groups of children. Our identification strategy, which uses
state of birth to examine the impact of schooling and child labor laws on adult outcomes, only
allows us to distinguish between the two native-born groups. We exclude the foreign-born from
our analysis.


Parental birthplace is only available for sample line individuals – the 5 percent of the Census
who answered the long form questionnaire. Following Lleras-Muney and Shertzer, we divide the



                                                                                               19
sample line into two groups: those for whom both parents are native-born and those who have at
least one foreign-born parent.


Table 6 uses parental birthplace information to examine whether the impact of schooling and
child labor laws on educational attainment differs between those with native-born parents and
those with foreign-born parents. Column 1 of the Table shows the effect of the continuous
required schooling measure on educational attainment for the all men sample, shown previously
in column 1 of Table 3, as a point of comparison. When restricting the sample to only those men
who are sample line individuals (column 2), a reduction in the sample size by 95 percent, the
estimated impact is unaffected.19 The effect of having at least one foreign-born parent reduces
educational attainment by over one half of a year (column 3), but the inclusion of this indicator
does not affect the estimated impact of schooling and child labor laws on years of schooling.


The final three columns of Table 6 allow for the laws to have different effects on sample line
individuals with native-born parents and those with foreign-born parents. Column 4 includes an
interaction between required years of schooling and the foreign-born parent indicator. The point
estimate on this interaction indicates there is no difference in the impact of schooling laws on
educational attainment between those native-born white men with native-born parents and those
with foreign-born parents. While this finding lines up with the results in Lleras-Muney and
Shertzer (2015) discussed above, the standard error on the interaction term is relatively large in
magnitude.


Columns 5 and 6 of Table 6 show the results of separately estimating the effects of the laws for
individuals with foreign-born and native-born parents. Relative to the specification in column 4,
separating the sample allows the state and region-year of birth effects to differ between these two
groups. The coefficient on years of schooling is positive and significant in both columns but is
only marginally significant for individuals with foreign-born parents. It is worth noting that the
standard errors on the required schooling estimates are large enough to encompass the point
estimate of the other group, especially for those with a foreign-born parent. However, when
19
  Although the sample size falls by a factor of twenty between columns (1) and (2), the corresponding standard
errors fall by less than the square root of 20 because the standard errors are clustered in both columns.




                                                                                                           20
using the categorical specification of required years of schooling, as shown in Appendix Table 6,
the estimates are only positive and significant for those with native-born parents. For those with
a foreign-born parent, the regressions yield insignificant and, in many cases, results that are
opposite in sign than expected. Overall, the results consistently show that schooling laws
increased educational attainment of native-born men with native-born parents while the findings
for native-born men with a foreign-born parent are more tenuous.


Given our mixed findings for the impact of required schooling on native-born men with foreign-
born parents in Table 6 and Appendix Table 6, Table 7 provides returns to schooling for three
samples: i) all native-born white men in the sample line, ii) all native-born white men in the
sample line with an indicator for having a foreign-born parent, and iii) only native-born white
men with native-born parents in the sample line. In Table 7, the continuous required schooling
measure yields much higher estimates of the returns to schooling than specifying the laws using
categorical measures.


Comparing the estimates using the categorical instruments (columns 3 and 6 in Table 7) across
the three samples, two things are notable. First, the F-statistics for native-born white men with
native-born parents are larger. This finding is perhaps not surprising given the insignificant
estimates on the interactions between the laws and the foreign-born parent indicator. Second, the
returns to schooling for native-born white men with native-born parents (Panel C of Table 7) are
generally higher. These results suggest that the returns to schooling from increasing required
schooling are larger for those with native-born parents, although the standard errors shown in
Panel C are large enough to include the point estimates from using all sample line white men.


Figure 6 shows the results of using quantile IV to estimate the returns to schooling across the
distribution of log weekly wages for both sample line individuals and for those sample line
individuals with only native-born parents. The corresponding point estimates and standard errors
are shown in Appendix Table 5, Panels B and C. The returns to schooling follow patterns similar
to that of the full sample in Figure 5 with higher returns for the lower weekly wage quantiles. As
with the IV estimates shown in Table 7, the quantile IV estimates are larger for native-born men




                                                                                                21
with native-born parents than for the full sample of native-born men. However, the estimates are
not precise enough to draw statistically significant distinctions between these two samples.


Effects for Non-Southern Born Men


Stephens and Yang (2014) show that the estimated returns to schooling in the 1960-1980
Censuses for white men becomes statistically insignificant and, in some cases, negative in sign
when allowing the year of birth fixed effects to vary by Census region. They suggest that the
rapid catching up of the South in terms of schooling requirements and school quality, amongst
other things, yields the positive and significant estimates of the returns to schooling when not
allowing the fixed effects to vary by region. Due to their findings, the specifications used
throughout this paper include region by year of birth fixed effects.


Nonetheless, one concern is that the South alone might be driving the results because of its rapid
adoption of compulsory attendance laws during this time period. Table 8 re-estimates the first
stage regressions in Table 2 but excludes men born in the South. The estimated coefficients on
the continuous required schooling measure in columns 1, 3, and 5 are slightly smaller than in
Table 2. The estimated coefficients on the categorical required schooling variables in columns 2,
4, and 6 are generally smaller and in some cases are no longer significant. This reflects the fact
that the variation within and across states is now smaller. The coefficients on eight years of
schooling and nine or more years of schooling remain positive and significant. The magnitudes
of the coefficients for eight years range from 0.063 to 0.083, whereas in Table 2 they ranged
from 0.123 to 0.138.


Table 9 re-estimates the OLS and IV returns to schooling regressions in Table 4, but excludes
men born in the South. The F-statistics are somewhat lower than those found in Table 4, but still
range between 19 and 23, well above the conventional levels. The IV estimates using the
categorical laws in columns 3 and 6 are slightly lower than those in Table 4, which includes




                                                                                               22
Southern born men, but are well within the earlier confidence intervals.20 Thus, excluding
Southern born has no qualitative impact on the findings presented earlier.


6.       Conclusion


This paper contributes to the literature on the effect of schooling laws and returns to schooling
for native-born white men born in the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries. Relative to
the prior literature, it uses the full count 1940 census, a more detailed coding of schooling laws, a
more flexible specification for estimation, earlier birth cohorts, and quantile IV estimates of
returns to schooling. Using compulsory attendance, continuation schooling, and child labor laws
as instruments for schooling, the results find positive and significant returns to schooling for
native-born white men. Quantile IV results show schooling increased wages for those at the
bottom of the earnings distribution relative to higher earners. The findings are similar if we
restrict the sample to men with native-born parents or drop men born in Southern states. This
paper is limited to white men primarily for comparability to the prior literature, and future work
will extend this analysis to include women and blacks.                       Moreover, numerous additional
institutional factors (e.g., Jim Crow laws and lagging school quality for blacks and cultural
norms against work outside of the home for women) must be carefully addressed to accurately
assess the impact of schooling and child labor laws on the economic outcomes of these groups.


References


Acemoglu, Daron and Joshua Angrist (2000). “How Large Are Human-Capital Externalities?
Evidence from Compulsory attendance Laws.” NBER Macroeconomics Annual 15: 9-59.


Angrist, Joshua D (1988). “Grouped Data Estimation and testing in Simple Labor Supply
Models,” Industrial Relations Section Working Paper no. 234.



20
  As found throughout the paper, the IV estimates of the returns to schooling using the continuous specification of
the laws (columns 2 and 5 in Table 9) are larger than the estimates from using the categorical specification (columns
3 and 6).




                                                                                                                  23
Angrist, Joshua D., and Alan B. Keueger (1991). “Does compulsory school attendance affect
schooling and earnings?.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics 106.4: 979-1014.


Angrist, Joshua D., and Guido W. Imbens (1995) “Two-Stage Least Squares Estimation of
Average Causal Effects in Models with Variable Treatment Intensity,” Journal of the American
Statistical Association, 90:430, 431-442.


Card, David (1999). “The Causal Effect of Education on Earnings,” in the Handbook of Labor
Economics, Volume 3, Part A, eds. Orley Ashenfelter and David Card: North Holland.


Chernozhukov, Victor and Christian Hansen (2006). “Instrumental quantile regression inference
for structural and treatment effect models,” Journal of Econometrics 132:491-525.


Chernozhukov, Victor and Christian Hansen (2008). “Instrumental Variable Quantile
Regression: A Robust Inference Approach,” Journal of Econometrics 142:379-398.


Cook, W.A. (1912). “A Brief Survey of the Development of Compulsory Education in the
United States,” The Elementary School Teacher Vol. 12, 331.


Eisenberg, M. J. (1988). “Compulsory attendance legislation in America, 1870-1915.” PhD
Dissertation, University of Pennsylvania.


Ensign, Forest Chester (1921). “Compulsory School Attendance and Child Labor: A Study of the
Historical Development of Regulation Compelling Attendance and Limiting the Labor of
Children in a Selected Group of States.” PhD Dissertation, Columbia University.


Finlay, Keith and Leandro Magnusson. (2009). “Implementing Weak Instrument Robust Tests
for a General Class of Instrumental Variables Models,” Stata Journal, 9(3):1-24.

Goldin, Claudia (1999). “Egalitarianism and the Returns to Education during the Great
Transformation of American Education.” Journal of Political Economy 107, S65.




                                                                                          24
Goldin, Claudia and Lawrence Katz (1999). “Human Capital and Social Capital: The Rise of
Secondary Schooling in America, 1910-1940.” Journal of Interdisciplinary History 29:683-723.


Goldin, Claudia and Lawrence Katz (2000). “Education and Income in the Early 20th Century:
Evidence from the Prairies.” Journal of Economic History 60:782-818.


Goldin, Claudia and Lawrence Katz (2001). “Decreasing (and then Increasing) Inequality in
America: A Tale of Two Half Centuries.” In The Causes and Consequences of Increasing
Inequality, ed. Finis Welch, 37-82. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.


Goldin, Claudia and Lawrence Katz (2002). Data Appendix to “Mass Secondary Schooling and
the State: The Role of State Compulsion in the High School Movement”, 2002. Revised 2007.


Goldin, Claudia and Lawrence Katz (2008). The Race Between Education and Technology.
Cambridge: Harvard University Press.


Goldin, Claudia and Lawrence Katz (2011). “Mass Secondary Schooling and the State: The
Role of State Compulsion in the High School Movement” in Understanding Long-Run Economic
Growth: Geography, Institutions, and the Knowledge Economy, Dora L. Costa and Naomi R.
Lamoreaux, eds., University of Chicago Press.


Goldin, Claudia and Robert Margo (1992). “The Great Compression: The Wage Structure in the
United States at Mid-century.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 107:1-34.


Landes, William and Lewis Solmon (1972). “Compulsory attendance Legislation: An Economic
Analysis of Law and Social Change in the Nineteen Century.” Journal of Economic History,
32:54-91.


Lindert, Peter (2000). “Three Centuries of Inequality in Britain and America,” in Handbook of
Income Distribution, eds. Anthony B. Atkinson and Francois Bourguignon. Amsterdam/New
York: Elsevier/North Holland.


                                                                                            25
Lleras-Muney, Adrianna (2002). “Were Compulsory Attendance and Child Labor Laws
Effective? An Analysis from 1915-1939.” Journal of Law and Economics, 45: 401-435.


Margo, Robert and T. Aldrich Finnegan (1996). “Compulsory attendance Legislation and School
Attendance in Turn of the Century America: A ‘Natural Experiment’ Approach.” Economics
Letters, 53: 103-110.


Mayman, Edward J. (1933). “The Evolution of the Continuation School in New York City.” The
School Review 41: 193-205.


McAfee, Ward M. (1998). Religion, Race, and Reconstruction: The Public School in the Politics
of the 1870s. Albany: State University of New York Press.


Moehling, Carolyn (1999). “State Child Labor Laws and the Decline of Child Labor.”
Explorations in Economic History, 36:72-106.


Moreira, Marcelo J. (2003). “A Conditional Likelihood Ratio Test for Structural Models,”
Econometrica, 71(4):1027-1048.

Puerta, Juan Manuel (2011) Essays on the Economic History of the Family, PhD Dissertation,
Universitat Pompeu Fabra.


Ralph, John H., and Richard Rubinson (1980). “Immigration and the Expansion of Schooling in
the United States, 1890-1970.” American Sociological Review (1980): 943-954.


Ruggles, Steven, Katie Genadek, Ronald Goeken, Josiah Grover, and Matthew Sobek.
Integrated Public Use Microdata Series: Version 6.0 [Machine-readable database]. Minneapolis:
University of Minnesota, 2015.


Staiger, Douglas and James H. Stock (1997). “Instrumental Variables Regression with Weak
Instruments,” Econometrica 65: 557-586.


                                                                                          26
Stephens Jr., Melvin and Dou-Yan Yang (2014). “Compulsory Education and the Benefits of
Schooling.” American Economic Review, June 2014, 104(6):1777-1792.


Tyack, David, James Thomas, and Aaron Benavot (1987). Law and the Shaping of Public
Education, 1785—1954. The University of Wisconsin Press.


U.S. Office [Bureau] of Education (various years). Report of the Commissioner of Education for
the Year Ended __. Washington, D.C.: Government Printing Office.




                                                                                           27
Figure 1: Passage of State Laws Affecting School Attendance, 1880-1930




Notes: Figure shows proportion of states with a compulsory attendance law, child labor law exempting working
children from compulsory attendance requirements, and continuation schooling law for working children in each
calendar year. This figure shows the existence of a law on the books, not whether the law bound children in practice.
See the dataset attached in the online Data Appendix for sources.

Figure 2: Completed Years of Schooling by Year of Birth, Native-Born White Men




Notes: Figure shows the population-weighted proportion of native-born white males reporting at least six, eight,
nine, or twelve years of schooling, by year of birth. Data are from the complete count of the 1940 census.




                                                                                                                  28
Figure 3: Required Years of Education by Year of Birth




Notes: Figure shows the population-weighted average years of required education by year of birth, according to state
compulsory attendance laws (accounting for years of schooling exemptions, in which children who had completed
sufficient schooling could drop out, and child labor exemptions, in which employed children with sufficient
schooling could drop out) and state continuation schooling laws (accounting for years of schooling exemptions).
Years of required education are calculated for each birth cohort as described in the online Data Appendix. Weights
are calculated from the size of year-of-birth cohorts in the 1940 census.

Figure 4: Effect of the Laws on Completed Years of Schooling, Native-Born White Men




Notes: Figure shows the coefficients from regressing completed years of schooling on laws using individuals who
were born between 1885 and 1912, inclusive. The outcome in each regression is a binary indicator for having
completed at least as many years as shown on the axes. Results are shown for the all white men sample that has
18,887,147 observations. Each regression includes state of birth and region by year of birth fixed effects. See
Appendix Table 1 for full results.



                                                                                                                29
Figure 5: Quantile Instrumental Variable Regression Estimates of Returns to Schooling, Native-
Born White Men




Notes: Each coefficient is from a separate regression, and error bars show 95% confidence intervals. Results are
shown for a random 25% sample of the working men sample: all white men who reported positive earnings and
positive weeks worked in 1939. This sample contains 3,306,178 observations. Each regression includes state of
birth and region by year of birth fixed effects. See Appendix Table 3, Panel A for full results.




                                                                                                             30
Figure 6: Quantile Instrumental Variable Regression Estimates of Returns to Schooling, Native-
Born Parents and Comparison Samples

Panel A: Sample Line Individuals




Panel B: Native Parents Only Sample Line Individuals




Notes: Each coefficient is from a separate regression, and error bars show 95% confidence intervals. Results are
shown using the working men sample: all white men who reported positive earnings and positive weeks worked in
1939. Panel A uses the 638,239 observations from the working men sample who are sample line individuals. Panel
B uses the 471,363 observations from the working men sample who are sample line individuals and have both
parents that are native born. Standard errors are clustered by state and year. Each regression includes state of birth
and region by year of birth fixed effects. See Appendix Table 5, Panels B and C for full results.



                                                                                                                  31
Table 1: Summary statistics

                                                       Sample:
                                                                   Restricted
                                                       Working     Working
           Variables                      All Men       Men          Men

            Age                             38.9         38.2        38.2

            Years of Schooling              9.22         9.37        9.88

            Log Weekly Wage                              3.18        3.34

            Required Schooling:

            Percent Zero Years              13.5         11.3        10.2

            Percent One to Five Years       9.2          8.8          8.4

            Percent Six Years               19.1         19.0        19.3

            Percent Seven Years             16.9         16.9        17.6

            Percent Eight Years             33.4         35.2        35.2

            Percent Nine or More Years      7.9          8.8          9.3

            N                            18,887,147   13,224,713   8,383,586




                                                                                32
                                 Table 2: Effect of the Laws on Years of Schooling for Native-Born White Men


                 Sample:                                   All Men                    Working Men                  Restricted Working Men
                 Laws                                (1)             (2)             (3)        (4)                  (5)             (6)

                 Continuous Laws (Years)
                  Required Schooling             0.019***                         0.022***                        0.022***
                                                  (0.003)                          (0.004)                         (0.004)

                 Categorical Laws
                  Required Schooling:
                  One to Five Years                              0.039**                          0.033*                             0.017
                                                                 (0.017)                         (0.017)                            (0.019)
                  Six Years                                      0.045**                         0.048**                             0.034
                                                                 (0.021)                         (0.021)                            (0.022)
                  Seven Years                                   0.094***                        0.104***                           0.105***
                                                                 (0.022)                         (0.023)                            (0.024)
                  Eight Years                                   0.123***                        0.138***                           0.135***
                                                                 (0.024)                         (0.025)                            (0.026)
                  Nine or More Years                             0.246**                        0.263***                           0.213***
                                                                 (0.029)                         (0.029)                            (0.030)

                 N                              18,887,147     18,887,147        13,224,713    13,224,713         8,383,586        8,383,586

Notes: Each column in the table presents the results of a separate regression using individuals who were born between 1885 and 1912, inclusive. Results are
shown for three samples: all native-born white men (Columns 1-2), all white men who reported positive earnings and positive weeks worked in 1939 (Columns
3-4), and all white men who reported positive earnings and worked at least 40 weeks in 1939, works but is not self-employed, and did not live on a farm
(Columns 5-6). The independent variables shown in the table are a continuous measure of required years of schooling that includes continuation schooling
requirements (Columns 1, 3, and 5) and indicators for required years of schooling that includes continuation schooling requirements (Columns 2, 4, and 6). Each
regression includes state of birth and region by year of birth fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered by state and year. Significance is represented by *** at
the .01 level, ** at the .05 level, and * at the .10 level.
                                 Table 3: Literature Review of Effects of Laws on Educational Outcomes

Paper                 Identification         Data                     Sample                   Time period            Effects of laws
Landes and Solmon     DD laws-time           Administrative           State-year averages      1870-1880, 1880-1890   No
(1972)                                       attendance, enrollment   from administrative
                                                                      data
Eisenberg (1988)      Pre-post county        Administrative           County-level averages    1897-1908              Yes for Iowa and
                      analysis Iowa,         attendance,              from administrative                             Pennsylvania
                      Pennsylvania           enrollment, school       data
                                             quality
Margo and Finegan     DD laws-older and      1900 Census sample       1/760 Preston sample     1900                   Yes for states with
(1996)                younger 14 year olds   In school                                                                attendance + labor
                      in 1900
Lleras Muney (2002)   DD Time series         1960 Census sample       1/100 sample             1915-1939              Yes, all laws
                      State FE, Year FE,     Years of schooling
                      Region x year FE
Goldin and Katz       DD Time series         1960 Census sample       1/100 samples            1910-1939              Yes, primarily
(2011)                State FE, Year FE,     Years of schooling                                (1896-1925             continuation
                      Region x TT            1910, 1920                                        birth cohorts)         schooling, they note
                                             working, in school                                                       effects modest
                                             Administrative
Puerta (2011)         DD laws-time in        1850-1910 Census         1/100 – 1/20 samples     1850-1910              Yes, bigger for early
                      border                 samples                                                                  (1850-1870) than late
                      townships/counties     In school                                                                (1880-1910)
Lleras-Muney and      DD Time series         1910, 1920, and 1930     1/100 samples            1910-1930              Yes, larger effects on
Shertzer (2015)       State FE, Year FE,     Census samples, 1940                              (1904-1924             enrollment for children
                      State TT               Census, WWII records                              birth cohorts)         born abroad than
                                                                                                                      native-born children
Clay, Lingwall,       DD laws-time           Complete 1940 Census     Full census, white men   1899-1926              Yes, effects modest
Stephens (2016)       State FE, Year FE,     Years of schooling                                (1885-1912             and nonlinear.
                      Region x Year FE                                                         birth cohorts)




                                                                                                                                                34
                                             Table 4: Returns to Schooling for Native-Born White Men


                    Sample:                                  Working Men                             Restricted Working Men
                    Specification:                              2SLS       2SLS                               2SLS          2SLS
                                                   OLS        Continuous Categorical             OLS      Continuous     Categorical

                    Laws                            (1)           (2)            (3)              (4)            (5)             (6)

                      Years of Schooling         0.082***      0.159***      0.079***         0.068***        0.120***        0.064***
                                                  (0.001)       (0.026)       (0.015)          (0.001)         (0.022)         (0.016)

                      First Stage F-Stat                          37.7          29.0                            34.0             20.1


                    N                           13,224,713    13,224,713    13,224,713        8,383,586      8,383,586        8,383,586


Notes: Each column in the table presents the results of a separate regression of log weekly wages on years of schooling using individuals who were born between
1885 and 1912, inclusive. Results are shown for two samples: all white men who reported positive earnings and positive weeks worked in 1939 (Columns 1-3),
and all white men who reported positive earnings and worked at least 40 weeks in 1939, works but is not self-employed, and did not live on a farm (Columns 4-
6). We present OLS estimates of the returns to schooling (Columns 1 and 4), IV estimates of the returns to schooling using a single continuous measure of
required years of schooling that includes continuation schooling requirements (Columns 2 and 5) and IV estimates of the returns to schooling using indicators for
required years of schooling that includes continuation schooling requirements (Columns 3 and 6). The corresponding first stage estimates are found in Table 3.
Each regression includes state of birth and region by year of birth fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered by state and year. Significance is represented by
*** at the .01 level, ** at the .05 level, and * at the .10 level.




                                                                                                                                                              35
                                           Table 5: Literature Review on Returns to Schooling

Paper                 Identification        Data                 Laws                  Time period       Returns
Angrist and Krueger   IV time series        1970-1980 Censuses   Quarter of birth      1920-1949 birth   Yes, IV larger than
(1991)                                      (1-5% samples)       attendance            cohorts           OLS

Staiger and Stock     IV time series        1980 Census          Quarter of birth      1930-1949 birth   Yes, IV larger than
(1997)                                      (5% sample)          attendance            cohorts           OLS

Goldin and Katz       Cross sectional       1915 Iowa Census                           1850-1897 birth   Yes, smaller for
(2000)                                      (2.5% sample)                              cohorts           primary school, larger
                                                                                                         for high school/college
Oreopoulos and        IV time series        1950-2000 Censuses   Attendance            1899-1982 birth   Yes, IV larger than
Salvanes (2011)                             (0.3-1% samples),                          cohorts           OLS
                                            ACS 2001-2007

Stephens and Yang     IV time series        1960-1980 Censuses   Attendance            1905-1954 birth   No, if controls for
(2014)                State FE, Year FE,    (1-5% samples)                             cohorts           Region x Year FE are
                      Region x Year FE                                                                   included

Clay, Lingwall,       IV Time series        Full 1940 Census     Attendance, labor,    1885-1912 birth   Yes, OLS in line with
Stephens (2016)       State FE, Year FE,                         continuation school   cohorts           previous studies (Card
                      Region x Year FE                                                                   1999), quantile IV
                                                                                                         positive for all
                                                                                                         quantiles, larger for
                                                                                                         lower quantiles




                                                                                                                                   36
      Table 6: Effect of the Laws on Years of Schooling for Native-Born White Men with Native-Born and Foreign-Born Parents


                Sample:                            Full Sample                                       Sample Line

                                                                                                                    Parents          1+ Parent(s)
                Sample:                                All                              All                        Native-born       Foreign-born
                Laws                                   (1)               (2)            (3)            (4)             (5)                (6)

                 Required Schooling                 0.019***          0.019***       0.021***      0.021***          0.026***           0.017*
                                                     (0.003)           (0.005)        (0.005)       (0.006)           (0.006)           (0.010)

                 Foreign-born Parent                                                -0.600***      -0.618***
                                                                                      (0.019)        (0.109)

                 Laws*Foreign-born Parent                                                            0.003
                                                                                                    (0.015)

                N                                  18,887,147          905,796       905,796        905,796           674,139           231,657

Notes: Each column in the table presents the results of a separate regression using individuals who were born between 1885 and 1912, inclusive. Results are
shown for four samples: all white men (Column 1), all white men who are in the sample line individuals (Columns 2-4), all white men in the sample line
individuals with both parents born in the United States, (Column 5), and all white men in the sample line individuals with one or both parents born outside of the
United States. (Column 6). The independent variables shown in the table are a continuous measure of required years of schooling that includes continuation
schooling requirements, an indicator for having at least one parent born outside of the United States (Columns 3-4) and an interaction between the continuous
measure of required schooling (including continuation schooling) and an indicators for having at least one parent born outside of the United States (Column 4).
Each regression includes state of birth and region by year of birth fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered by state and year. Significance is represented by ***
at the .01 level, ** at the .05 level, and * at the .10 level.




                                                                                                                                                                  37
         Table 7: Returns to Schooling for Native-Born White Men with Native-Born Parents

                                           Panel A: All Sample Line – Full Sample Specification
Sample:                                 Working Men                           Restricted Working Men
Specification:                             2SLS          2SLS                          2SLS          2SLS
                              OLS        Continuous Categorical         OLS        Continuous     Categorical

Laws                           (1)            (2)           (3)              (4)             (5)              (6)

 Years of Schooling         0.081***      0.123***         0.030          0.068***        0.100***         0.060**
                             (0.001)       (0.050)        (0.029)          (0.001)         (0.041)         (0.025)

 First Stage F-Stat                          14.8          11.2                             13.1             8.5

N                           638,239       638,239       638,239          406,225        406,225       406,225
                                         Panel B: All Sample Line – Including Foreign-born Indicator
Sample:                                 Working Men                              Restricted Working Men
Specification:                             2SLS          2SLS                             2SLS          2SLS
                              OLS        Continuous Categorical           OLS         Continuous     Categorical

Laws                           (1)            (2)           (3)              (4)             (5)              (6)

 Years of Schooling         0.082***      0.112***         0.021          0.068***        0.093***         0.053**
                             (0.001)       (0.046)        (0.026)          (0.001)         (0.038)         (0.023)

 First Stage F-Stat                          16.7          14.1                             15.0             11.1

N                           638,239       638,239      638,239         406,225         406,225       406,225
                                                 Panel C: Native-born Parents Sample Line
Sample:                                 Working Men                             Restricted Working Men
Specification:                             2SLS         2SLS                             2SLS          2SLS
                              OLS        Continuous Categorical          OLS         Continuous     Categorical

Laws                           (1)            (2)           (3)              (4)             (5)              (6)

 Years of Schooling         0.087***      0.134***       0.077***         0.072***        0.085***        0.074***
                             (0.001)       (0.045)        (0.025)          (0.001)         (0.033)         (0.022)

 First Stage F-Stat                          21.0          15.0                             23.4             13.3

N                           471,363        471,363       471,363           294,728        294,728          294,728

 Notes: Each estimate in the table presents the results of a separate regression using individuals who were born
 between 1885 and 1912, inclusive. Results are shown for two samples: all white men who reported positive
 earnings and positive weeks worked in 1939 (Columns 1-3), and all white men who reported positive earnings and
 worked at least 40 weeks in 1939, works but is not self-employed, and does not live on a farm (Columns 4-6). We
 present OLS estimates of the returns to schooling (Columns 1 and 4), IV estimates of the returns to schooling using
 a single continuous measure of required years of schooling that includes continuation schooling requirements
 (Columns 2 and 5) and IV estimates of the returns to schooling using indicators for required years of schooling that
 includes continuation schooling requirements (Columns 3 and 6). The corresponding first stage estimates are found
 in Table 3. Each regression includes state of birth and region by year of birth fixed effects. Standard errors are
 clustered by state and year. Significance is represented by *** at the .01 level, ** at the .05 level, and * at the .10
 level.


                                                                                                                     38
      Table 8: Effect of the Laws on Years of Schooling for Native-Born White Men, Excluding the
                                                           South


Sample:                                 All Men                   Working Men                  Restricted Working Men
Laws                              (1)             (2)            (3)        (4)                  (5)             (6)

Continuous Laws (Years)
 Required Schooling            0.016***                       0.020***                        0.018***
                                (0.004)                        (0.004)                         (0.004)

Categorical Laws
 Required Schooling:
 One to Five Years                             0.012                          -0.018                           -0.047*
                                              (0.028)                        (0.027)                           (0.028)
 Six Years                                     0.009                          -0.007                            -0.032
                                              (0.027)                        (0.024)                           (0.025)
 Seven Years                                  0.058**                        0.052**                             0.039
                                              (0.028)                        (0.026)                           (0.027)
 Eight Years                                  0.083**                        0.081**                           0.063**
                                              (0.030)                        (0.028)                           (0.030)
 Nine or More Years                          0.204***                       0.203***                          0.139***
                                              (0.035)                        (0.033)                           (0.034)

N                             14,781,297    14,781,297       10,606,026    10,606,026         6,871,341       6,871,341

     Notes: Each column in the table presents the results of a separate regression using individuals who were born
     between 1885 and 1912, inclusive. Results are shown for three samples: all white men (Columns 1-2), all white
     men who reported positive earnings and positive weeks worked in 1939 (Columns 3-4), and all white men who
     reported positive earnings and worked at least 40 weeks in 1939, works but is not self-employed, and does not live
     on a farm (Columns 5-6). The independent variables shown in the table are a continuous measure of required years
     of schooling that includes continuation schooling requirements (Columns 1, 3, and 5) and indicators for required
     years of schooling that includes continuation schooling requirements (Columns 2, 4, and 6). Each regression
     includes state of birth and region by year of birth fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered by state and year.
     Significance is represented by *** at the .01 level, ** at the .05 level, and * at the .10 level.




                                                                                                                     39
            Table 9: Returns to Schooling for Native-born White Men, Excluding the South



Sample:                                Working Men                           Restricted Working Men
Specification:                            2SLS       2SLS                             2SLS          2SLS
                             OLS        Continuous Categorical           OLS      Continuous     Categorical

Laws                          (1)           (2)           (3)             (4)            (5)             (6)

 Years of Schooling       0.075***       0.177***     0.070***         0.064***       0.135***        0.058***
                           (0.001)        (0.035)      (0.016)          (0.001)        (0.031)         (0.017)

 First Stage F-Stat                        22.9          29.0                           19.3            19.9


N                         10,606,026    10,606,026    10,606,026       6,871,341      6,871,341       6,871,341


 Notes: Each column in the table presents the results of a separate regression using individuals who were born
 between 1885 and 1912, inclusive outside of the U.S. South. Results are shown for two samples of men non-
 Southern Born white men: all white men who reported positive earnings and positive weeks worked in 1939
 (Columns 1-3), and all white men who reported positive earnings and worked at least 40 weeks in 1939, works but is
 not self-employed, and did not live on a farm (Columns 4-6). We present OLS estimates of the returns to schooling
 (Columns 1 and 4), IV estimates of the returns to schooling using a single continuous measure of required years of
 schooling that includes continuation schooling requirements (Columns 2 and 5) and IV estimates of the returns to
 schooling using indicators for required years of schooling that includes continuation schooling requirements
 (Columns 3 and 6). The corresponding first stage estimates are found in Table 3. Each regression includes state of
 birth and region by year of birth fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered by state and year. Significance is
 represented by *** at the .01 level, ** at the .05 level, and * at the .10 level.




                                                                                                                  40
                                   Appendix: For Online Publication

Appendix Figure 1: Effect of the Laws on Completed Schooling – Separate Continuation School

                            Panel A: Compulsory Attendance Requirements




                               Panel B: Continuation School Requirements




Notes: Figures show the coefficients from regressing completed years of schooling on laws using individuals who
were born between 1885 and 1912, inclusive. The outcome in each regression is a binary indicator for having
completed at least as many years as shown on the axes. Results are shown for the all white men sample that has
18,887,147 observations. Each regression includes state of birth and region by year of birth fixed effects. See
Appendix Table 2 for complete results.

                                                                                                                  41
                                         Appendix Table 1: Effect of the Laws on Completed Years of Schooling
                       Years of    Years of     Years of     Years of    Years of     Years of     Years of    Years of     Years of     Years of    Years of     Years of
VARIABLES              School      School       School       School      School       School       School      School       School       School      School       School
Years of Schooling     1+          2+           3+           4+          5+           6+           7+          8+           9+           10+         11+          12+
                       (1)         (2)          (3)          (4)         (5)          (6)          (7)         (8)          (9)          (10)        (11)         (12)
Required Schooling:
 One to Five Years    0.0025***    0.0028***   0.0034***    0.0052***   0.0074***   0.0081***     0.0074**    0.0048       -0.0030      -0.0028      -0.0011      -0.0005
                      (0.0006)     (0.0008)    (0.0010)     (0.0015)    (0.0024)    (0.0030)      (0.0033)    (0.0031)     (0.0024)     (0.0023)     (0.0023)     (0.0021)
 Six Years            0.0046***    0.00565**   0.0074***    0.0123***   0.0196***   0.0245***     0.0227***   0.0138***    -0.0094***   -0.0144***   -0.0117***   -0.0081***
                      (0.0007)     (0.0008)    (0.0012)     (0.0018)    (0.0028)    (0.0035)      (0.0039)    (0.0037)     (0.0030)     (0.0027)     (0.0026)     (0.0023)
 Seven Years          0.0037***    0.0042***   0.0053***    0.0094***   0.0155***   0.0208***     0.0211***   0.0128***    0.0035       -0.0021       0.0004      0.0027
                      (0.0008)     (0.0010)    (0.0013)     (0.0019)    (0.0030)    (0.0037)      (0.0041)    (0.0039)     (0.0034)     (0.0031)     (0.0029)     (0.0027)
 Eight Years          0.0048***    0.0055***   0.0072***    0.0128***   0.0212***   0.0283***     0.0293***   0.0191***    0.0029       -0.0063*     -0.0052*     -0.0015
                      (0.0009)     (0.0010)    (0.0014)     (0.0020)    (0.0031)    (0.0038)      (0.0044)    (0.0042)     (0.0039)     (0.0033)     (0.0031)     (0.0029)
 Nine to Ten Years    0.0039***    0.0042***   0.0052**     0.0094***   0.0150***   0.0211***     0.0258***   0.0223***    0.0467***    0.0320***    0.0184**     0.0156***
                      (0.0010)     (0.0012)    (0.0017)     (0.0024)    (0.0034)    (0.0041)      (0.0047)    (0.0047)     (0.0056)     (0.0050)     (0.0044)     (0.0040)


    Notes: Each column in the table presents the results of a separate regression using individuals who were born between 1885 and 1912, inclusive. The outcome in
    each regression is a binary indicator for having completed at least as many years as shown at the top of the column. Results are shown for the all white men
    sample that has 18,887,147 observations. Each regression includes state of birth and region by year of birth fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered by state
    and year. Significance is represented by *** at the .01 level, ** at the .05 level, and * at the .10 level.




                                                                                                                                                                   42
                         Appendix Table 2: Effect of the Laws on Completed Years of Schooling – Separate Continuation School
                         Years of     Years of     Years of     Years of      Years of   Years of    Years of    Years of     Years of   Years of     Years of     Years of
VARIABLES                School       School       School       School        School     School      School      School       School     School       School       School
Years of Schooling       1+           2+           3+           4+            5+         6+          7+          8+           9+         10+          11+          12+
                         (1)          (2)          (3)          (4)           (5)        (6)         (7)         (8)          (9)        (10)         (11)         (12)
Required Schooling
w/o Continuation Yrs.:
 One to Five Years       0.0023***    0.0026***    0.0030***    0.0046***    0.0068***   0.0073***   0.0067**    0.0046      -0.0040     -0.0029      -0.0002      0.0004
                         (0.0006)     (0.0008)     (0.0010)     (0.0015)     (0.0024)    (0.0029)    (0.0032)    (0.0030)    (0.0027)    (0.0024)     (0.0022)     (0.0020)
 Six Years               0.0042***    0.0050***    0.0066***    0.0113***    0.0186***   0.0236***   0.0229***   0.0155***   -0.0071**   -0.0116***   -0.0083***   -0.0051**
                         (0.0007)     (0.0009)     (0.0012)     (0.0018)     (0.0028)    (0.0034)    (0.0038)    (0.0036)    (0.0033)    (0.0029)     (0.0025)     (0.0022)
 Seven Years             0.0031***    0.0034***    0.0040***    0.0071***    0.0120***   0.0154***   0.0154***   0.0098**    0.0019      0.0008       0.0056*      0.0079***
                         (0.0008)     (0.0010)     (0.0014)     (0.0021)     (0.0032)    (0.0039)    (0.0039)    (0.0040)    (0.0039)    (0.0035)     (0.0031)     (0.0029)
 Eight to Nine Years     0.0034***    0.0038***    0.0043***    0.0077***    0.0135***   0.0177***   0.0204***   0.0188***   0.0146***   0.0103**     0.0127***    0.0122***
                         (0.0010)     (0.0012)     (0.0016)     (0.0022)     (0.0034)    (0.0042)    (0.0047)    (0.0044)    (0.0047)    (0.0041)     (0.0036)     (0.0033)
Continuation
School:
 One to Two Years        0.0007***    0.0007*      0.0010*      0.0013*      0.0012      0.0012      0.0006      -0.0021     0.0042      0.0016       -0.0019      -0.0015
                         (0.0003)     (0.0004)     (0.0005)     (0.0008)     (0.0011)    (0.0015)    (0.0016)    (0.0016)    (0.0026)    (0.0023)     (0.0020)     (0.0018)
 Three to Four Years     -0.0014***   -0.0019***   -0.0027***   -0.0034***   -0.0037**   -0.0042**   0.0002      0.0062***   0.0270***   0.0251***    0.0137***    0.0118***
                         (0.0003)     (0.0004)     (0.0007)     (0.0009)     (0.0014)    (0.0018)    (0.0021)    (0.0020)    (0.0033)    (0.0031)     (0.0027)     (0.0025)


    Notes: Each column in the table presents the results of a separate regression using individuals who were born between 1885 and 1912, inclusive. The outcome in
    each regression is a binary indicator for having completed at least as many years as shown at the top of the column. Results are shown for the all white men
    sample that has 18,887,147 observations. Each regression includes state of birth and region by year of birth fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered by state
    and year. Significance is represented by *** at the .01 level, ** at the .05 level, and * at the .10 level.




                                                                                                                                                                    43
                                          Appendix Table 3: Reduced Form Estimates of Returns to Schooling


                             Sample:                                     Working Men                      Restricted Working Men
                             Laws                                     (1)           (2)                     (3)             (4)

                             Continuous Laws (Years)
                              Required Schooling                  0.0035***                             0.0026***
                                                                   (0.0006)                              (0.0005)

                             Categorical Laws
                              Required Schooling:
                              One to Five Years                                     0.012***                               0.007**
                                                                                     (0.003)                               (0.003)
                              Six Years                                             0.024***                              0.017***
                                                                                     (0.004)                               (0.004)
                              Seven Years                                           0.022***                              0.015***
                                                                                     (0.004)                               (0.004)
                              Eight Years                                           0.029***                              0.021***
                                                                                     (0.005)                               (0.004)
                              Nine or More Years                                    0.038***                              0.027***
                                                                                     (0.006)                               (0.005)

                             N                                    13,224,713       13,224,713            8,383,586        8,383,586

Notes: See notes to Table 4. We restrict the analysis to men working in 1939 who were born between 1885 and 1912. The instruments are the years of required
compulsory attendance and continuation school indicators used in Table 7, Column 4 (Columns 1-4 here), and Table 8, Column 4 (Columns 5-8 here). Each
regression includes state of birth and region by year of birth fixed effects. Significance is represented by *** at the .01 level, ** at the .05 level, and * at the .10
level.




                                                                                                                                                                    44
                              Appendix Table 4: Impact of Education on Earnings – 1% Sample of 1940 Census

                                                               2SLS           2SLS               LIML           1st Stage       1st Stage
                                                  OLS        Continuous     Categorical        Categorical     Continuous      Categorical

               Laws                                (1)             (2)          (3)                (3)             (5)             (6)

                Years of Schooling              0.085***       0.240**       0.164***           0.172***
                                                 (0.001)       (0.103)     [0.068, 0.321]        (0.054)

               Continuous Laws (Years)
                Required Schooling                                                                              0.026**
                                                                                                                (0.010)

               Categorical Laws
                Required Schooling:
                One to Five Years                                                                                                  0.096
                                                                                                                                 (0.061)
                Six Years                                                                                                          0.071
                                                                                                                                 (0.066)
                Seven Years                                                                                                       0.125*
                                                                                                                                 (0.073)
                Eight Years                                                                                                      0.185**
                                                                                                                                 (0.077)
                Nine or More Years                                                                                              0.327***
                                                                                                                                 (0.092)

                First Stage F-Stat                           7.2                4.2


Notes: Each column in the table presents the results of a separate regression using individuals who were born between 1885 and 1912, inclusive. Results are
shown for the previously available 1% micro sample of the 1940 Census constructed using the same criteria as the working men sample: all white men who
reported positive earnings and positive weeks worked in 1939. This sample contains 142,173 observations. Each regression includes state of birth and region by
year of birth fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered by state and year and are shown in parentheses. 95% confidence intervals for Moreira’s Conditional
Likelihood Ratio Test are shown in brackets. Significance is represented by *** at the .01 level, ** at the .05 level, and * at the .10 level.




                                                                                                                                                           45
                             Appendix Table 5: Quantile Instrumental Variable Regression Estimates of Returns to Schooling

                                                                                     Quantile Point Estimates
                       5th   10th     15th    20th    25th    30th    35th    40th    45th    50th      55th    60th   65th    70th    75th   80th      85th    90th    95th

                                                                             A. Working Men Sample (25% subsample)
Years of Schooling    0.131 0.164 0.162 0.141 0.148 0.135 0.139 0.136 0.133 0.116 0.096 0.086 0.057 0.044 0.033 0.001                                   0.004 0.009 -0.016
                     (0.022) (0.011) (0.010) (0.012) (0.010) (0.011) (0.015) (0.012) (0.010) (0.013) (0.010) (0.011) (0.009) (0.008) (0.010) (0.012)   (0.008) (0.010) (0.024)

                                                                          B. Working Men Sample - Sample Line Individuals
Years of Schooling    0.080 0.119 0.110 0.106 0.097 0.084 0.095 0.016 0.024 0.031 0.033 0.001 0.017 -0.001 -0.008 -0.025                                -0.018 -0.011 -0.076
                     (0.024) (0.038) (0.059) (0.022) (0.025) (0.022) (0.019) (0.047) (0.063) (0.024) (0.018) (0.055) (0.015) (0.016) (0.014) (0.013)   (0.020) (0.021) (0.038)

                                                                 C. Working Men Sample - Native Parents Only Sample Line Individuals
Years of Schooling    0.141 0.152 0.137 0.129 0.122 0.104 0.114 0.105 0.073 0.044 0.049 0.052 0.035                             0.027 0.019 0.002       -0.009 0.016 0.039
                     (0.046) (0.031) (0.039) (0.038) (0.019) (0.018) (0.014) (0.021) (0.018) (0.016) (0.012) (0.014) (0.013) (0.014) (0.016) (0.016)   (0.022) (0.060) (0.018)


    Notes: Each estimate in the table presents the results of a separate quantile IV regression of log weekly wages on years of schooling, using laws as an instrument
    for years of schooling. We restrict the analysis to men working in 1939 who were born between 1885 and 1912. Results are shown from the working men
    sample: all white men who reported positive earnings and positive weeks worked in 1939. Panel A uses a random 25% sample of the working men sample and
    contains 3,306,178 observations. Panel B uses the 638,239 observations from the full working men sample who are sample line individuals. Panel C uses the
    471,363 observations from the full working men sample who are sample line individuals and have both parents that are native born. The instruments are the
    combined years of required compulsory attendance and continuation school indicators used in Table 3, Columns 2,4, and 6. Each regression includes state of
    birth and region by year of birth fixed effects.




                                                                                                                                                                       46
         Appendix Table 6: Effect of the Laws on Years of Schooling on Those with Foreign-born Parents – Categorical Laws

                                                                             Outcome = Years of Schooling
               Sample:                          Full Sample                                   Sample Line

                                                                                                              Parents        1+ Parent(s)
               Sample:                              All                           All                        Native-born     Foreign-born
               Laws                                 (1)              (2)          (3)           (4)              (5)              (6)

                One to Five Years                 0.039**           0.027        0.028         0.030            0.051            -0.104
                                                  (0.017)          (0.031)      (0.031)       (0.037)          (0.033)          (0.072)
                Six Years                         0.045**           0.028        0.027         0.038           0.095**         -0.184**
                                                  (0.021)          (0.036)      (0.035)       (0.042)          (0.038)          (0.073)
                Seven Years                      0.094***         0.104***     0.106***      0.127***         0.160***           -0.074
                                                  (0.022)          (0.039)      (0.038)       (0.044)          (0.042)          (0.075)
                Eight Years                      0.123***         0.122***     0.129***      0.141***         0.182***           -0.047
                                                  (0.024)          (0.041)      (0.040)       (0.046)          (0.043)          (0.078)
                Nine or More Years                0.246**         0.255***     0.288***      0.261***         0.377***            0.045
                                                  (0.029)          (0.047)      (0.047)       (0.052)          (0.051)          (0.088)

                Foreign-born Parent                                            -0.602***     -0.547***
                                                                                 (0.019)       (0.161)

                One to Five Years                                                              -0.013
                                                                                              (0.191)
                Six Years                                                                      -0.073
                                                                                              (0.166)
                Seven Years                                                                    -0.094
                                                                                              (0.163)
                Eight Years                                                                    -0.065
                                                                                              (0.163)
                Nine or More Years                                                              0.074
                                                                                              (0.163)

               N                                 18,887,147          905,796       905,796       905,796        674,139        231,657
Notes: Each column in the table presents the results of a separate regression using individuals who were born between 1885 and 1912, inclusive. See notes to
Table 5.




                                                                                                                                                         47
         Appendix Table 7: Impact of Education on Earnings – 25% Working Men Sample

                                                     2SLS            2SLS             1st Stage         1st Stage
                                        OLS        Continuous      Categorical       Continuous        Categorical

  Laws                                   (1)            (2)            (3)                (4)              (5)

   Years of Schooling                 0.082***       0.154***      0.093***
                                       (0.001)        (0.028)       (0.017)

  Continuous Laws (Years)
   Required Schooling                                                                 0.024***
                                                                                       (0.004)

  Categorical Laws
   Required Schooling:
   One to Five Years                                                                                     0.040**
                                                                                                         (0.019)
   Six Years                                                                                             0.063**
                                                                                                         (0.022)
   Seven Years                                                                                          0.120***
                                                                                                         (0.024)
   Eight Years                                                                                          0.155***
                                                                                                         (0.027)
   Nine or More Years                                                                                   0.290***
                                                                                                         (0.031)

   First Stage F-Stat                                  39.0           26.8



Notes: Each column in the table presents the results of a separate regression using individuals who were born
between 1885 and 1912, inclusive. Results are shown for a random 25% sample of the working men sample: all
white men who reported positive earnings and positive weeks worked in 1939. This sample, which is the same
sample that is used in the quantile IV estimates shown in Figure 5 and Panel A of Appendix Table 4, contains
3,306,178 observations. Each regression includes state of birth and region by year of birth fixed effects. Standard
errors are clustered by state and year. Significance is represented by *** at the .01 level, ** at the .05 level, and * at
the .10 level.




                                                                                                                      48
                  Appendix Table 8: Impact of Schooling on Employment Outcomes

                                                           Panel A: OLS Estimates
                                              Employed                        Unemployed           Not in the
    Outcome:                    Employed      Excl. WPA      Unemployed         Incl. WPA         Labor Force

    Mean of Dep Var.:              0.886         0.842           0.063               0.109           0.055

    Laws                            (1)            (2)            (3)                 (4)              (5)

     Years of Schooling          0.010***      0.017***        -0.006***          -0.013***        -0.005***
                                 (0.0001)      (0.0001)         (0.0001)           (0.0001)         (0.0001)

                                                           Panel B: 2SLS Estimates
                                              Employed                         Unemployed          Not in the
    Outcome:                    Employed      Excl. WPA      Unemployed         Incl. WPA         Labor Force

    Laws                            (1)            (2)            (3)                 (4)              (5)

     Years of Schooling          0.012***      0.027***        -0.013***          -0.028***          -0.0001
                                  (0.004)       (0.005)          (0.003)            (0.005)         (0.0024)


Notes: Each estimate in the table presents the results of a separate regression using the sample of all white men who
were born between 1885 and 1912, inclusive. We present OLS estimates in Panel A and 2SLS estimates in Panel B
using the categorical instruments. The outcome in column (1) is an indicator for being employed during the week of
March 24-30, 1940. The outcome in column (2) is an indicator for being employed but excluding those on work
relief from counting as employed (Goldin and Margo 1992). The outcome in column (3) is an indicator for being
unemployed but only uses those men who are participating in the labor force in the analysis. The analysis in column
(4) is the same as that found in column (3) except those on work relief are counted as being unemployed (Goldin and
Margo 1992). The outcome in column (5) is an indicator for being out of the labor force. The sample of 18,887,147
observations in columns (1), (2), and (5) includes all white men in the relevant birth cohorts. The sample of
17,853,124 observations in columns (3) and (4) includes those who are in the labor force. The corresponding first
stage estimates for columns (1), (2), and (5) are shown in column (2) of Table 2 and the corresponding first stage F-
statistic is 18.3. The first stage estimates and F-statistic for the sample of men in the labor force used in columns
(3) and (4) is quite similar to the results combining men both in and out of the labor force. Each regression includes
state of birth and region by year of birth fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered by state and year. Significance
is represented by *** at the .01 level, ** at the .05 level, and * at the .10 level.




                                                                                                                   49
          Data Appendix to Laws, Educational Outcomes, and Returns to Schooling:
                 Evidence from the Early Twentieth Century United States
                   Karen Clay, Jeff Lingwall, and Melvin Stephens Jr.

State-Level Compulsory Attendance, Child Labor, and Continuation Schooling Laws

The attached STATA file contains the compulsory attendance, child labor, and
continuation school age limits and exemptions for each state between 1880 and 1930.
This builds on the work of many others, in particular Stephens and Yang (2014) and the
1910-1939 compilation in Goldin and Katz (2007), which expanded work by Angrist and
Acemoglu (2000), Adriana Lleras-Muney, and Stephanie Schmidt. This dataset extends
these previous codings to 1880, but differs in some ways to accommodate additional
characteristics of the laws.
       The dataset has ten variables:

     1.  entryage: The age at which children had to enter school.
     2.  exitage: The age at which all children could stop attending school.
     3.  earlyyrs: The years of completed schooling that allowed an exemption to exitage.
     4.  earlyyrs_condition: The earliest age at which an earlyyrs exemption could be
         used. For example, the unconditional exit age might be 16 (exitage = 16) with the
         ability to drop out after six years of schooling (earlyyrs = 6), provided the child
         was at least 14 (earlyyrs_condition = 14).
     5. workage: The age at which employed children could stop attending school.
     6. workyrs: The schooling required for a workage exception to apply.
     7. contage: The age working children stopped attending continuation school. 21
     8. contyrs: The schooling required to be exempt from continuation school.
     9. reference_agelimit: A reference to the state session law or statutory compilation
         in which the law is found. (With limited exceptions, the dates and age limits are
         drawn directly from the state session laws, which are accessible through
         HeinOnline’s historical state law database.) For states with laws prior to 1880,
         this references the source of the age limits existing in 1880.
     10. reference_courseofstudy: A reference indicating the length of a typical primary
         school course when earlyyrs or workyrs required completion of primary school.




21
  States varied in the scope of their continuation schooling laws. Most states with these laws required the
creation of continuation schools, contingent on city size or number of eligible children in the district. A
minority of states in this time period—Connecticut (through 1918 outside large cities), Indiana, and Ohio
(through 1921)—gave districts the option of creating schools and requiring attendance. The attached
STATA file treats both types of law as requiring continuation school attendance.



                                                                                                        50
        Most of the laws had exceptions for poverty, distance from school, or by special
order of a local judge or school board. As with prior codings, we ignore these and other
case-specific exemptions. When a law was optional at the county level, or passed county
by county, we use the date the law either applied statewide or required counties to opt-out
rather than opt-in. Where one age applied to cities and towns and another to the rest of
the state, we use the age limit applicable to the state generally. These are complex laws,
and special cases sometimes required discretionary coding. Details on initial laws in
particular states are given below.

        The variables earlyyrs, workyrs, and contyrs are coded as “99” when the laws
required literacy rather than a specific number of years of school. When these variables
used “completion of primary school” or similar language as the requirement, we code the
law as “99X”, where X is the length of a typical primary school course in the state.

State-Specific Notes on Initial Laws

Alabama We code the initial attendance law as beginning in 1917, because the 1915 statute specified the
law would take effect “on and after the first day of October, 1917.”22

Arizona An early attendance law was passed in 1875, but was repealed in 1883.23 The conventional date of
the first law is 1899, when the law was re-implemented.24

Arkansas We code the initial law as beginning in 1917, because an earlier 1909 law did not apply to 44 of
75 counties (including Pulaski County, the most populous county and location of Little Rock).25

Florida A 1915 law was an “opt in” law, which no county implemented prior to 1918.26

Georgia We code the initial attendance law as beginning in 1917, because the 1916 statute specified “the
provisions of this Act shall become operative on the first day of January in the year nineteen hundred and
seventeen.”27

Louisiana A 1910 law applied only to the Parish of Orleans.28 In 1916 compulsory attendance was applied
statewide.29




22
   1915 Ala. Acts 534.
23
   1883 Ariz. Sess. Laws 50; 1875 Ariz. Sess. Laws 40.
24
   1899 Ariz. Sess. Laws 14.
25
   1909 Ark. Acts 706.
26
   1915 Fla. Laws 61; HARRY GARDEN CUTLER, 1 HISTORY OF FLORIDA, PAST AND PRESENT, HISTORICAL
AND BIOGRAPHICAL 180 (1923) (noting the first county to adopt the law in 1918, and that by 1919 the law
applied statewide).
27
   1916 Ga. Laws 103.
28
   1910 La. Acts 366.
29
   1916 La. Acts 59.



                                                                                                       51
Mississippi A 1918 law was an “opt in” law, which was not effective.30 The 1920 law was an “opt out”
law, and as of 1921 only four counties had opted out.31

North Carolina North Carolina passed compulsory attendance for a few select counties in 1901 and 1903,
and in 1907 an “opt in” law was passed that applied across the state.32 As of 1910 the state reported that
“[o]nly a few districts have as yet availed themselves of this law and adopted compulsory attendance.”33
The 1913 law required attendance statewide.34

Tennessee In 1905, the state began to pass laws county by county through a tortured population-based
method based on the 1900 census.35 In 1913 the law applied statewide.36

Texas An early compulsory attendance law was passed during the 1870s, but was soon repealed.37
Compulsory attendance was revisited in 1915, with a law that went into effect in 1916.38

Virginia A 1908 law was “opt in,” which was not widely adopted.39 The law was applied statewide in
1918.40

Washington An initial statewide attendance law was passed in 1871 and repealed in 1873.41 A second
attendance law was passed in 1877, which did not apply to small localities.42 In 1886 the law applied
statewide.43



Calculating Years of Required Schooling

The required years of attendance for each birth cohort in each state can be calculated by
iterating through the dataset. In each year of a child’s life, this calculation asks whether


30
   1918 Miss. Laws 312; BIENNIAL REPORT AND RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE STATE SUPERINTENDENT OF
PUBLIC EDUCATION TO THE LEGISLATURE OF MISSISSIPPI FOR THE SCHOLASTIC YEARS 1919-1920 AND
1920-1921, at 11 (1921) (comparing 1920 to 1918).
31
   Id.
32
   1907 N.C. Sess. Laws 1284; 1903 N.C. Sess. Laws 1011, 1030, 1036, 1152; 1901 N.C. Sess. Laws 988.
33
    BIENNIAL REPORT OF THE SUPERINTENDENT OF PUBLIC INSTRUCTION OF NORTH CAROLINA TO
GOVERNOR W.W. KITCHIN FOR THE SCHOLASTIC YEARS 1908-1909 AND 1909-1910, at 44 (1910).
34
   1913 N.C. Sess. Laws 267.
35
   E.g., 1905 Tenn. Pub. Acts 1040 (implementing compulsory attendance in, e.g., “counties of this State
having a population of no less than ... 12,890 ... and not more than ... 12,900, according to the Federal
Census of 1900 ....”).
36
   1913 Tenn. Pub. Acts 19.
37
   1876 Tex. Gen. Laws 199; 1870 Tex. Gen. Laws 113.
38
   1915 Tex. Gen. Laws 92 (noting the law would take require attendance “beginning September 1, 1916”).
39
   1908 Va. Acts 640; ANNUAL REPORT OF THE SUPERINTENDENT OF PUBLIC INSTRUCTION OF THE
COMMONWEALTH OF VIRGINIA WITH ACCOMPANYING DOCUMENTS: SCHOOL YEAR 1916-1917, at 57-118
(1918) (noting county-level implementation of compulsory attendance).
40
   1918 Va. Acts 752.
41
   1873 Wash. Sess. Laws 419; 1871 Wash. Sess. Laws 29.
42
   1877 Wash. Sess. Laws 278 (applying to “any city, town or village containing more than four hundred
inhabitants”).
43
   1886 Wash. Sess. Laws 27.



                                                                                                       52
attendance was required based on the laws in that year and the cohort’s accumulated
years of required attendance. Specifically, at each age 5 to 17 of a child’s life, we ask

       (1) Is the child’s age between the entryage and the exitage in effect in that year?
       (2) Does an exemption to exitage apply?
               a. Has the child already been required to attend for sufficient years to
                   qualify for an earlyyrs exemption? Or,
               b. Is the child’s age equal to or greater than the workage? If so, has the
                   child been required to attend for sufficient years to satisfy the workyrs
                   requirement?
       (3) If a workage exemption applies, is the child’s age less than contage? If so, has
           the child completed sufficient schooling to be exempt from continuation
           school if a contyrs exemption exists?

        For example, Alabama passed its first compulsory attendance law in 1915, which
went into effect in 1917. The law required attendance between ages 8 and 16 (entryage =
8 and exitage = 16). In 1919, the state added an exception for children who had
completed primary school (which took six years of schooling), so long as the child was at
least 14 (earlyyrs = 996 and earlyyrs_condition = 14). Children could also leave school to
work at age 14, so long as they had a fourth-grade education (workage = 14 and workyrs
= 4). The Table below highlights each year the 1902-1909 birth cohorts are coded as
required to attend school. It also shows the total years of required schooling for a child in
each cohort.




                                                                                          53
Data Appendix Table 1: Attendance Requirements for the 1902-1909 Alabama Birth Cohorts


                                                                  Birth Cohort
                                   1902      1903      1904       1905      1906       1907      1908          1909


 Calendar Year                                             Cohort’s Age in Each Year
 1916                                14         13        12        11           10        9         8            7
 1917 (first law in effect)          15         14        13        12           11      10          9            8
 1918                                16         15        14        13           12      11         10            9
                                                              1
 1919 (law modified)                 17         16       15         14           13      12         11           10
 1920                                18         17        16        15           14      13         12           11
                                                                                             2
 1921                                19         18        17        16           15     14          13           12
 1922                                20         19        18        17           16      15         14           13
                                                                                                                     3
 1923                                21         20        19        18           17      16         15          14

 Years Required
 Attendance:                          1          2         3          4           4        4         5            6


Notes: A child is coded as required to attend school in each highlighted cell. The bottom row shows the
total years of required attendance for each birth cohort.

 1
   A child born in 1904 is coded as required to attend school in 1919, at age 15, despite the age 14 workage
 exemption, because they had not been required to complete the workyrs four years of schooling. Similarly,
 a child born in 1905 is coded as required to attend at ages 14 and 15, and a child born in 1906 is coded as
 required to attend at age 14.
 2
   A child born in 1907 was required to attend for four years (1917-1920), and so would qualify for the
 workage exemption at age 14, in 1921.
 3
   A child born in 1909 was required to attend six years of school (1917-1922, at ages 8-13). At age 14, the
 child would be exempt under the six years earlyyrs exemption. The child would also be exempt under the
 workage exemption, because they had more than four years of required attendance.




                                                                                                         54
                            Example Compulsory Attendance Laws

Oregon’s 1889 compulsory attendance law44

Section 1. Every parent, guardian, or other person in this State having control or charge of a child
or children between the ages of eight and fourteen years shall be required to send such child or
children to a public school for a period of at least twelve weeks in each school year, of which at
least eight weeks’ school be consecutive, unless the bodily or mental condition of such child or
children has been such as to prevent his or her or their attendance at school or application to
study for the period required, or unless such child or children are taught in a private school or at
home in such branches as are usually taught in primary schools, or have already acquired the
ordinary branches of learning taught in the public schools; provided, in case a public school shall
not be taught for the period of twelve weeks, or any part thereof during the year, within two
miles by the nearest traveled road of the residence of any person within the school district, he or
she shall not be liable to the provisions of this Act.

Section 2. Any parent, guardian or other person having control or charge of any child or children
failing to comply with the provisions of this Act shall be liable to a fine of not less than five
dollars nor more than twenty-five dollars for the first offense, nor less than twenty-five dollars
nor more than fifty dollars for the second and each subsequent offense, besides the cost of the
prosecution.

Section 3. It shall be the duty of the directors and clerk of each school district to make diligent
effort to see that this law is enforced in their respective districts.

Section 4. Justices of the peace shall have concurrent jurisdiction with the circuit court in all
prosecutions under this Act.

Section 5. Inasmuch as many children are now permitted to remain away from school without
cause and to their great detriment, this law shall take effect and be in force from and after its
approval by the Governor.

Approved February 25, 1889.

Alabama’s 1919 compulsory attendance law45

ARTICLE 15. SCHOOL ATTENDANCE.

Section 1. Every parent, guardian or other person in the State of Alabama having control or
charge of any child or children between the ages of eight (8) and sixteen (16) years shall be
required to send such child or children to a public school or to a private, denominational or
parochial school, taught by a competent instructor, and such child or children shall attend school

44
     1889 Ore. Acts 111.
45
     1919 Ala. Acts 615.



                                                                                                      55
for the entire length of the school term in every scholastic year, provided that the county or city
board of education, as the case may be, shall have power to reduce the period of compulsory
attendance to not less than one hundred (100) days for any individual school, unless the school
term for any school is less than one hundred (100) days, in which event the period of compulsory
attendance shall be for the entire school term. The period of compulsory attendance shall
commence at the beginning of the school, unless otherwise ordered by the county or city board
of education, as the case may be, with the approval of the State board of education.

Section 2. Any child or children fourteen (14) years of age and upward, who have completed the
elementary course of study or the equivalent thereof, or who are legally and regularly employed
under the provisions of the Child Labor Law,46 shall be exempt from the provisions of this
Article, and in case there be no public school within two and one-half miles by the nearest
traveled road of any person between the ages of eight (8) and sixteen (16) years, he or she shall
not be subject to the provisions of this article, unless public transportation within reason- able
walking distance is provided.

Section 3. Any child or children who are physically or mentally incapacitated for the work of the
school are exempt from this article, but the school authorities shall have the right, and they are
hereby authorized, when exemptions under the provisions of this article are claimed by any
parent, guardian or other person having control of any child or children, to require from a
practicing physician a properly attested certificate, that such child or children should not be
required to attend school for some physical or mental condition which renders attendance
impracticable or inexpedient.

Sections 4-8 [describes duties of attendance officers]

Section 9. It shall be unlawful for any parent, guardian, or other person having control of a child
to fail to send such child to school as required by the provisions of this article, and any parent,
guardian, or other person violating the provisions of this article, shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor, and shall be fined in a sum of not less than five ($5) dollars, nor more than fifty
($50.) dollars, and may be committed to the county jail for a term of not to exceed thirty (30)
days. All fines collected shall be paid into the county or city treasury, as the case may be, and it
is hereby made the duty of all city attorneys in their respective cities, and of all county and
circuit solicitors for the respective counties and districts to prosecute all complaints filed and
actions brought under this article.

Sections 10-15 [describes treatment of truants, state reporting, and school vacations]




46
   The child labor law of 1919 provided for legal employment at age 14 so long as the child had a fourth-grade
education. 1919 Ala. Acts 867.



                                                                                                           56
