NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

IMMIGRANTS AND FIRMS' OUTCOMES:
EVIDENCE FROM FRANCE
Cristina Mitaritonna
Gianluca Orefice
Giovanni Peri
Working Paper 22852
http://www.nber.org/papers/w22852

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 2016

We are grateful to participants of CEPII seminar 2012, CEPII-PSE workshop 2013, ETSG
Munich 2014, OECD conference 2014 and OSE workshop 2015. We thank Matthieu Crozet,
Lionel Fontagne, Thierry Mayer, Anna Maria Mayda, Farid Toubal and two anonymous referees
for helpful comments. Customs data and DADS database were acceded at CEPII. This work
benefited from a State aid managed by the National Agency for Research, through the program
Investissements devenir with the following reference: ANR-10-EQPX-17 (Remote Access to data
CASD). The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2016 by Cristina Mitaritonna, Gianluca Orefice, and Giovanni Peri. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Immigrants and Firms' Outcomes: Evidence from France
Cristina Mitaritonna, Gianluca Orefice, and Giovanni Peri
NBER Working Paper No. 22852
November 2016
JEL No. E25,F22,J15,J61
ABSTRACT
In this paper we analyze the impact of an increase in the local supply of immigrants on firms’
outcomes, allowing for heterogeneous effects across firms according to their initial productivity.
Using micro-level data on French manufacturing firms spanning the period 1995-2005, we show
that a supply-driven increase in the share of foreign-born workers in a French department (a small
geographic area) increased the total factor productivity of firms in that department. Immigrants
were prevalently highly educated and this effect is consistent with a positive complementarity and
spillover effects from their skills. We also find this effect to be significantly stronger for firms
with low initial productivity and small size. The positive productivity effect of immigrants was
also associated with faster growth of capital, larger exports and higher wages for natives. Highly
skilled natives were pushed towards firms that did not hire too many immigrants spreading
positive productivity effects to those firms too. Because of stronger effects on smaller and
initially less productive firms, the aggregate effects of immigrants at the department level on
average productivity and employment was small.
Cristina Mitaritonna
CEPII
113 Rue de Grenelle
Paris, 75007
France
cristina.mitaritonna@cepii.fr

Giovanni Peri
Department of Economics
University of California, Davis
One Shields Avenue
Davis, CA 95616
and NBER
gperi@ucdavis.edu

Gianluca Orefice
CEPII
113 rue de Grenelle
75007 Paris, France
gianluca.orefice@cepii.fr

A online appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w22852

1

Introduction

This paper estimates the effect of immigration on firm-level productivity, capital investments, employment and
exports using French firm data in the period 1995-2005. We also analyze how these effects where different across
firms depending on their initial productivity and size and how immigration affected employment flows of natives
across firms and firm creation and destruction. Recent papers have found indirect evidence that immigrants
benefits firms’ productivity. Specialization of natives and immigrants in different and complementary tasks (Peri
and Sparber, 2009) may increase production efficiency and labor productivity at the local level. Highly skilled
foreign individuals, especially those in science and technology fields, contribute to innovation and increase the
productivity of a region or a city (Kerr and Lincoln, 2010, Peri et al, 2015). There is, however, scant direct
evidence of the impact of immigrants on firms’ productivity and employment due to limited data availability
and identification issues at the firm level. When analyzing the impact of immigration at the firm level, one has
to account for the heterogeneity that drives differences in firm-specific responses to a local change in immigrant
supply. Thus, simply analyzing the correlation between immigrant workers’ share and performance of firms is
likely to be uninformative of the effect of the first on the second.
New data on French manufacturing firms and an identification strategy based on country-of-origin-driven
variation in the supply of immigrants across geographic areas (French Departments) allow us to focus on firmspecific effects of an increase in immigrants. In particular, with our data, we can construct multiple outcomes
at the firm level in a panel of individual firms that can be followed over time.1 Merging them with Census data
we can also construct an instrument for the local change in supply of immigrants using a shift-share method
based on the pre-existing immigrants’ location at the level of a French ”départments” (local areas) interacted
with changes in the aggregate inflows of immigrants by country of origin. The increased immigration from the
European Union during the decade, driven by introduction of free mobility in 1992, provide an interesting event
to study. Our identification method is not new, as it builds on a traditional instrument proposed by Altonji and
Card (1991) and then Card (2001). However, the increased immigrant flows post 1992 and validity checks that
we perform to ensure that such an instrument is uncorrelated with pre-1992 economic conditions and trends
across French Departments, put our application on reasonably solid ground. We also control for several timevarying, firm-level characteristics, and for firm fixed effects to reduce the concerns of lingering endogeneity and
omitted variable bias.
Firm-level data allow us to analyze the effect of immigration in the context of firms with heterogeneous
initial productivity. We ask the crucial question whether immigration has a different impact on the initially
more productive or on the less productive firms. Hence, we estimate a response to immigrants that can depend
1 Because of data unavailability for firms’ TFP and value added in 1995, our estimation sample is restricted to the period
1996-2005. See the data section for more details.

2

on firm’s initial productivity (which is highly correlated with its size and probability of exporting). If the
inflow of immigrants helps firms that are initially less productive, it can also help native workers in those firms,
preventing job destruction and encouraging growth. This would appear as aggregate complementarity with
native workers (as in Ottaviano and Peri, 2012). In this case immigration would be beneficial in particular for
firms lagging behind in the productivity distribution. The importance of studying the heterogeneous effect of
immigration across firms’ characteristics is supported by firm-level stylized facts showing that not all French
firms employed immigrant workers as of 1995, and that the share of immigrants hired exhibits a large variation
across firms and is correlated with the variation of other firm characteristics (see section 3.2).
We also document that, based on aggregate statistics relative to their occupational distribution, the net
immigrant inflow in France during the 1995-2005 period was skill-intensive (see section 3.2). The employment
of foreign-born workers increased significantly more in occupations with high cognitive and analytical content
than in those with high manual content. The share of immigrants with a high school diploma (or lower)
decreased over that period from 74% in 1995 to 58% in 2005, while those with more than a 3-year university
diploma grew in percentage from 9% to 14% of the foreign population. Moreover, from Labor Force Survey
data we know that the share of immigrants in the group of tertiary educated increased from 5.7% to 7.1% over
the period 1995-2005. Hence their net inflow had a relatively larger share of college educated than in the native
population. As mentioned above, the increase in immigrants was mainly driven by EU citizens and a large share
of those was college educated. The findings of this paper should be interpreted as documenting the effects of
high-skilled immigrants on outcomes of manufacturing firms.
This paper introduces two main novelties with respect to the existing literature. First, we focus on firm-level
outcomes and we only exploit within-firm variation when assessing the impact of a variation of immigration
supply in the local labor market on these outcomes. Second, we allow heterogeneity in initial firm productivity
to affect the response to immigration and we interact the local supply change in immigrants with the initial
productivity of firms to estimate the consequences of such heterogeneity (we also consider firms’ size and
immigrant share as proxies for initial productivity).
We first show that a supply-driven increase in immigrants in an area pushes the average firm to hire immigrants. This is quite reasonable as larger supply of immigrants in the area will drive larger employment of
immigrants. Interestingly, such an effect is stronger for the subset of firms that initially had low productivity
levels. These firms were more likely to start hiring immigrants and hired more of them in the considered period.
Then we show that firms with low initial productivity also experienced the largest positive productivity effects
associated with immigration in the area. We also explore whether other outcomes, related to the productivity of
firms, such as exit, domestic market share, export and capital investments were affected by hiring immigrants.
We identify significant positive effects on exports and on the level of capital used by firms. Even for these

3

outcomes, in most cases the strongest effect is for firms starting with low levels of productivity and low share
of immigrants. These additional results are consistent with the idea that the productivity gains may be in part
driven by skill-capital and skill-technology complementarities within the firm that hired immigrants. We find no
evidence of a decline in native wages as a consequence of hiring immigrants. Rather, as a consequence of higher
productivity, native wages increased in the department. Interestingly, the composition of native workers across
firms also changed as a consequence of immigration. Highly educated native workers were pushed into firms
hiring fewer immigrants and contributed to increasing their wages. New immigrants had a small but significant
effect in reducing firm exit and seem to increase the size of small firms relative to large firms. These differential
effects and reallocation across firms imply a small aggregate effect at the department level as immigration spurs
convergence of productivity and of the size of firms by stimulating small, initially less productive firms more than
larger and initially more productive ones. Differently from a homogeneous effect on all firms, the heterogeneous
firm-level effects aggregate to a modest regional effect.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 puts this paper in the context of the existing literature
and introduces a simple framework to discuss the channels explored in the empirical analysis. Section 3 presents
the data and stylized facts. Section 4 discusses the empirical specifications and the identification strategy and its
limitations. Section 5 describes and comments on the estimates of the effects of immigration on firm outcomes.
Section 6 concludes the paper.

2

Framework and Literature Review

There is an abundance of studies on the effect of immigrants on the labor market outcomes of natives. These
studies analyze immigration at the national level (e.g. Borjas 2003, Borjas and Katz 2007, Ottaviano and
Peri 2012) or at the local level (such as Card 2001, 2009), and they use data from several different countries2
(see also the literature reviews by Longhi et al (2005), Kerr and Kerr (2011) and Lewis and Peri (2015)).
Much less is known, however, about the firm-level effects of immigrants or about the inter-firm adjustments
triggered by immigrants. This is in part due to the easier availability of labor market data (from census
and population surveys) rather than firm-level data including information on the place of birth of individuals.
Recently, aggregate studies suggest interesting mechanisms through which immigrants may be absorbed within
firms, such as adjusting the task specialization of workers (Peri and Sparber 2009; Ottaviano, Peri and Wright
2013), modifying the adopted production techniques (e.g. Lewis 2011), promoting accumulation of physical
2 Some countries such as Germany (De New and Zimmermann 1994) and the UK (Dustmann, Fabbri and Preston 2005) are
particularly well studied. Recent papers study the labor market effect of migration by using individual level data from countryspecific surveys. Edo and Toubal (2015), using individual level data for France, find that immigration decreases the wage of highly
educated native workers by about 1% and contributes to an increase in the wage of low-skilled workers by 0.5%. Cohen-Goldner
and Paserman (2011), using individual-level data for Israel, find a 10% increase in the share of immigrants decreases native wages
by 1 to 3% in the short run, and has no effect in the medium-long run.

4

capital or expanding the number of establishments (Olney, 2013).
Only very recent studies have used firm-level data to study the effects of immigration. Malchow-Moller,
Munch and Skaksen (2012), using data from Danish firms, find that immigrants substitute for natives within
individual firms. Martins, Piracha and Varejao (2012) using Portuguese data find no effect of immigrants on
the employment of natives at the firm level. These studies focus only on the wage and employment effects of
immigrants and hence they extend the classical labor approach to firm-level data. Hatzigeorgiou and Lodefalk
(2016) and Hiller (2013) consider more specific firm-level outcomes. They analyze the effect of immigrants on
firm-level exports, relying on a reduced-form empirical specification that correlates firm-immigrants and firm
exports. Ghosh et al. (2014) and Doran et al. (2014) study the effect of a reduction in the annual H-1B
cap (skilled immigrant visas) in the US on firm-specific outcomes (i.e. innovation, productivity, revenues and
profits). The first paper analyzes the impact of restricting the H-1B number on the outcome of all large US
firms, the second uses a smaller sample but exploits the randomness of a lottery allocation of . Ghosh et al.
(2014) find a significant reduction in size and productivity for firms that heavily depend on foreign H-1B workers
following the enforcement of a lower H-1B quota. The second paper does not find any impact on innovation
at the firm level from hiring fewer H-1B employees. Let us emphasize that an important difference between
our study and those using visa growth in the US is the free mobility of EU workers that constituted the bulk
of new foreign-born individuals in our sample. In the US, firms previously hiring workers are at a relative
advantage for hiring more, when the quota increases, as they are familiar with laws and procedures. In France,
EU citizens were easily available to firms, when barrier to mobility were removed. This fact may contribute to
the explanation of the finding that less productive firms hired more immigrants during the considered period
and it is an important difference between our analysis and the research on visa workers.
Our analysis is focused on the impact of immigrants on firm-specific outcomes. We aim at first quantifying
the effect of an exogenous increase of immigrants in a labor market on firms’ productivity (and on other
productivity related firms’ outcomes). Then we also study whether the effect of immigration is heterogeneous
across firms with different levels of initial productivity (or initial size). Finally we analyze other margins of
adjustment, such as firm exit and native mobility and selection across firms in response to local immigration.
While the change in immigrant workers’ availability pertains to the local labor market, different firms may
respond differently to it and important outcomes such as productivity, capital investments and exports may be
affected. Recent studies (e.g. Peri 2011, Peri and Sparber 2009) suggest immigrants are often concentrated in
specific jobs and in specific production tasks. Different firms may be subject to productivity gains according
to their exposure to these jobs and their internal organization of productive tasks. More recently, Peri et al.
(2015) have emphasized that highly skilled immigrants in STEM jobs may increase productivity of US cities,
especially for college educated workers. Brunow et al (2015) began to analyze the correlation between cultural

5

diversity of workplace (as diversification of foreign employees in the firm) and firm productivity. A recent paper
by Haas and Lucht (2013) uses a general equilibrium model with heterogeneous firms (as in Melitz 2003) where
migrants imperfectly substitute for native workers and firms differ in their productivity levels and it shows, via
simulation results, that firm productivity increases with the immigrants’ share in the firm.
To capture the variety of channels through which immigration may affect productivity and natives’ wages in
heterogeneous firms we consider the production function of a generic firm i within a labor market. We indicate
with s =

F
N +F

the share of foreign-born workers in that labor market, where N and F indicate the employment

of natives and foreign-born respectively. Firms can adjust their technology and efficiency responding to the
native/immigrant composition of the labor force so that firm-specific productivity may depend on (s), via
externalities. The presence of more immigrants may also increase the number of foreign workers hired by the
firm (fi ), and it may also generate productivity gains (through specialization, complementarity and optimal
task allocation) that may vary across firms. We allow for immigrants and natives to be imperfect substitutes
in a CES production function (as in Ottaviano and Peri 2012, or Docquier, Ozden and Peri 2014) and we allow
firms to benefit from migrant’s externalities within the region. We represent this using the following production
function for firm i :

σ−1
σ

Yi = Ai (s)(βfi

σ−1

σ

+ (1 − β)ni σ ) σ−1

(1)

In equation (1) we are assuming that hired immigrants fi and natives ni are combined into output (Yi ) with an
elasticity of substitution equal to σ > 1 so that the productivity of native workers may depend on immigrants
through complementarities. Immigrants have a specific productivity β that may differ from that of natives
(1 − β). The productivity of the firm also depends, however, on the proportion of immigrants in the local labor
market, s, through skill spillovers and externalities. While the CES component allows a positive wage and labor
productivity effect of immigrants on natives within the firm through complementarity, the productivity effect
may extend to the whole area either because of skill externalities (Docquier et al, 2014), technology adoption
(Lewis 2013) or efficiency reasons (Peri 2012) and it may vary across firms (hence the subscript i). Dividing
equation (1) by (ni + fi ) implies that output per worker, yi , and hence labor productivity of firm i, depends on
the share of immigrants in the firm, s

yi =

i

and in the region s as follows:

σ−1
σ−1
σ
Yi
= Ai (s)(βsi σ + (1 − β)(1 − si ) σ ) σ−1
ni + f i

(2)

The first term, Ai (s) captures the effect of the share of immigrants, through potential externalities, on the
productivity of firm i. The intensity of this externality can be different across firms. The second term, in
brackets, captures the within-firm complementarity effect between immigrants and natives. It impacts the

6

average labor productivity of a firm and it has an internal maximum (between 0 and 1) which is a value of si
corresponding to the “optimal” combination of immigrants and natives. This optimum is larger the larger is β,
the relative productivity of immigrants. For equal productivity of immigrants and natives, (β = 0.5) the second
term is maximized at si = 0.5. Hence, for similar productivity of immigrants and natives, an increase in the
share of immigrants in the firm will likely increase labor productivity in a firm through this channel at levels of
si smaller than 0.5 which is the case for most of the considered firms. At higher value of si the contribution of
that term can become negligible or even negative.3
The average productivity effect of immigrants in a local labor market (in our case a French department) will
be the weighted average productivity of each firm, yi , with weights equal to the size of firms in terms of workers
xi =

ni +fi
N +F .

Hence:

y=

X

x i yi =

X

xi (s)yi (s)

(3)

i∈F irms

i∈F irms

The notation above emphasizes that not just the productivity of individual firms, yi but their relative size, xi (s),
can be affected by the percentage of immigrants in the local labor market. Both the productivity and the size
of a firm may vary in response to changes in the local share of immigrants in different ways. Individual firms
hiring more immigrants may benefit from their internal complementarity with natives, or from externalities due
to spillovers effects. Firm creation and destruction (entry and exit) can also be induced by the presence of
immigrants. The reallocation of natives may also affect relative size of firms.
Influential models of international trade (such as Melitz 2003, Bernard et al. 2003) have emphasized that
the opening to international market competition produces a selection of firms and affects the creation and
destruction of those. Opening to trade will affect firms differently depending on their initial productivity. The
local inflow of immigrants can also generate differential productivity effects across firms that may depend on
their initial productivity, specialization and hiring of immigrants. Hence equation (3) allows for possible effects
of immigrants on firm size (and on firm survival) that may vary across the initial distribution of firms.
Our empirical analysis investigates, first, equation (2) at the firm level. In particular, we analyze how a
change in the local share of immigrants over time affects the productivity of firms, allowing different effects
along the initial productivity distribution. In particular, considering the variation over time of a linear version
of equation (2) we can write:

∆yi = yia ∆s + yib ∆si
3 The

(4)
1

σ−1
σ

wage of native workers in firm i is given by the following expression wni = Ai (s)(1−s)− σ (βsi
1
−σ

+(1−β)(1−si )

σ−1
σ

1

) σ−1 .

The extra-term (1 − s)
shows how the complementarity between immigrant and native workers affects native wages positively
and more strongly than average productivity in the firm.

7

In (4) the operator ∆ captures the change over time. The term yia ∆s captures the firm-specific change triggered
by a change in the share of local immigrants, due to externalities and the term yib ∆si captures the change
in productivity in a firm due to increased share of its own immigrant workforce, due to complementarity.
Hence yia and yib are partial derivatives of firm productivity with respect to the immigrant externality and
complementarity effect, respectively. We are interested in analyzing how the effects vary depending on firm’s
initial heterogeneity. What expression (4) makes also clear is that even firms not directly hiring immigrants
may be affected by their inflow in the local economy as their productivity may depend on s through local
externalities, as shown in the first term yia ∆s. To analyze the heterogeneous productivity effects we will use
different measures and proxies of initial productivity levels (initial TFP, initial size, initial share of immigrants)
interacted with the change in local labor markets’ immigrant shares .
The estimated impact of immigrants on individual firm productivity is only part of the total effect immigration can have on average local productivity. Besides affecting the productivity of existing firms increases
in immigration can change their relative size, by pushing labor towards or away from firms that hire more
immigrants. By changing the competition environment it may also affect the creation/destruction of firms and
the selection of natives among them. Hence, decomposing the effect of a change in s on the average local area
productivity expressed by (3), gives the following equation:

∆y =

X

(s)yinew (s) +
xnew
i

i∈∆F irms

X

∆xi (s) ∗ yi (s) +

i∈F irms

X

xi (s) ∗ ∆yi (s)

(5)

i∈F irms

The decomposition emphasizes that there are three potential channels affecting the local productivity effect of
immigrants. Beginning from the third term we will analyze how the change in immigrant share in a labor market
area affects individual firm productivity and how this effect differs across firms (as illustrated by equation 4); this
is the focus of our firm-level analysis which studies productivity effects allowing different forms of heterogeneity.
Then, the first term on the right hand side of equation (5), captures the effect on creation and destruction
of firms (∆F irms) due to an increase in s. Immigration can change the firm landscape by helping new firm
creation or affecting survival of existing firms. We will also analyze in detail the impact of immigrants on
these two margins. Finally the second term in equation (5) captures the effect of immigration in reallocating
workers across existing firms, through changing the relative size of firms, (∆xi ). Depending on whether firms
use technologies that complement immigrant skills more or less intensely, some may grow while others may
shrink in response to immigrants. By capturing the change in relative size of firms this term suggests that
also the selection of native workers (e.g. by skills) across firms may change and we will analyze this source of
heterogeneity and potential spillovers.
The main goal of this paper is identifying an exogenous shock related to the inflow of foreign born workers
and analyzing the average and the differential impact on firm productivity, on firm creation, destruction and
8

on the reallocation of native workers across firms. The framework above acknowledges the existence of several
potential channels through which immigration can impact productivity and hence local employment/wages
within and across firms. We also analyze the impact on size, capital investment and exports that are important
outcomes at the firm level, and are related to their productivity performance. This framework is much richer
than the one used traditionally to analyze the labor market effect of immigrants which constraints many of the
above effects to be zero and only analyzes aggregate impact on employment and wages.

3

Data and stylized facts

3.1

Sources and summary statistics

Let us begin with a description of the data and some important stylized facts. In constructing firm-level variables
we merged several data sources. First, the Declaration Annuelle des Donnetes Sociales (DADS) database consists
of administrative files based on mandatory reports on employees’ earnings and characteristics. DADS data
contain yearly information about the structure of employment for each establishment in France.4 Each single
observation in this dataset corresponds to a unique establishment-year combination. At the establishment
level, DADS provides information on geographic location and industry, as well as the identification number
for the establishment (SIRET) and the parent enterprise (SIREN). In terms of employee characteristics, we
have information on the gender, age, place of birth (native vs. foreigners), total yearly gross and net earnings,
number of hours worked and occupation (both at two-digit CS and four-digit PCS-ESE classification), but not
educational attainment. Individual employees are not linked across years, but establishments are, hence, we can
construct the characteristics of the average employees in a firm (SIREN) for each year.
To construct the variables on firm outcomes we also use two additional data sources that cover the whole
manufacturing sector. The trade variables used are from the Custom dataset, which provides records of all the
French firms exporting goods during the 1995-2005 period. Exports – quantified in tons and valued in Euros
– are available by firm, year, product (identified by an 8 digit code corresponding to the NC8 nomenclature)
and the country of destination.5 The other source we use is the Annual Business survey (EAE). It gives us
balance-sheet data information (e.g. value added, sales, value of the assets included in the capital stock, use of
intermediate goods) necessary to compute domestic market share, capital and total factor productivity. EAE
data are available for firms with more than 20 employees over the period 1995-2007. Matching all these sources
together, using the SIREN identification number, we obtain an unbalanced panel dataset of firms over the 19954 This database includes different units organized by year and region (12 years, 24 regions) which implies 288 separate databases
with more than 50 million observations per year were merged.
5 For the number of products exported one needs to account for the fact that the product nomenclature changes over time during
the period considered. To avoid the problem of mistaking a change in code for a change in product we harmonized the product
nomenclature in the dataset, expressing all export and imports at the HS6 1996 revision.

9

2005 period.6 However, some of the variables needed to compute the TFP measure have missing information
in 1995; for this reason our estimation sample in tables 5-12 (and A3-A9) is restricted to the period 1996-2005.
See appendix section A1 for further details on data coverage. Finally, the data about the immigrant and native
populations in each department each year are from (department-year) aggregation of DADS individual data.
Thus, we obtain the total number of immigrant and native workers in the department in year t. The share of
immigrants across departments in 1990 (used to build our instrument) come from INSEE Population Census.
The summary statistics of the outcome variables and of the share of foreign-born at the firm level are reported
in Table 1.

3.2

Immigrants Skills and Firm heterogeneity

During the 1995-2005 period, the net inflow of immigrants in France was highly skilled and unevenly distributed
across departments. We do not have information on the education of workers in the DADS data, so in order to characterize the skill content of French immigration in the 1995-2005 we rely on the complexity and
communication-intensity of the tasks performed by workers (we follow Peri and Sparber (2009) and focus on
the dichotomy between communication and manual tasks to classify jobs along the communication-intensity
spectrum). To do so we combine measures from the O*NET database that associate the intensity of several
skills to each occupation in the Standard Occupational Classification (SOC) - cross-walking this classification
with the occupational structure provided by the DADS.7 First, table 2 shows that immigrant inflow between
1995 and 2005 was much larger among the high-complexity than the low-complexity group of occupations.
The table shows the top 10 occupations by complexity index increased the percentage of immigrants in total
hours worked by 9.7 percentage points, while the share of hours worked by immigrants among low complexity
occupations increased only 2.6 percentage points (p.p.). Similarly, distinguishing production (blue collar) and
non-production (white collar) manufacturing workers, the first group’s share of immigrants increased by only 2.5
p.p. during the 1995-2005 period, while the second group increased by 9.3 p.p. Figure 1 shows the percentage
composition of immigrants in France (from the IEB dataset) from 1980 to 2010 by schooling degree. The largest
group is primary-educated immigrants, but their share has been declining fast, especially over the past 15 years.
Immigration of college-educated people, however, has been increasing rapidly (the top share in the bar chart).
Finally, over the 1995-2005 period, the share of immigrants with a high school diploma (or lower) decreased from
74% in 1995 to 58% in 2005. The share of immigrants with at least a three-year university diploma went from
6 A standard concern in firm-level (unbalanced) panels is we observe only surviving firms. In our framework, the arrival of new
immigrants in the department might change the toughness of competition among firms in the same area, implying a survivor bias
in our estimation. To check for this potential bias, we re-estimate all our regressions on a balanced dataset including firms which
are present over the entire period. Results do not change. As a sample of this robustness check, in table A6 we show results on
TFP using a balanced database.
7 By merging both into the 1988 International Standard Classification of Occupations, ISCO-88.

10

9% in 1995 to 14% in 20058 . Using Labor Force Survey data we could also compute the share of immigrants
(over total population) by education attainment. The share of immigrants in the group of tertiary educated
population increased from 5.7% to 7.1% over the period 1995-2005. Differently, the share of immigrants in the
group of unskilled population (with less than 3-year university diploma) decreased by 1 percentage point (from
6.7% to 5.6%). Overall, it is fair to characterize the net flow of immigrants into French manufacturing during
the 1995-2005 period as skill-intensive.
A second interesting feature of the inflow of immigrants in France is their very uneven cross-regional distribution. First, the considered period is one of a significant increase in the foreign-born population in France
(from about 6% of the population in 1995 to 12% in 2005). Second, different regions had very different exposure
to immigrants. Some regions (such as Champagne-Ardenne and Lorraine) maintained a low exposure to immigration over the entire period; other regions experienced increasing exposure to immigrants over time. As an
example, the population percentage of immigrants in the Nord-Pas-de-Calais region increased from 6.3 points
in 1995 to 16 points in 2005 (with an average yearly growth rate by 25%). Other regions simply increased the
already-high share of immigrants over the same period. For example, in 1995 the Ile-de-France and Rhone-Alpes
regions already had relatively large immigrant shares of 10% and 9.6%, respectively, that increased significantly
to 21% and 18% in 2005, respectively.9
Just as historical reasons produced large variation in the presence of immigrants across areas, the data show
a very large variation in the presence of foreign-born workers across firms. In 199610 36% of all French firms did
not employ any immigrant workers. The share of firms with 0 immigrants varies a lot across department. As an
example, in Seine Saint-Denis and Val d’Oise only 12% of all firms did not employ immigrants in 1996, while 78%
of firms did not employ immigrants in Nierre and Haute Marne. Only in the South-East department of HauteGaronne did all firms employ at least one immigrant worker. The share of firms that do not hire immigrants
is negatively and significantly correlated with the share of immigrants in the department, as shown in figure 2.
However there are some firms with no immigrants even in departments with large share of immigrants. The
large variation of immigrant share across firms is correlated to other firm characteristics. This underscores the
importance of controlling for firm characteristics and also the need for a sharper identification strategy not
based on the correlation between share of immigrants and productivity levels across firms. Table 3 shows the
linear correlation coefficients across French manufacturing firms between immigrants and productivity proxies
in year 1996. Each row of the table uses the variable listed in the first column as dependent in a regression,
on region and sector fixed effects and on either the immigrant share in the firm employment (column 1), or on
a dummy equal to one for having no immigrants and zero otherwise (column 2). The dependent variables are
8 The

education composition of immigrants is also displayed in table A2 of the Appendix.
on the share of foreign population in 1995 and 2005 for all regions are shown in table A1 of the Appendix, that is available

9 Data

online.
10 The year 1996 is the initial year for our estimation sample.

11

TFP, domestic market share, capital per worker and exports (all in logs). The first two are measures of labor
productivity, while the other two variables are positively correlated with it. The share of immigrants in the
firm is significantly correlated with all the firm outcomes considered. While such correlation may or may not
arise for causal reasons in our identification we will not use any of this cross sectional association to identify our
effect, but we will let the firm heterogeneity drive differential response to exogenous local immigrant inflow.

4

Empirical Framework

The goal of the empirical analysis is to help us understand the response of firms’ outcomes to inflows of
immigrants in the local labor markets. In particular we set up an empirical model that, controlling for firm
productive heterogeneity, analyzes the response of firm outcomes to local immigration shocks. We allow firms
with low initial productivity to react differently to a positive shock in migrant labor supply. For this reason we
allow firms that initially have TFP or total employment below the median or zero immigrant share to respond
to local immigration shocks in a different way than the rest of firms. We focus on a simple distinction between
firms below and above the median of average productivity (or size) to capture whether heterogeneous effects
imply a reduction (positive additional effect below the median) or an increase (negative additional effect) in
the productivity inequality across firms.11 We also consider specifically firms that initially had zero immigrants
to see if they respond to these shocks in different ways than the rest (in table 3 we show that firms without
immigrants are among the less productive ones). If immigrants have an effect that is complementary to a firm’s
technology, and their presence allows the adoption of more efficient technologies, those firms may exhibit a
particularly strong positive effect when they start hiring immigrants.
Area-level changes in immigrant share, appropriately instrumented, can be considered an exogenous supply
shock for the firm. However, the size of the change in the firm’s employment share of immigrants depends also
on its own characteristics. Hence, variation of immigrants across departments represents supply-shock, while
variation of firms’ share of immigrants within the department provide evidence of heterogeneous responses. The
few previous studies on the impact of immigrants at the firm level (e.g. Malchow-Moller, Munch and Skaksen
(2012), Martins, Piracha and Varejao (2012)) combined the cross-sectional variation due to firm-level hiring and
the variation of immigrant supply across localities. This may confound variation in local supply with variation
in firms’ response to it. In our approach we will consider only exogenous area-level variation of immigrants as a
supply shock. Additionally, we will use the firm-level variation within a department to understand differential
firm response.
The trade literature has previously related export shocks to firm-level outcomes (such as productivity and
11 We

will also check with a finer partition of firms by quartiles of initial productivity to show that the effect of immigration is
actually monotonic in initial productivity. See table A7.

12

wages). In that context (e.g. Hummels et al 2014), it makes sense to consider a firm-specific export (or import)
shock because of the differential exposure of each firm to the growth of specific foreign markets. In our case,
immigration shocks are more reasonably considered as changes in the local availability of immigrant workers
and, as such, they are common to all establishments in a labor market. Then we allow individual firm to respond
differently according to their differential initial productivity. Our baseline empirical model is as follows:


!
MI
MI
)d,t ∗ Ii (ki,1996 ≤ k) + β3 Xi,t + εi,t
+ β2 (sIM
(y)i,s,d,t = φi + φs,T + φr,T + β1 sIM
d,t
d,t

(6)

The variable (y)i,s,d,t represents an outcome relative to firm i in sector s, department d and year t. Our sample
includes the universe of French manufacturing firms with at least 20 employees between 1995 and 2005.12 Hence,
the index t takes values between 1995 and 2005. However, because of data unavailability for firm TFP in 1995,
our estimation sample is restricted to the 1996-2005 period. The term φi indicates a set of firm fixed effects,
meant to capture all the unobserved firm-specific factors affecting the outcomes of firms. Since, in our sample,
every firm belongs to a specific sector-department, firm fixed effects also capture department and sector-specific
unobserved factors.13 By introducing firm fixed effects we base our identification on differences with respect to
firm-specific average over time (within estimator). This reflects the spirit of equation (4) that describes how
changes in firm’s productivity depends on the change in immigrant composition of the local labor force. The
terms φs,T and φr,T are, respectively, sector-by-period and region-by-period fixed effects (one region is the union
of 4-5 departments according to the French administration) and are meant to control for unobserved regionand sector-specific (time-variant) variables at a frequency of T years where T = 2.14 In particular, they could
capture local agglomeration effects or sector-specific technologies that change over time.15 As one period lasts
two years, those fixed effects fully absorb changes in French labor market legislation and/or sector technologies
that evolve slowly.16
The term Xi,t captures a set of firm-specific time-varying controls, including a headquarter dummy (being
one if the firm is the head-quarter of a group), a foreign affiliate dummy (being one if the firm is an affiliate of a
MI
foreign multinational firm) and the firm’s age. The explanatory variables of interest are: (i) sIM
, the share of
d,t

immigrant population at time t in the department d where the firm is located;17 and (ii) the interaction of this
12 As described in the data section, we rely on manufacturing firms with at least 20 employees, i.e. firms for which we have balance
sheet data from EAE.
13 In our sample each firm belongs to a specific department-sector over the entire period. For multi-plant firms operating in several
sectors and regions we keep the sector and department of the biggest plant (in terms of total number of workers).
14 Two-year period fixed effects imply that we have a dummy variable for a given region (or sector) every two years. We run several
robustness checks by changing the duration of the period. See Appendix table A5 for TFP estimation results using, respectively,
three- and five-year period definitions for the fixed effects.
15 The fixed effects we introduce are the most demanding, while still maintaining reasonable identification power in the IV
estimation. The inclusion of region-by-year effects would render the instrument excessively weak. We will show several robustness
checks with regards to these fixed effects in Appendix table A5.
16 One important shock in the French labor market might be represented by the EU enlargement, having added Eastern countries
in 2004 (free mobility of workers within EU). Although our period fixed effects control for this shock, France implemented the free
mobility of people from Eastern countries only in 2008 – outside our sample period.
17 We consider 92 non-overseas departments of France for which we have data on the 1990 stock of migrants by the INSEE

13

variable with the dummy Ii (ki,1996 ≤ k) that selects firms whose initial characteristic ki,1996 was below a certain
threshold. This variable aims at capturing the differential effect depending on initial firm characteristics.18
We adopt three different specifications depending on the choice of the initial characteristic. Such characteristic is meant to be correlated with initial productivity of the firm. Hence k represents alternatively, (i) the
share of immigrants in firm i as of 1996 and in this case the threshold is 0; (ii) the TFP of firm i as of 1996
and in this case the threshold is the sample median and (iii) the total employment of firm i in 1996 and also in
MI
, captures the exogenous
this case the threshold is the sample median. The change of immigrant share, sIM
d,t

department-level change in immigrant supply, and the dummy, Ii (ki,1996 ≤ k), allows the outcomes of firms
that initially have no immigrants or low productivity (or size) to respond differently to such a shock
We analyze several outcomes, (y)i,t , at the firm level. They are the log of total factor productivity (TFP), the
domestic market share (as further proxy of productivity), the logarithm of the capital stock, the exit probability
of firms,19 the number of plants per firm, the logarithm of exports, the number of served foreign markets, the
wage of natives in the firms and the employment of native workers in the firm. All those variables (except
exit probability) are positively correlated with productivity. Hence estimating a positive and significant β1 and
β2 coefficients for those outcome variables implies that immigration promotes convergence of those outcomes
across firms, stimulating initially less productive firms more than the rest. We estimate specification 6 on the
full sample of firms.

4.1

Identification issues and Instrumental Variables

Estimating equation (6) using least squares methods, even if we include fixed effects for firm-specific, regionperiod and sector-period unobservable variables, leaves open the possibility that some omitted local conditions
may affect the changes in demand of immigrants and the changes in productivity/labor demand of firms simultaneously. District-specific yearly shocks, not observable to the researcher may drive a positive correlation
MI
between the residual εi,t , in equation (6) and the explanatory variable, sIM
. In our setting, the omitted
d,t

variable concern is more severe than the reverse causality problem, as the unobserved productivity shocks of an
individual firm do not have a significant impact on the department’s economic outcome, which is much larger.
In order to identify the part of the change in the immigration share at the department level driven by supplydriven variation, rather than by local productivity shocks, we use a shift-share instrument based on the initial
spatial distribution of immigrants. Pioneered by Altonji and Card (1991) and used in several studies since then
Population Census (needed to compute our instrumental variable). Thus, the explanatory variable of interest takes 1,012 different
values (92 departments by eleven years).
18 This implies that results would be restricted to firms that existed in 1996. To attenuate this limitation, we run two robustness
checks. First, we take the sub-period 2000-2005 and use the 2000 as starting year (using firms existing in 2000). Second, we run
equation 6 on a balanced panel with firms existing over the entire period 1996-2005 (no entry/exit). Results for both robustness
checks are reported in the online Appendix table A6 and confirm our baseline estimation results.
19 We thank anonymous referee for suggesting this interesting firm outcome.

14

(such as Card (2001), Card (2009), Peri and Sparber (2009), and Lewis (2013), among others), this approach
is based on the fact that, because of information and preferences, new immigrants tend to move to the same
area (French department) where previous immigrants from the same country already live. This is because they
know of opportunities in those locations from the network of immigrants, and because they enjoy the amenities
of living with their co-nationals. These reasons to co-locate are driven by preference and information, not by
demand shocks. Building on this idea we construct the imputed number of immigrants in district d, for each
\
year t = 1996 − 2005, IM
M I d,t as follows. For each country of origin, o, we distribute the total number of
^
immigrants in France for that group in year t indicated as IM
M I o,t across departments, in proportion to the
share of that national group in the district as of 1990. By summing across countries of origin we obtain such
an imputed number of immigrants in each department:

\
IM
M I d,t =

X
o

IM M Id,o,1990,Census
^
∗ IM
M I o,t .
IM M IF rance,o,1990,Census

(7)

This method uses the initial distribution of immigrants from each country across districts interacted with the
aggregate inflow of immigrants by country of origin. District-specific labor demand changes between 1995 and
2005 should not be correlated with either term, as long as district-specific determinants of agglomeration of
some immigrant communities in the years before 1995 are not strongly correlated with demand changes in the
period 1996-2005. Since the only available data on total immigrants by country of origin in France are from the
^
Census, we also impute the yearly number of immigrants by country of origin - IM
M I o,t - as follows:
IM M IF rance,o,t,Census
^
∗ IM M IF rance,t,DADS .
IM
M I o,t =
IM M IF rance,t,Census

(8)

the first term in equation (8) is the share of immigrants in France from a given origin o in census year t (based
on Census data, INSEE). While the second term in equation (8), IM M IF rance,t,DADS , is the stock of foreignborn individuals working in France at time t in the manufacturing plus service sectors and is obtained from
DADS data - which also provide the exhaustive sample of workers that we use (see section 3.1). Notice that we
include the total stock of migrants working in service and manufacturing sectors, while we include manufacturing
firms only when estimating equation (6).20 This increases the correlation of the instrument with the supply of
immigrants as manufacturing-specific shocks in a region should not affect aggregate flows. We then imputed
the share of immigrants in the department as follows:
IM M I =
s\
d,t

\
IM
M Id,t
\
IM
M Id,t + N ativesd,1995

(9)

20 By focusing on the manufacturing sector, we also avoid any minimum wage issues (Salaire minimum interprofessionnel de
croissance, SMIC). Indeed only in service sectors (as touristic services, hotels and food services) the average hourly wage is close to
the minimum wage.

15

In expression (9) the native population is fixed at year 1995 so as to avoid spurious effects due to the potentially
endogenous native population growth in the department over the 1996-2005 period. Internal mobility of native
workers due to local demand shocks could introduce significant spurious bias in the instrument if one uses
the contemporary (rather than initial) number of native individuals. The instrument captures the idea that
departments with a large initial share of immigrants (as of 1990) are likely to attract a larger share of new
immigrants coming from the same country of origin because of network effects. So different migration rates
from different countries, driven by changing conditions in sending country or policy variations or changes in
immigration costs (all factors likely to be unrelated to local demand shocks) have differential impact on French
districts depending on the distribution of these migrants. The implicit assumption is that the distribution of
immigrants across departments for each country of origin in 1990 were uncorrelated with the distribution of
changes in labor demand shocks in the department, conditional on firm fixed effects and region-period and
sector-period fixed effects. Some potential concern for this type of instrument may arise if the 1990 distribution
of immigrants across department is correlated with some economic conditions that affects subsequent changes of
productivity and employment in firms. To mitigate these concerns, we test whether the instrument is correlated
with initial economic conditions of the departments in the next section. We cannot test (due to lack of data)
whether they are uncorrelated with their trend preceding 1996; but we provide alternative tests supporting the
validity of the exclusion restriction. However, the instruments we use here are commonly used in this literature
and generally considered valid (i.e. uncorrelated with pre-1996 levels of economic activity). For these reasons we
consider our estimates as informative on the causal role of immigrants on French firms. In the next sub-section
we discuss in greater detail the validity of our instrumental variable.

4.2

Instrument validity

Before presenting the empirical results, we show evidence consistent with the validity of the exclusion restriction,
which is crucial to our identification strategy. In constructing the IV we assumed the distribution of immigrants
by origin country in year 1990 was orthogonal to subsequent productivity and labor demand shocks at the
local level. This is a strong assumption. Past income and productivity shocks, specific to departments, may be
persistent over time. This introduces the possibility that past income and productivity had an effect on the stock
of immigrants in 1990, and, through this channel, the instrument may be spuriously correlated to current firm’s
outcomes. To find some reassurance that the instrument constructed this way is not correlated with preexisting
economic patterns across departments, we calculate the correlation across departments between the instrument,
namely the change in the imputed immigrants over the period 1996-2005,21 and the average economic outcomes
in the departments as of 1996 (TFP, domestic market share, capital and trade). Table 4 panel A shows the OLS
21 Computed

\
\
MI
IM
MI
as sIM
d,2005 − sd,1996

16

correlation of imputed changes in immigrants and 1996 economic outcomes across departments. Reassuringly, we
do not find any significant correlation between the instrument and the preexisting average economic outcomes.
While this is a reasonable test, it does not rule out correlation of the instrument with pre-1996 trend in the
outcomes. A more accurate test would be to regress the trend in our outcome variables before-1996 on the
after-1996 trend of our instrument. While we do not have information on French firms’ TFP before 1996 we
perform two additional tests. First, we test the validity of our instruments, constructed for the second half of the
period only (2000-2005) relative to trends of the first part of the period (1996-1999). A significant correlation of
local shocks and immigration behavior over time could generate a correlation with pre-existing trends, casting
doubt on the shift-share procedure.22 Results reported in Table 4 panel B show that there is no statistically
significant correlation between the pre-2000 trend in local outcomes and the post-2000 trend in the instrument.23
As an alternative, instead of using trends in the outcome variables at the firm level, we check the correlation of
instruments with pre-existing labor market trends, available for the 1982-1990 period from French Census data.
Results reported in panel C of table 4 show that the instrument is not correlated with preexisting trend in local
labor market (department) variables.

5

The Effects of Immigration on Firms

Tables 5 to 12 show the estimated parameters on the explanatory variables of interest for specification (6) using
the full sample of firms in our dataset and different firm-level outcomes. These tables share a similar structure,
while using different outcome variables. We will describe the main features of the tables when commenting on
the estimates presented in table 5 and, even more in table 6 which introduces the main estimates relative to
productivity. Then we will comment on the parameter estimates for each of the other tables in the following
subsections that relate to different outcomes. As described in section 4, the estimation sample in tables 5-12
(and in the online Appendix tables A3-A9 which represent checks of robustness) covers the period 1996-2005.
We use firm characteristics measured in year 1996 to compute the dummy Ii (ki,1996 ≤ k) as in equation (6).
The sample used for all regression includes all manufacturing firms. The standard errors are clustered at the
department level in each specification so as to account for the correlation across firms and over time within a
geographic area.
22 We

thank anonymous referee for suggesting this test.
only significant correlation is for domestic market share but only at 10% and with the opposite sign that an endogeneity
argument would suggest. This is an accurate test for the exogeneity of the instrument after 2000. So, in Onlne Appenix Table A6
we show TFP baseline results for the sub-period 2000-2005. Results are qualitatively identical to the baseline estimations on the
full sample.
23 The

17

5.1

Firm’s hiring of Immigrants

In table 5 we show how the increased supply of immigrants in the department translates into local firms hiring
them. In particular, in panel A, we analyze how likely are firms that employed no immigrants at the beginning
of the considered period to begin hiring them in response to the increased supply. The dependent variable is
a dummy equal to one if the firm increases the number of immigrants from 0 to a positive share during the
considered year. The main effect –reported in row one of the table – captures how the probability of hiring
the first immigrant by a local firm increases as the share of immigrants in the area rises by one percentage
point. Then, the interaction terms in specifications (4)-(5) captures the additional effect for firms with initial
productivity below the median (the coefficient reported in the second row) or the interaction with firms whose
size was below the median in 1996 (the coefficient reported in the third row). In panel B of table 5 we also
analyze whether department specific migration shocks affect the number of immigrants hired by the firm (in
logarithms) and if this effect is stronger in firms with initial productivity (or size) below the median.
These regressions are meant to establish whether firms become more likely to hire immigrants (and hire more
of them) when more immigrants are available as workers. What is more interesting is to analyze whether those
firms with initially low productivity or small size responded to the exogenous inflow of immigrants differently
than other firms. If firms are homogeneous in their response to newly available immigrant workers, and this
is independent of their productivity or size, one should expect that new immigrants are hired across firms
homogeneously or, possibly, in proportion to their size and productivity. This would imply probability of hiring
across firms and number of newly hired constant or proportional to firm’s size and productivity. Hence a negative
or null coefficient should be estimated for the interaction effects shown in columns (4) and (5) of panel A and B
of table 5. Alternatively, if smaller and less productive firms might be more inclined to start hiring immigrants
because of stronger complementarity, cost-saving and skill externalities in production, then one would observe
a positive effect on firms with initially lower productivity. In this case a larger supply of immigrants could
generate a stronger increase in the share of immigrants for smaller, less productive firms who can be moving the
new technologies, while firms with higher initial productivity will have smaller changes. Such scenario would
imply positive estimates of the interaction coefficient of columns (4) and (5).
The first two columns of table 5 show the OLS estimates of the coefficient on the immigrant share of
employment in the department. The specification in column (1) includes region and sector fixed effects as
controls, while specification (2) also includes firm fixed effects. The 2SLS estimates, on which we focus, are
presented in column (3), which also includes a more demanding set of fixed effects (region-by-period and sectorby-period) as well as controls for individual firm characteristics. In this specification we find that a one-percentpopulation increase in immigrants in a district translates into a 0.57% higher probability for the average firm
to begin hiring immigrants (panel A); and to a 0.4% increase in the number of immigrants hired by the firm

18

(panel B). Controlling for firm fixed effects and instrumenting the inflow of immigrants produces a larger point
estimate of this effect, relative to OLS estimates. This indicates the presence of omitted variable bias in the
OLS specification attenuating the effect.
When separating firms with low initial productivity (below the median), we find that these firms experienced
an extra boost from immigration, increasing their probability of hiring the first immigrant by a further 0.26%
(column 4, Panel A) and showing a much larger percentage hiring of immigrants in initially less productive
firms (Panel B). Column (5) shows the differential response related to initial size and reveals that firms initially
smaller than the median in 1996 had a significantly higher probability of beginning to hire immigrants and a
significantly larger (log) number of immigrants hired. Similar to the case of firms with low productivity, these
smaller firms responded to larger local supply of immigrants by increasing more substantially the probability
of a first foreign-born hire and the number of immigrants hired. We analyze in the next sections whether such
a higher propensity to hire immigrants, for initially small and less productive firms, was also associated with
larger estimated effects of immigrants on outcomes.

5.2

Firms’ TFP growth

A main objective of this paper is studying the effect of immigration on the productivity of firms. Such effect can
be positive if immigrants bring complementarity in production and/or if they create externalities by affecting
the choice of efficient technologies or efficient specialization. However, it can be negative if immigrants crowd
firms or other productive inputs. Previous papers (such as Ottaviano and Peri 2012 or Peri 2012) have analyzed
potential productivity effects in aggregate (state or urban) economies, but the analysis of firm-level effects is still
lacking. Table 6 shows the estimated effects of immigration, measured as the increase in the share of foreignborn in the area (department) by one percentage point of the population, on firm productivity measured as
total factor productivity (TFP). We compute the TFP of firms assuming the production function is log-linear,
and hence productivity can be calculated as a residual from a log regression. We use the Olley and Pakes
(1996) approach (henceforth, OP), which accounts for the endogeneity in the use of inputs and improves on
the reliability of OLS estimates.24 A detailed description of the OP approach and of our calculations is in the
Appendix section A2.25
In column (1) we show the average effect of immigration estimated using OLS and including only region
24 As a robustness check we also compute the TFP using a CES aggregation of labor between immigrants and natives. By assuming
an elasticity of substitution equal to ten – consistent with Ottaviano and Peri (2012) and Peri (2011) – the CES aggregation of
labor is the following: (N atives0.9 + (Immigrants ∗ (ImmiW age/N ativeW age))0.9 )1.1 . Estimation results using this approach
are reported in table A6 columns (7) and (8). They are not too different from the simpler approach taken in the main text.
25 The OP approach consists of a semi-parametric estimator using firm investment to proxy for unobserved productivity shocks.
This allows a solution to the simultaneity problem between inputs and output. The OP procedure also defines an exit rule to
solve for the selection issue in TFP estimation. Since OP relies on investment to proxy for productivity shocks (with investment
increasing in productivity), only observations with positive investment values could be used. See appendix section A.2 for further
details on TFP calculation.

19

and sector fixed effects and individual firm controls. Then in column (2) we add firm fixed effects to the
previous specification. These estimations may suffer from two problems. First, there can be bias from several
sources such as simultaneity, omitted variables and measurement error. If the correlation between omitted
productivity-increasing variables and the inflow of immigrants is positive, the bias of OLS will be positive.
Measurement error and omitted ”productivity” variables negatively correlated with immigration would bias the
OLS estimates downward instead. Second, in those specifications we do not allow for heterogeneous effects
of immigrants across firms. As a consequence of potentially contrasting biases it is hard to predict the sign
of the overall bias. Progressively including fixed effects and then using the IV estimation and, importantly,
allowing for heterogeneous effects across firms, should reduce those biases. In particular we observe that the
inclusion of firm fixed effects (from column 1 to column 2) increases the size of the estimated coefficient (i.e.
the correlation between immigrant supply and firm TFP) from 0.11 to 0.14. This suggests that unobserved
firm-level characteristics which are positively associated with productivity growth are also negatively correlated
with the local share of immigrants. Hence, omitting them produces a downward bias in the correlation. At the
same time, the effects of immigrants on firm productivity is revealed in columns (4)-(6) to be heterogeneous
and, in particular, such an affect is stronger for initially less productive firms. Such heterogeneity may also
contribute to the downward bias when it is not accounted for.
For these reasons, we move to 2SLS estimates and first show in column (3) the average effect, estimated
including the full set of fixed effects as reported in equation 6. Increased immigration in the department is associated with faster TFP growth in firms: a ten-percent-of-employment increase in immigrants in the department
(which is roughly the average overall growth rate of immigrants in French manufacturing between 1995 and
2005) corresponds to a 1.7 log point increase in TFP for the average firm in the department (corresponding to
an increase of about 1.7 percent). More interesting are the estimates in column (4), (5) and (6) in Table 6. They
show a stronger effect of immigrant share on TFP for firms that had no immigrants initially. The interaction
term has a positive and significant coefficient. The estimates in column (5) also reveal that the stronger effect of
immigrants corresponds to firms with a low initial TFP level (below the median). Those firms experienced an
additional TFP increase of 3.6 log points for each ten-percent-of-employment increase in the immigrant population in the department, relative to firms with initially high productivity (above the median). As TFP may be
measured with error, we alternatively consider initial size in terms of employment, commonly considered as an
alternative measure of firms’ success. In column (6), we show that firms with an initial employment level below
the median experienced a TFP increase of 3.5 log points for each ten-percent-of-employment increase in the
immigrant population in the department, while for firms initially above the median size the effect was only 0.5
log points per ten-percent-of-employment increase. While in this and subsequent specifications we include one
dimension of heterogeneity at a time and emphasize that initial productivity, size and share of immigrants are

20

strongly (and positively) correlated, we also experimented with including two or three at a time. In general the
partition according to initial productivity is the most relevant one in identifying different responses of immigrant
share on productivity and other outcomes (these results are available upon request). To confirm that initial
productivity is monotonic in determining the TFP response to immigration we also estimate interactions with
a finer partition of firms by quartiles of initial productivity. The estimates can be found in the online Appendix
table A7, and they reveal that the effect of migration is monotonically decreasing in initial productivity, with
the strongest effect on firms with initial productivity below the 25th percentile and significantly positive effects
only for firms below the median.
The effect of immigrants in boosting productivity of initially smaller and less productive firms may depend
on the fact that those are more willing to hire them, and to adopt technologies and specialization that benefit
from immigrants’ effects. This feature may also explain why in a simple OLS regression with few controls and
no firm fixed effects (as in column 1 of table 6) one finds an attenuated correlation (if still positive) between
immigrant inflow and firm productivity. Immigrants were more likely to flow to initially less productive firms,
in the France manufacturing sector, which may have help those firms cut costs, restructure production and
increase productivity more than large firms.
The last row of table 6 shows the Kleinbergen-Paap F-statistics that measures the power of the instruments.
In the case of two endogenous variables, the immigrant share and its interaction with the initial characteristics
dummy, we use two instruments: the imputed immigrant share described above and its interaction with the
dummy. In table 7 we report detailed results for the first stage regressions of the 2SLS procedure. Our
instrumental variables are always highly significant in explaining the endogenous share of immigrants in the
department and its interactions with Ii (ki,1996 ≤ k) . The F-stat and the joint F-stat are always well above 10,
implying the instruments are not weak. It can be noticed that the instrumental variables are highly relevant and
that the main instrument is a strong predictor of the main variable (share of foreign-born), while the interacted
instrument is a strong predictor of the interaction term.26

5.3

Other productivity-related outcomes

The measures of productivity (TFP) used in the previous section are obtained as the residual from a firm-level
production function. Hence measurement error of inputs can affect it, sometimes substantially. In this section,
we provide robustness checks of the previous results using “easier to measure” firm outcomes which are positively
correlated with productivity. Firms’ domestic market share is an alternative measure used in several papers
(e.g. Blonigen et al. 2014) as higher productivity induces cost advantages and, hence, a larger share of sales
26 To save space we do not report detailed first stage regressions results for the other firms’ outcomes (available upon request).
However specification (6) does not change across firms’ outcomes and first stage might slightly change only because of missing
observations.

21

and revenues for a firm in the domestic market. Specifically, we calculate domestic revenue for each firm (as
total turnover minus exported value) and divide it by the total domestic revenue of all French firms. We report
results of these estimations in Panel A (the upper part) of table 8. Results are consistent with those obtained
using TFP estimations: a ten-percent-of-employment increase in immigrants in the department corresponds to
a 2.8 percentage point increase in domestic market share when we estimate the effects using 2SLS controlling
for the most demanding set of fixed effects. When considering the possibility of heterogeneous effects, according
to initial size and productivity, most of the impact of immigrants accrues to initially smaller and less productive
firms. The impact on market share is a 6.7 percentage point increase for firms with no immigrants in 1996
and it is about 8 percentage points for firms with low productivity or small size (below median) in 1996. The
impact on firms above the median of productivity and size is not significant (see columns (5) and (6) in table
8 Panel A). As further robustness checks, reported in the online Appendix table A3, we use three other proxies
for firm productivity as dependent variable: (i) value added per worker (see table A3 columns 1 and 2), (ii)
TFP calculated following the Levinsohn and Petrin (2003) approach (see table A3 columns 3 and 4), and (iii)
revenues per worker (see table A3 columns 5 and 6). Albeit with some differences, all three checks confirm a
positive and significant average effect of immigrants and stronger effects on firms with initial productivity below
the median.
In section 2 and within the framework of decomposition (5) we highlighted the possibility that immigration
flows affect the entry/exit dynamics of firms. Indeed, a possible consequence of increased productivity and
larger market share for a firm is the increased probability of surviving in the market. The exit of a firm from the
market is rather easy to record and, while a rather ”coarse” variable, it is precisely measured. So, if an increased
supply of immigrants benefits firms in the form of higher productivity, this could also reduce their probability of
exiting the market. We test this channel in Panel B of table 8 where the dependent variable is a dummy equal to
one if the firm becomes inactive (conditional on being active for at least two years) and remains such for at least
two years. While we do not know from our dataset the reason why a firm ceased its activities, we know that the
database includes all firms in France and, hence, disappearance from the dataset implies cessation of activities.
The result for this outcome is similar (with opposite sign) to those on productivity. However, the heterogeneity
in this effect between smaller, less productive firms and larger firms is not as large as the heterogeneity in the
productivity effects. Using the 2SLS estimates of column (3), we find a ten-percent-of-employment increase
in immigrant workers in a department corresponds to a 6.7 percentage point reduction in the exit probability
for the average firm. This effect is somewhat magnified for firms with employment level below the median in
1996 (see column 6), but the additional effect is small and the probability of exiting decreases only by 7.0-7.1
percentage points (rather than by 6.3). Firms that were relatively small and unproductive in 1996 experienced
a stronger boost to their productivity growth as a consequence of a larger immigrant share. Their probability

22

of exiting the market also decreased when the inflow of immigrants was larger.27
The fact that exit and entry can be affected by immigration suggests that selection of firms may drive some
of the productivity effect estimated previously. To check that this is not the case, we perform two checks. First
take the sub-period 2000-2005 and use the 2000 as starting year selecting only firms already existing in 2000.
Second, we estimate equation 6 on a balanced panel with firms existing over the entire period 1996-2005 (no
entry/exit). Results for both robustness checks (reported in the online Appendix table A6) confirm our baseline
estimation results. The productivity effects are similar on the whole sample or on the balanced panel revealing
no bias produced by selective attrition.
5.3.1

Growth in Physical Capital

The significant increase in productivity at the firm level, identified in the previous section is likely to drive
other changes in firms’ outcomes. As a large part of the immigrant inflow experienced by these French firms
was of highly skilled workers, their hiring may have promoted complementarity with physical capital, boosting
investment and the adoption of new technologies (e.g. Krusell et al 2000). If this was the case, then we should
also observe growth in the firm’s physical capital stock associated with larger inflows of immigrants. On the
other hand, if immigration was an unexpected shift in the supply of labor accompanied by slow and costly
capital adjustment then firms might have experienced a decrease in the capital/labor ratio in the short run and
small change in capital stock. Moreover, firms may adopt different production techniques in response to larger
availability of skilled immigrants, and those can be more capital intensive. Lewis (2011) finds that in areas
of large low-skilled immigration, firms experience slower growth in their capital-labor ratios. It is interesting,
therefore, to see whether, in our case, the impact on TFP is accompanied by a similar impact on firm physical
capital intensity.
Panel A of table 9 (the upper part of it) shows the estimates of specifications similar to those in the
previous tables, when the dependent variable is the logarithm of capital value, calculated as the total value of
the capital stock of the firm (deflated by its price index). The coefficients tell us whether larger immigration
shares in the department stimulate higher net investment in the firm. Column (1) shows the OLS estimates
with the more limited set of fixed effects and column (2) includes firm fixed effects as controls. Notice the
importance of firm fixed effects to obtain in this case a significant effect of immigration on capital stock. Then
in column (3) we show the positive and significant effect on the capital of the average firm using 2SLS: a
ten-percent-of-employment increase of immigrants in the department increases the capital stock in the average
firm by 8 percent. The elasticity is larger (in percentage terms) than for productivity. When firms hire more
27 We also estimated the effect of migration on the entry rate of firms across departments. This effect cannot be analyzed with a
firm-level regression but we, rather, used a department-level regression. The results suggests that migration can affect positively
the entry rate of firms. However the coefficient is very imprecisely estimated and not statistically significant.

23

immigrants, they significantly increase their capital investment and their capital stock. Columns (4) - (6)
confirm a significant effect of immigration on capital investment which is stronger for those firms with initially
no immigrants, low productivity, or small size (below the median) in the initial year of 1996. The elasticity
of response for smaller/less productive firms to department immigration is about three times greater than the
response of other firms.
Measures of the value of the capital stock of firms can be imprecise and include all types of physical capital
investments. As a robustness check, reported in Panel B of table 9, we use a coarser, but easier to collect,
measure of firms’ capital stock. Namely, we consider the number of plants that the firm operates. This number
is often one and sometimes grows to two or three. The results are significantly weaker than those for the total
stock of capital, as to be expected for a variable that changes irregularly and rarely. Overall, however, even
the impact on this outcome is in line with the findings described above. The average effect on the number of
firms’ plants is positive and is essentially driven by those firms starting in 1996 with 0 immigrants (compare
the estimates in columns 3 and 4). Overall, these results show that immigration positively affects the total
value of capital as well as the number of plants a firm operates. These findings are clearly complementary to
what Lewis (2011) finds for the United States. There, prevalently low skilled immigration was associated with
the adoption of unskilled-intensive technology and less mechanization. Here, prevalently skilled immigration
seems to be associated with increased capital intensity, higher TFP and increased opportunity for operating
new plants.
5.3.2

Growth in Exports

The productivity gains from immigration shown in the previous sections could affect the export performances
of firms in the manufacturing sector. A large body of empirical literature (beginning with Bernard and Jensen
1999) has emphasized that more productive firms are those serving international markets and exporting more.
Moreover, firms that export in more than one international market are the most productive one. The fact
that these firms are able to cover the fixed cost of entry in several foreign markets is an indicator of their high
level of productivity. At the same time, several papers have analyzed the connection between immigration and
exports at the national and regional level (see Felbermayr, Grossman and Kohler (2012) for a recent review),
emphasizing how immigrants may reduce the fixed cost of exporting. Few papers have also looked at the
firm-level connection between immigrants and exporting their products. Hiller (2013) and Hatzigeorgiou and
Lodefalk (2016) show this connection using Danish and Swedish firm-level data, respectively. Most studies
find that immigrants have a trade-creation effect on regions and firms and they interpret this as the result
of reducing fixed costs of trading with the country of origin of immigrants (e.g. Peri and Requena (2010)).
Immigrants play a key role in connecting firms to new export markets in the countries where they are from.

24

Firms hiring additional immigrants (from different countries) are more likely to enter additional export markets.
Our previous analysis has found a positive productivity effect and, hence, combining higher productivity with
lower trade costs we expect to also find a positive impact of immigrants on trade for our sample.
Estimates of the (logarithm of the) total value of exports are reported in table 10 Panel A. They show that
the presence of immigrants in a department boosts the export sales of French firms (column 3). In particular,
a ten-percent-of-employment increase in immigrants in a department increases the export sales of the average
firm by 12.7 percent. This effect is, as those found above, mainly driven by firms with low initial productivity
and small size (see columns 5 and 6) who at the beginning of the period did not hire immigrants (column 4).
The effects on total exports are consistent with those on productivity.
The effect on total exports can be decomposed into the extensive and intensive margins of trade. In a
standard trade model with heterogeneous firms, a reduction in the fixed cost of exporting, due to immigrant
workers, may favor small and less productive firms in particular. Immigration, by reducing the fixed cost of
exporting, helps less productive firms access additional markets and export more (Melitz (2003); Chaney (2008)
and Crozet and Koening (2010)). Positive immigration shocks are thus expected to positively affect the extensive
margin of firms depending on their initial productivity/size. We test this channel by estimating equation 6 on
the number of export markets in which firms sell, which can be considered one of the ”extensive margins” of
export. In table 10 Panel B we find a strong positive effect of immigrants on the number of foreign markets
(see column 3), which is entirely due to those firms with initially low productivity (column 5) and small size
(column 6). As an alternative measure for the extensive margin of trade in table A4 columns (1)-(2), we use
the number of exported varieties (computed as the number of HS-6 digit items exported by each firm) and also
find a positive immigrant supply shock has a positive effect on the number of exported varieties, especially for
firms with low initial productivity.
Trade models with heterogeneous firms do not provide clear predictions on the effects of a reduction in
the fixed cost of export on the intensive margin of export (export per market). However, as shown above,
immigration has a strong positive effect on the productivity of firms that might reflect in an increase in the
intensive margin of export of firms. In table A3 columns (4)-(6), we estimate whether immigration also affects
the average exported value per destination and per variety of exported good. In line with previous results on
TFP (and domestic market share), we find an increase in immigrants in a department increases the average
export per destination (and variety), with a particularly strong effect for those firms with initially zero migrants
in production and for firms with low initial productivity.

25

5.3.3

Growth in Wages and Employment

The evidence presented so far suggests that increases in the supply of immigrants may have helped smaller
and less productive firms improve, invest, and increase their productivity and exports. But did these same
inflows hurt native workers?28 Higher productivity, higher investment in physical capital intensity and lower
exit probability should help existing workers in those firms, too. While it is possible that immigrant workers had
a competition effect on natives, they may have also helped existing workers through those productivity channels.
In a framework similar to that of the previous tables, we consider the logarithm of wages of native workers in
firms and the number of native workers employed in the firm (in log units) as two additional outcomes measured
at the firm level. We report the estimated coefficients in table 11, where we display in Panel A the wage effects
and in Panel B the employment effects. Wages are measured at the firm level and hence combine changes in
wages of individuals and potential changes in the composition of workers at the firm level so that selection can
take place. What are the channels through which immigrants can affect native wages and employment in the
firm? First, the estimated productivity improvement should produce positive wage effects for natives, however,
technology and capital may complement natives to a different extent than immigrants if their skills are different.
Moreover, a larger supply of immigrants can increase competition for some native workers in the local labor
market and may induce native workers to change firms. The results of table 11 Panel A reveal interesting
patterns. An increase in the immigrant share in the department seems to have a strong positive effect on the
average wage of natives on average. This is consistent with the productivity effect. A ten-percent-of-employment
increase in immigrants is associated with a 5% increase in native wages in the average firm (column 3 of table
11). However, the effect on native wages is not stronger in firms initially hiring fewer immigrants (columns 4)
and, although still positive, is reduced in firms with low initial productivity (+4.2% in column 5 adding the main
effect and interaction) or with small initial size (+3.7% in column 6). These results could be puzzling if one only
considers the productivity effect of immigrants across firms. However, one has to account also for a composition
effect. In particular if, in response to hiring immigrants, high skilled natives redirect their employment towards
firms that do not hire many of them, one can observe an increase in the average skills of natives in firms with
initially high productivity (and subsequent low hiring of immigrants). This would imply an increase in native
wages which could be larger in firms hiring fewer immigrants as natives’ composition became more skilled in
those firms. Table 12 shows that this is exactly the case. Using a framework similar to that of previous tables,
we show the estimated effect of migration on the share of natives white collar jobs (skilled jobs) relative to
the total employment of a firm.29 Consistently with our explanation, firms with initially low TFP experienced
only a small increase in the share of native in white collar jobs; however, firms with high initial productivity
28 Recent studies on the labor market effect of immigration using Labor Force Survey data for France show average null (slightly
negative) impact of immigration on the wages and employment of native workers in the long run (Edo 2015; Edo and Toubal 2015).
29 We use white collar jobs as a proxy for skilled workers since we have data on the occupation of workers but not on their
education.

26

experienced larger and significant increases in the share of native workers in white collar jobs.
Interestingly, the mobility of highly skilled native workers towards firms that hire fewer immigrants (or none)
may be an important channel of positive spillovers in a municipality. Firms that do not hire immigrants may
experience part of the benefit via an increase in their skilled workforce. One can test the strength of this spillover
by analyzing the change in productivity in firms that hire no immigrants in a municipality that experiences
an increase in immigration. We show one way of assessing the pure externality effect (vis-a-vis the combined
complementarity-externality) in table A8 of the online Appendix. We report the effect of immigration at the
department level on two types of firms, both with 0 immigrants at the beginning of the period. The first type
hires immigrants over the period (switchers), the second type never hire immigrants. As expected, firms that
hire immigrants experience the highest TFP boost, value added increase and domestic share growth. However,
also firms without immigrants benefit from immigration in terms of TFP, suggesting the positive spillover effects.
Table 11 shows also that initially smaller and less productive firms expand their employment of natives more
than other firms (Panel B of table 11) and given their change in skill composition this employment growth must
takes place mainly through inflow of less skilled. In columns (3) and (4) of Panel B, we find a null effect of
immigration on the employment of natives in the average firm. However, this hides a heterogeneous effect: a tenpercent-of-employment increase in immigrants is associated with a 5% decrease in native employment in firms
with high initial productivity and to a 2.2% increase in native employment for firms with low initial productivity
(column 5). As allowed in decomposition (5) immigration might induce the reallocation and selection of workers
across existing firms and thus change the relative size and skill composition of firms. In column (6) we show
the same kind of evidence using initial size instead of productivity to differentiate firms. Firms with low initial
productivity and small size are those that experience the most pronounced productivity boost from immigration
and net job-creation, increasing both immigrant and native employment.
The employment and wage data are available for a larger sample that includes all small firms (including
those with less than 20 workers) within the DADS dataset. Hence, in this case we can estimate a specification
for all firms including small ones (for which we do not have balance sheet data from EAE). Column (7) of table
11 reports the results for the extended sample that includes all small firms. In this case, the average wage effect
is similar to column (3), but the employment effect turns positive, consistent with the estimates of columns (5)
and (6) showing positive employment effects for initially small firms.

5.4

Department level regressions

All specifications estimated in the previous sections focus on firm-level outcomes. The results strongly suggest
productivity effects may be larger for initially less productive and smaller firms (table 6); these firms are also
more likely to increase in size (table 11) but have fewer skilled natives (table 12) in response to immigrants.

27

Hence, from an aggregate point of view, the effects of immigrants may be more conducive to productivity
(and size) convergence across firms than to net aggregate productivity growth. Another important effect can
be net firm creation in the area (first term of the decomposition), which could magnify employment effects
at the firm level. In this section, therefore, we analyze aggregate department-level outcomes to see which
firm-level heterogeneous effects survive the aggregation. Results from panel regressions in which the units are
”department-year” observations, in which we include year effects, are reported in table 13. All regressions use
2SLS estimation using the IV described above. Immigration has a positive, but not significant, effect on net firm
creation in a department (column 1). Column 2 also shows a positive and not significant effect of immigration
on total employment of natives in a department. The firm-level analysis suggested this effect may take place
with a reallocation of workers from larger (less affected) to smaller (more affected) firms.30 Then we estimate
the effect of immigration on the total exports of firms by given department-year. Consistently with firm level
estimation, immigration has a positive effect on exports.31
On the productivity side at the department level,32 we find that immigration has a positive and significant
effect on the average domestic market share and on value added – see columns (6) and (7) – and a positive, but
not significant, effect on average TFP and aggregate capital stock. Coefficients on domestic market share and
per capital value added are bigger, but not far from those estimated at the firm level (and reported in tables
8 and A3). Finally, we estimate the effects of an increase in the supply of immigrants’ in a department on
the wage gap between immigrant and native workers (computed as the ratio between average immigrant over
native wage in each department). While improving productivity and opportunities may benefit all workers, the
increased supply of immigrants can hurt their own wage opportunities relative to natives. We do find evidence
of this effect in column (8).

6

Conclusion

Using French firm-level data, we are among the very few who have studied the effect of immigration on a set
of firm-specific outcomes related to productivity. In particular – also new in the literature – we study how
firms differ in responding to exogenous immigrant supply changes due to immigration depending on their initial
productivity and size. A significant empirical regularity emerges from the analysis: firms in departments that
experienced a large inflow of immigrants had productivity gains, faster investment and export growth, lower exit
probability and larger employment growth than comparable firms in departments receiving lower immigration
30 As a further robustness check for the local labor market impact of migration, we replicate our estimations using French Labor
Force Survey at the region-year level. Results are reported in the online Appendix table A9. Consistently with results reported in
table 13, we find null effect of immigration on both native workers and wage in the region.
31 The point estimate cannot directly be compared with firm-level estimation because of a scale effect from aggregation.
32 To avoid compositional effects in aggregation, we computed a within-department weighted average using the inverse of firm size
and productivity in 1996 as weights.

28

inflows. Using an instrument that proxies the supply-driven inflow of immigrants by distributing new inflows
proportionally to the location of historical immigrant groups, and including a very rich set of fixed effects
to control for firm and region heterogeneity, our analysis confirms these effects are consistent with a causal
interpretation. We also find that firms with low initial productivity and small size are those that increase
their employment of immigrants more and experience the largest productivity growth and strongest capital and
export growth in response to the local increase in immigrant supply.
This has promoted some convergence in size and productivity level across firms in France, as high immigration
departments have experienced higher productivity growth of initially less productive firms. We speculate this
may be due to the fact that smaller, less productive firms were more ready to hire immigrants in order to cut
costs and/or adopt new technologies, improve specialization, and invest in capital and methods that complement
the skills of immigrants. There is also suggestive evidence that the positive productivity effect may spill over
to firm not hiring immigrants, partly through an increase of the highly skilled natives who work in those firms.
The possibility that immigrants, by helping firms (grow and survive), also help native workers stay employed
and productive in thriving firms, may be at the basis of the result that competition from immigrants does not
seem to hurt the labor market opportunities of natives (see Lewis and Peri 2015 for a review). This paper offers
a new angle to understand that effect on labor market.

7

Acknowledgements

We are grateful to participants of CEPII seminar 2012, CEPII-PSE workshop 2013, ETSG Munich 2014, OECD
conference 2014 and OSE workshop 2015. We thank Matthieu Crozet, Lionel Fontagné, Thierry Mayer, Anna
Maria Mayda, Farid Toubal and two anonymous referees for helpful comments. Customs data and DADS
database were acceded at CEPII. This work benefited from a State aid managed by the National Agency
for Research, through the program Investissements devenir with the following reference: ANR-10-EQPX-17
(Remote Access to data CASD).

References
Altonji, j. and D. Card, (1991) ”The Effects of Immigration on the Labor Market Outcomes of Less-skilled
Natives”, NBER Chapters, in Immigration, Trade and the Labor Market, pp. 201-234.

Bernard, Andrew B. and Bradford Jensen, J., (1999). ”Exceptional exporter performance: cause, effect, or
both?”, Journal of International Economics, Elsevier, vol. 47(1), pages 1-25, February.

29

Bernard Andrew B., Jonathan Eaton, J. Bradford Jensen and Samuel Kortum, (2003). ”Plants and Productivity in International Trade”, American Economic Review, American Economic Association, vol. 93(4), pages
1268-1290, September.

Blonigen, B., Fontagné, L., Sly, N. and F. Toubal (2014) ”Cherries for sale: The incidence and timing of crossborder M&A”, Journal of International Economics, 94: 341-357.

Borjas, G. (2003) ”The Labor Demand Curve is Downward Sloping: Reexamining the impact of Immigration
on the Labor Market”, Quarterly Journal of Economics, 118(4): 1335-74.

Borjas, G. and L.F. Katz (2007) ”The Evolution of the Mexican-Born Workforce in the United States”, in
Mexican Immigration to the United State, ed. G. Borjas, 13-56. University of Chicago Press.

Brunow, S., Trax, M. and J. Suedekum (2015) ”Cultural Diversity and Plant-Level Productivity”, Regional
Science and Urban Economics, 2015, Vol. 53 (Aug): 85-96.

Card, D. (2001) ”Immigrants Inflows, Native Outflow, and the local Labor Market Impacts of higher immigration.”, Journal of Labor Economics, 19(1):22-64.

Card D. (2009) ”Immigration and Inequality”, American Economic Review, Papers and Proceedings, 99(2): 1-21.

Chaney, T. (2008) ”Distorted gravity: the intensive and extensive margins of international trade” American
Economic Review 98(4), 1707-1721.

Cohen-Goldner, S. and M.D. Paserman (2011) ”The dynamic impact of immigration on natives’ labor market
outcomes: Evidence from Israel” European Economic Review, vol. 55(8): 1027-1045.

Crozet, M. and P. Koenig (2010) ”Structural gravity equations with intensive and extensive margins”, Canadian
Journal of Economics 43(1), 41-62.

De New, J.P and K.F. Zimmermann (1994) ”Native Wage Impacts of Foreign Labor: A Random Effects Panel
Analysis” Journal of Population Economics, 7(2):177-92.

30

Docquier F. , C. Ozden and G. Peri (2014)“The Labour Market Effects of Immigration and Emigration in
OECD Countries”. The Economic Journal, 124 (579): 1106-1145.

Doran Kirk, Alexander Gelber and Adam Isen, (2014). ”The Effects of High-Skilled Immigration Policy on
Firms: Evidence from H-1B Visa Lotteries,” NBER Working Papers 20668, National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.

Dustmann, C., F. Fabbri and I. Preston (2005) ”The Impact of Immigration on the British Labour Market”
Economic Journal, 115(507): F324-F341.

Edo A., (2015) ”The Impact of Immigration on Native Wages and Employment” The B.E. Journal of Economic
Analysis and Policy (Contributions).

Edo, A. and F. Toubal (2015) ”Selective Immigration Policies and Wages Inequality” in Review of International
Economics, (23)1: 160-187.

Felbermayr, Gabriel, Grossmann, Volker and Kohler, Wilhelm, (2012). ”Migration, International Trade and
Capital Formation: Cause or Effect?”, IZA Discussion Papers 6975, Institute for the Study of Labor (IZA).

Ghosh, A., A.M. Mayda and F. Ortega, (2014). ”The Impact of Skilled Foreign Workers on Firms: An Investigation of Publicly Traded U.S. Firms” IZA Discussion Papers 8684.

Haas, A. and M. Lucht (2013) ”Heterogeneous Firms and Imperfect Substitution: The Productivity Effect of
Migrants” Norface Discussion Paper Series 2013019, Norface Research Programme on Migration, Department
of Economics, University College London.

Hatzigeorgiou, A. and M. Lodefalk (2016) ”Migrants’ Influence on Firm-level Exports”, Journal of Industry,
Competition and Trade,1-21.

Hiller, S. (2013) ”Does immigrant employment matter for export sales? Evidence from Denmark”, Review of
World Economics, 149(2):369-394.

Hummels, D., R. Jorgensen, J.Munch and C. Xiang (2014) ”The Wage Effects of Offshoring: Evidence from

31

Danish Matched Worker-Firm Data”, American Economic Review, 104 (6):1597-1629.
Kerr S.P. and W.R. Kerr (2011) ”Economic Impacts of Immigration: A Survey” Finnish Economic Papers, vol.
24(1), pages 1-32.

Kerr S.P. and W.F. Lincoln (2010) ”The Supply Side of Innovation: H-1B Visa Reform and the U.S. Ethnic
Invention”, Journal of Labor Economics, vol.28(3), pp. 473-508.

Krusell Per, Lee E. Ohanian, Jose-Victor Rios-Rull and Giovanni L. Violante, (2000) ”Capital-Skill Complementarity and Inequality: A Macroeconomic Analysis,” Econometrica, Econometric Society, Econometric Society,
vol. 68(5), pages 1029-1054, September.

Levinsohn, J. and A. Petrin (2003) ”Estimating production functions using inputs to control for unobservables”,
Review of Economic Studies, 70(2):317-341.

Lewis, E. (2011) ”Immigration, Skill Mix, and Capital Skill Complementarity”, The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 126(2):1029-1069.

Lewis, E. (2013) ”Immigration and Production Technology”, Annual Review of Economics vol.5: 165-191.

Lewis E. and G. Peri (2015) “Immigration and the Economy of Cities and Regions” in Gilles Duranton, J.
Vernon Henderson, William C. Strange, editors: Handbook of Regional and Urban Economics, Vol 5A, UK:
North Holland, 2015, pp. 625-685.

Longhi S., P. Nijkamp and J. Poot (2005) ”A Meta-Analytic Assessment of the Effect of Immigration on Wages”
Journal of Economic Surveys, vol. 19(3), pages 451-477, 07.

Malchow-Moller N., J.R. Munch and J.R. Skaksen (2012) ”Do Immigrants Affect Firm-Specific Wages?” Scandinavian Journal of Economics, vol. 114(4):1267-1295.

Martins, P.S., Piracha, M. and J. Varejao (2012) ”Do Immigrants Displace Native Workers? Evidence from
Matched Panel Data” IZA Discussion Papers 6644, Institute for the Study of Labor (IZA).

Melitz, M. (2003) ”The Impact of Trade on Intra-Industry Reallocations and Aggregate Industry Productivity”

32

Econometrica, 71(6):1695-1725.

Olley, S.G. and A. Pakes (1996) ”The dynamics of productivity in the telecommunications equipment industry”,
Econometrica, 64(6):1263-1297.

Olney, William W. (2013). ”Immigration And Firm Expansion,” Journal of Regional Science, Wiley Blackwell,
vol. 53(1), pages 142-157, 02.

Ottaviano, G. and G. Peri (2012) ”Rethinking the Effects of Immigration on Wages”, Journal of the European
Economic Association, 10(1):152-197.

Ottaviano, G., Peri, G. and G. Wright (2013) ”Immigration, Offshoring and the American jobs”, American
Economic Review , 103(5):1925-59.

Peri, G. (2011) ”Rethinking the area approach: Immigrants and the labor market in California”, Journal of
International Economics, vol. 84(1), pages 1-14.

Peri, G. (2012) ”The Effect of Immigration on Productivity: Evidence from U.S. States” Review of Economics
and Statistics, 94(1):348-358.

Peri, G. and C. Sparber (2009) ”Task Specialization, Immigration, and Wages”, American Economic Journal:
Applied Economics, 1(3):135-69.

Peri, G. and F. Requena (2010) ”The trade creation effect of immigrants: Testing the theory on the remarkable
case of Spain”, Canadian Journal of Economics, 49(4):1433-1459.

Peri G., K. Shih and C. Sparber (2015) ”STEM workers, visas and productivity in US cities”, Journal of Labor
Economics, vol.33:S225-S255.

33

Tables

Table 1
Summary statistics for firm-year observations
Observations Mean Std Dev. Min
Max
Variable
Employment of natives
119950
149.95
519.47
1
63229
Wage of natives (per hour worked)
119950
11.21
5.27
2.72 161.21
Per capita value added
107859
38.07
92.06
0
14594
TFP OP
104850
6.03
1.18
0.86
13.30
TFP LP
98572
255.6
652.2 0.000 3760
Domestic Market Share
118924
0.000
0.001 0.000 0.049
Capital
119950
10676 130147
0
1.3*107
Number of Plants
119950
1.72
4.21
1
236
Total Export Value
119950
6.96*107 5.19*108
0
8.55*109
Export value per destination
87701
4.13*105 1.66*106
0
9.57*107
Number of export varieties
119661
35.62
110.05
0
5183
Number of export markets
119661
10.21
15.61
0
174
Share of foreign-born
119950
0.05
0.09
0
0.99
Note: individual observations are firms by year in France over the period 1996-2005. The
sources of the data are several and they are described in the text section 3.1 and A.1.

1

Table 2
Share of total hours worked by foreign-born individuals in France Manufacturing sector
Occupation Type

Share of hours worked by foreign-born
Change 1995-2005
1995
2005

Skilled (top 5 cognitive/manual occupation)

0.046

0.165

0.119

Unskilled (bottom 5 cognitive/manual occupation)

0.093

0.119

0.016

Skilled (top 10 cognitive/manual occupation)

0.038

0.135

0.097

Unskilled (bottom 10 cognitive/manual occupation)

0.089

0.115

0.026

Non-production workers

0.038

0.131

0.093

Production workers

0.093

0.118

0.025

Note: Authors’ calculation on DADS dataset. Production workers are those of occupation groups CS 62, 63, 64, 65, 67, 68 and
69 (manual skilled workers, handlers, storage and transport workers, agricultural workers, industrial skilled workers, motorvehicle drivers, unskilled manual workers and unskilled industrial workers). Other occupations groups are considered as nonproduction workers. Top 10 occupation by cognitive/manual complexity are: government officials, engineers and technical
managers, business and administration professionals, commercial managers, professors and scientists professions,
administrative workers in private sector, teachers, information professions, administrative workers and technicians. Bottom
10 occupation by cognitive/manual complexity are: police and military, personal services workers, manual skilled workers,
skilled handlers, storage and transport workers, foremen, agricultural workers, industrial skilled workers, motor-vehicle
drivers, unskilled manual workers and unskilled industrial workers.

2

Table 3
Correlation between immigrants share and firms’ outcome in 1996
Variable
TFP

(1)
0.069***
(0.015)

(2)
-0.113***
(0.003)

Domestic Market Share

0.193*
(0.103)

-0.667***
(0.015)

Employment

0.178**
(0.086)

-0.623***
(0.018)

Capital Intensity

0.524***
(0.073)

-0.166***
(0.018)

Exports

0.588***
(0.236)

-1.295***
(0.056)

Per capita Revenues

0.152***
-0.060***
(0.054)
(0.012)
Immigrant share in the
Dummy for zero
Explanatory variable
firm
immigrants in the firm
Additional Covariates
Region and Sector fixed effects
Note: individual observations are manufacturing firms in France in 1996. The
sources of the data are several and are described in the text section 3.1 and A.1.

3

Table 4
Correlation between the IV and economic outcomes in French districts
Panel A: Firms’ Outcome in the initial year
TFP as OP
Domestic Market Share (ln)
Ln(capital)
Tot Trade
Number of traded varieties

Panel B: Change in firms outcomes, 1996-1999.
TFP as OP
Domestic Market Share (ln)
Ln(capital)
Tot Trade
Number of traded varieties
Panel C: Change in local labour market
characteristics (1982-1990)
Average Wage
Average Wage Native Workers
Total Employment
Total Employment Natives
Total Hours Worked
Total Hours Worked by Natives
Observations

Change in Imputed
Immigrant share 1996-2005
0.051
(0.095)
0.497
(0.597)
0.371
(0.599)
1.625
(1.628)
1.168
(0.826)
Change in Imputed
Immigrant share 2000-2005
-0.052
(0.035)
-0.276*
(0.156)
-0.355
(0.335)
-1.121
(0.707)
-0.379
(0.349)
Change in Imputed
Immigrant share 1996-2005
-1.457
(1.289)
-1.306
(1.391)
0.023
(0.364)
-0.370
(0.349)
0.353
(0.420)
0.062
(0.433)
92

Note: Each row represents the result from a univariate regression having as dependent
variable the change of the imputed departmental share of immigrant and the change/level in
the economic value listed at the top of each panel for the district as explanatory variable.

4

Table 5
Immigration in the District and Firm’s hiring of immigrants
(1)

(2)

(3)

Panel A. Dep. Var : Dummy for going from 0 to >0 immigrant employment
0.110***
0.181***
0.576***
Immigrant share in Department
(0.026)
(0.039)
(0.081)
(Immigrant share in Department)
x initial TFP below median)
(Immigrant share in Department)
x initial Employment below median)
Method of Estimation
OLS
OLS
2SLS
Observations
119486
119482
115492
F-stat of first stage
56.33
Joint F-stat (Kleibergen-Paap F statistic)
Panel B. Dep. Var : Number of immigrants in the firm (ln)
-0.474
0.093
0.424*
Immigrant share in Department
(0.426)
(0.090)
(0.295)
(Immigrant share in Department)
x initial TFP below median)
(Immigrant share in Department)
x initial Employment below median)
Method of Estimation
OLS
OLS
2SLS
Observations
75960
75960
74273
F-stat of first stage
54.05
Joint F-stat (Kleibergen-Paap F statistic)

(4)

(5)

0.467***
(0.088)
0.261***
(0.116)

0.406***
(0.082)

2SLS
98252

0.376***
(0.098)
2SLS
112599

27.44

26.43

0.088
(0.299)
1.154**
(0.542)

-0.051
(0.247)

2SLS
64348

1.446***
(0.423)
2SLS
72672

23.46

20.95

Note: Column (1) includes region and sector fixed effects and firm-level control variables (age and foreign-owned dummy). Column (2)
includes region, sector and firm fixed effects and firm level control variables. Columns (3)-(5) include region-by-period, sector-by-period and
firm fixed effects and firm level control variables. The period considered is 1996-2005. The unit of observation is one firm in one year. *, **, ***
indicate significance at the 10, 5 and 1% confidence level. The standard errors are clustered at the department level

5

Table 6
Immigration in the District and Firm’s TFP
(1)

Immigrant share in Department
(Immigrant share in Department)
x (zero initial immi. share)
(Immigrant share in Department)
x initial TFP below median)
(Immigrant share in Department)
x initial Employment below median)
Method of Estimation
Observations
F-stat of first stage
Joint F-stat (Kleibergen-Paap F statistic)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

Dep. Var :
TFP calculation using Olley and Pakes Method
0.141***
0.171***
0.131***
0.014
(0.023)
(0.026)
(0.026)
(0.023)
0.141***
(0.041)
0.360***
(0.058)

0.110***
(0.039)

OLS
104432

OLS
104432

2SLS
100431
58.86

(6)

0.055**
(0.026)

2SLS
98056

2SLS
95032

0.296***
(0.047)
2SLS
98056

28.58

27.92

27.29

Note: Column (1) includes region and sector fixed effects and firm level control variables. Column (2) includes region, sector and firm fixed effects
and firm level control variables. Columns (3)-(6) include region-by-period, sector-by-period, firm fixed effects and firm level control variables
described in the text. The period considered is 1996-2005. The unit of observation is one firm in one year. Standard errors are clustered at the
department level. *, **, *** indicate significance at the 10, 5 and 1% confidence level.

6

Table 7
First Stage Results

Dep Var :
Imputed Immigrant share in Department
(Immigrant share in Department)
x (zero initial immi share)
(Immigrant share in Department)
x initial TFP below median)
(Immigrant share in Department)
x initial Employment below median)
Observations
F-stat of first stage
Joint F-stat (Kleibergen-Paap F statistic)

(1)

(2)

Immigrant
Share

Immigrant
Share

0.644***
(0.084)

0.614***
(0.081)
0.099*
(0.058)

100431
58.86

(3)
Immigrant
Share x Zero
initial Immi sh
-0.022
(0.014)
0.779***
(0.124)

98056
30.20

98056
25.10
28.58

(4)

0.630***
(0.082)

(5)
Immigrant
Share x TFP
below 50th.
-0.027
(0.018)

0.026
(0.022)

0.714***
(0.109)

Immigrant
Share

95032
29.69

95032
26.59
27.92

(6)

0.638***
(0.083)

(7)
Immigrant
Share x Empl
below 50th.
-0.030
(0.019)

0.011
(0.019)
98056
29.45

0.708***
(0.106)
98056
26.79

Immigrant
Share

25.45

Note: Columns (1)-(7) always include region-by-period, sector-by-period, firm fixed effects and firm level control variables described in the text. Standard errors are
clustered at the department level. The period considered is 1996-2005. The unit of observation is one firm in one year. *, **, *** indicate significance at the 10, 5 and
1% confidence level.

7

Table 8
Immigration in the District and Firm’s Domestic market share and Exit probability
(1)
Immigrant share in Department
(Immigrant share in Department)
x (zero initial immi share)
(Immigrant share in Department)
x initial TFP below median)
(Immigrant share in Department)
x initial Employment below median)
Method of Estimation
Observations
F-stat of first stage
Joint F-stat (Kleibergen-Paap F statistic)
Immigrant share in Department
(Immigrant share in Department)
x (zero initial immi share)
(Immigrant share in Department)
x initial TFP below median)
(Immigrant share in Department)
x initial Employment below median)
Method of Estimation
Observations
F-stat of first stage
Joint F-stat (Kleibergen-Paap F statistic)

(2)

(3)

Panel A. Dep. Var : Domestic market share (ln)
0.955**
0.990***
0.276***
(0.385)
(0.159)
(0.097)

(4)

(5)

(6)

0.065
(0.132)
0.667***
(0.247)

-0.061
(0.136)

-0.099
(0.117)

0.821***
(0.248)

OLS
118460

OLS
118460

2SLS
114455
56.08

Panel B. Dep. Var : Dummy=1 if the firm exits the market
-0.201***
-0.310***
-0.673***
(0.019)
(0.043)
(0.076)

2SLS
111609

2SLS
97395

0.881***
(0.206)
2SLS
111609

27.02

27.43

26.44

-0.675***
(0.075)
0.022
(0.055)

-0.650***
(0.097)

-0.631***
(0.072)

-0.056
(0.088)

OLS
154742

OLS
154742

2SLS
151280
57.32

2SLS
146040

2SLS
135530

-0.074**
(0.030)
2SLS
146040

29.16

25.67

28.29

Note: Column (1) includes region and sector fixed effects and firm level control variables. Column (2) includes region, sector, firm fixed effects and
firm level control variables. Columns (3)-(6) include region-by-period, sector-by-period, firm fixed effects and firm level control variables described
in the text. The period considered is 1996-2005. The unit of observation is one firm in one year. Estimations in panel B do not contain firm level
controls as we do not have such information when the firm is not observed in DADS (we squared the dataset to compute the exit dummy). Standard
errors are clustered at the department level. *, **, *** indicate significance at the 10, 5 and 1% confidence level.

8

Table 9
Immigration in the District and Firm’s Capital Stock and Number of Plants
(1)
Immigrant share in Department
(Immigrant share in Department)
x (zero initial immi share)
(Immigrant share in Department)
x initial TFP below median)
(Immigrant share in Department)
x initial Employment below median)
Method of Estimation
Observations
F-stat of first stage
Joint F-stat (Kleibergen-Paap F statistic)
Immigrant share in Department
(Immigrant share in Department)
x (zero initial immi share)
(Immigrant share in Department)
x initial TFP below median)
(Immigrant share in Department)
x initial Employment below median)
Method of Estimation
Observations
F-stat of first stage
Joint F-stat (Kleibergen-Paap F statistic)

(2)

(3)

Panel A. Dep. Var : Log of physical capital
0.185
1.006***
0.806***
(0.325)
(0.198)
(0.131)

(4)

(5)

(6)

0.587***
(0.162)
0.638**
(0.263)

0.435***
(0.166)

0.474***
(0.162)

0.808***
(0.198)

OLS
118775

OLS
118775

2SLS
114928
56.52

Panel B. Dep. Var : Log of number of plants per firm
0.096
0.071**
0.091*
(0.115)
(0.031)
(0.048)

2SLS
111928

2SLS
98009

0.742***
(0.239)
2SLS
111928

27.28

27.48

26.46

-0.001
(0.069)
0.299***
(0.102)

0.039
(0.089)

0.091
(0.093)

0.122
(0.128)

OLS
119486

OLS
119486

2SLS
115492
56.33

2SLS
112599

2SLS
98252

0.017
(0.152)
2SLS
112599

27.12

27.44

26.43

Note: Column (1) includes region, sector fixed effects and firm level control variables. Column (2) includes region, sector, firm fixed effects and firm
level control variables. Columns (3)-(6) always include region-by-period, sector-by-period, firm fixed effects and firm level control variables
described in the text. The period considered is 1996-2005. The unit of observation is one firm in one year. Standard errors are clustered at the
department level. *, **, *** indicate significance at the 10, 5 and 1% confidence level.

9

Table 10
Immigration in the District and Firm’s Exports
(1)
Immigrant share in Department
(Immigrant share in Department)
x (zero initial immi share)
(Immigrant share in Department)
x initial TFP below median)
(Immigrant share in Department)
x initial Employment below median)
Method of Estimation
Observations
F-stat of first stage
Joint F-stat (Kleibergen-Paap F statistic)
Immigrant share in Department
(Immigrant share in Department)
x (zero initial immi share)
(Immigrant share in Department)
x initial TFP below median)
(Immigrant share in Department)
x initial Employment below median)
Method of Estimation
Observations
F-stat of first stage
Joint F-stat (Kleibergen-Paap F statistic)

(2)

(3)

Panel A. Dep. Var : Log of exports
1.103*
0.661***
1.275***
(0.588)
(0.204)
(0.343)

(4)

(5)

(6)

0.854**
(0.387)
1.524**
(0.648)

0.082
(0.298)

0.328
(0.378)

2.768***
(0.692)

OLS
87069

OLS
87069

2SLS
83697
58.47

Panel B. Dep. Var : Log of number of foreign markets
0.544*
0.269***
0.611***
(0.296)
(0.061)
(0.147)

2SLS
81901

2SLS
75600

2.721***
(0.619)
2SLS
81901

27.14

28.43

27.70

0.400**
(0.177)
0.681**
(0.320)

0.135
(0.129)

0.304*
(0.175)

1.108***
(0.279)

OLS
87408

OLS
87408

2SLS
84009
58.47

2SLS
82225

2SLS
75882

0.820***
(0.249)
2SLS
82225

27.14

28.43

27.70

Note: Column (1) includes region, sector fixed effects and firm level control variables. Column (2) includes region, sector, firm fixed effects and firm
level control variables. Columns (3)-(6) always include region-by-period, sector-by-period, firm fixed effects and firm level control variables described
in the text. The period considered is 1996-2005. The unit of observation is one firm in one year. Standard errors are clustered at the department level.
*, **, *** indicate significance at the 10, 5 and 1% confidence level.

10

Table 11
Immigration in the District and Native workers’ wage in the firm
(1)
Immigrant share in Department
(Immigrant share in Department)
x (zero initial immi share)
(Immigrant share in Department)
x initial TFP below median)
(Immigrant share in Department)
x initial Employment below median)
Method of Estimation
Observations
F-stat of first stage
Joint F-stat (Kleibergen-Paap F statistic)
Immigrant share in Department
(Immigrant share in Department)
x (zero initial immi share)
(Immigrant share in Department)
x initial TFP below median)
(Immigrant share in Department)
x initial Employment below median)
Method of Estimation
Observations
F-stat of first stage
Joint F-stat (Kleibergen-Paap F statistic)

(2)

(3)

Panel A. Dep. Var : Log of wage of natives
0.596***
0.702***
0.488***
(0.143)
(0.120)
(0.073)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

0.502***
(0.073)
-0.049
(0.070)

0.561***
(0.093)

0.573***
(0.090)

0.523***
(0.054)

-0.137*
(0.076)

OLS
119486

OLS
119486

2SLS
115492
56.33

2SLS
112599

2SLS
98252

-0.198***
(0.076)
2SLS
112599

27.12

27.44

26.43

-0.490**
(0.194)

-0.760***
(0.204)

Panel B. Dep. Var : Log of native workers in the firm
-0.077
-0.237***
-0.118
-0.201
(0.228)
(0.057)
(0.123)
(0.164)
0.188
(0.183)

2SLS
1185558
84.22

0.129***
(0.046)

0.709***
(0.222)

OLS
119486

OLS
119486

2SLS
115492
56.33

2SLS
112599

2SLS
98252

1.417***
(0.227)
2SLS
112599

27.12

27.44

26.43

2SLS
1185645
84.22

Note: Column (1) includes region, sector fixed effects and firm level control variables. Column (2) includes region, sector, firm fixed effects and firm level control
variables. Columns (3)-(6) always include region-by-period, sector-by-period, firm fixed effects and firm level control variables described in the text. The period
considered is 1996-2005. The unit of observation is one firm in one year. Standard errors are clustered at the department level. *, **, *** indicate significance at the 10,
5 and 1% confidence level. In column (7) we show regression results for the full sample of French firms, including firms with less than 20 employees (firms for which we
do not have balance sheet information).

11

Table 12
Immigration in the District and Native White collar workers in the firm
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

0.138***
(0.031)
-0.085**
(0.039)

0.201***
(0.033)

0.198***
(0.035)

Dep. Var : White Collar Natives over total employment
Immigrant share in Department
(Immigrant share in Department)
x (zero initial immi share)
(Immigrant share in Department)
x initial TFP below median)
(Immigrant share in Department)
x initial Employment below median)
Method of Estimation
Observations
F-stat of first stage
Joint F-stat (Kleibergen-Paap F statistic)

0.233*
(0.126)

0.132***
(0.016)

0.108***
(0.023)

-0.187***
(0.037)

OLS
119486

OLS
119489

2SLS
115492
56.32

2SLS
112599

2SLS
98252

-0.202***
(0.047)
2SLS
112599

27.12

27.44

26.43

Note: Column (1) includes region, sector fixed effects and firm level control variables. Column (2) includes region, sector, firm fixed effects and firm level
control variables. Columns (3)-(6) always include region-by-period, sector-by-period, firm fixed effects and firm level control variables described in the text.
The period considered is 1996-2005. The unit of observation is one firm in one year. Standard errors are clustered at the department level. *, **, ***
indicate significance at the 10, 5 and 1% confidence level..

12

Table 13
Immigration and District specific outcomes
(1)
Dep Var :
Immigrant share in Department
Method of Estimation
Observations
Sample
Aggregation
First stage coefficients :
Imputed Immi sh.
F-stat of first stage

(2)

(3)

(4)

Number of
firms
2.314
(2.010)
2SLS
1001

Employment
Export
of natives
2.957
10.53**
(3.020)
(0.429)
2SLS
2SLS
1001
996
All Firms
Sum across firms in the same department
0.294***
121

0.294***
167

0.293***
165

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

Domestic mkt
Per capita
Wage Gap
share
Value Added (immi/natives)
0.885
0.046
1.383**
1.085***
-1.160*
(0.930)
(0.098)
(0.613)
(0.388)
(0.592)
2SLS
2SLS
2SLS
2SLS
2SLS
996
910
1001
910
992
All Firms
Weighted average across firms in the same department
Capital

TFP

0.293***
165

0.289***
146

0.294***
167

0.289***
146

0.289***
160

Note: Columns (1)-(8) include year fixed effects. The period considered is 1995-2005. The unit of observation is one department in one year. *, **, *** indicate significance at
the 10, 5 and 1% confidence level.

13

Figure 1:
Foreign-born in France, percentage of total by Education category (Primary, secondary and tertiary)

100%
90%
80%
70%
60%
50%
40%
30%
20%
10%
0%

1980

1985

1990

Primary education

1995

2000

Secondary education

Source: IAB Brain Drain Dataset.

14

2005

Tertiary education

2010

Figure 2
Correlation between the share of firms with no immigrants and the immigrants share
French Departments, 1996

Note: Each point in the graph represents one department. The horizontal axis represents the share of immigrants in
the population of the department while the vertical axis represents the share of firms with zero foreign employment
among all firms.

15

