NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

WHY DOES MONEY AFFECT OUTPUT?
A SURVEY

Olivier J. Blanchard

Working Paper No. 2285

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue

Cambridge, MA 02138
June 1987

This will be Chapter 19 of the forthcoming Handbook of Monetary Economics.
I thank the NSF for financial support. I thank Larry Ball, Stan Fischer,
Ben Friedman, Ben McCallum, Greg Mankiw, Danny Quah, David Romer, Julio
Rotemberg and Larry Summers for many helpful discussions and suggestions.
The research reported here is part of the NBER's research programs in
Economic Fluctuations and Financial Markets and Monetary Economics. Any
opinions expressed are those of the author and not those of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper #2285
June 1987

Why Does Money Affect Output?
A Survey

ABSTRACT

Why movements in nominal money appear to have strong and lasting effects on real
activity is one of the most difficult questions in macroeconomics. The paper surveys
the state of knowledge on the issue, with a focus on recent developments.
The paper starts by reviewing the evolution of thought from Keynes' emphasis on
wages to the "wage price mechanism" of the early 1970's, as well as the facts on the
relation between money, prices and output. From this review, it concludes that the
intellectual crisis of the 1970's came not from the inability of the prevailing
theory to explain the facts —which it had mostly right—, but from the weakness of its
theoretical foundations.

The paper then examines the reconstruction effort. two alternative strategies
have been followed. The first has been to break with previous research and explore
how far models based on perfect competition and imperfect information could go in
explaining the effects of money on activity. This strategy has largely fizzled and
its proponents moved away from the money—output issue. The second has been instead to
explore whether the many insights of previous research could be made more rigorous
and has focused on the potential role of imperfect competition in labor and goods
markets ; substantial progress has been made, but no grand synthesis has emerged, nor
is likely to in the foreseable future.

Olivier J. Blanchard
Department of Economics
MIT

Cambridge, MA 02139

1

Much of the research on economic fluctuations has focused on the effects on
nominal money on output. This is not because money is the major source of movements

in output : it is not. Rather, it is because economic theory does not lead us to
expect such effects. Indeed it holds that, with flexible prices, money should be
approximately neutral, with changes in nominal money being reflected in nominal
prices rather than in output.

Of course we know that, even with competitive markets, full information and
flexible prices, the neutrality proposition is only an approximation. Any anticipated
change in nominal money must lead to anticipated changes in the price level, and thus
introduce a wedge between the opportunity cost of holding money and the cost of

capital ; in all cases this will affect utility and, in most cases, is likely to
affect capital accumulation as well (see Fischer [1979] and Chapter 8). Even
unanticipated changes, if they are the result of open market operations are likely to
be non neutral : open market transactions will usually involve some but not all
holders of money and have distribution effects (see Rotemberg [1984], Grossman and
Weiss (1983]). But, except for the effects of steady inflation which may be
substantial (especially when the non neutrality of the tax system is taken into
account) ,

these effects are mere intellectual curiosities ; they can account neither

for the size nor for the shape of the effect of money on output which we shall review
below. For that reason, most of the research has taken as a given that prices do not
adjust fully and instantaneously to nominal money and focused on the reasons for and
implications of imperfect price adjustment. This will also be the approach of this
survey.

2

From Keynes to the mid 1970's, most researchers had shared a common framework,
the so—called neoclassical synthesis. Changes in money led to changes in aggregate
demand. Because nominal wages and prices adjusted slowly to changes in employment and
output, changes in nominal money led to sustained changes in real money and in
output. Within that framework, research had proceeded on each of the components, the
"transmission

mechanism't of money to aggregate demand on the one hand and the "wage

price mechanism" on the other. By the early 70's, research on

the

wage price

mechanism had a strongly empirical and atheoretical bent, which was to lead to a
serious crisis. While the counter revolution of the 1970'.s was partly triggered by
events, its success was due to the weakness of the theoretical foundations of the
dominant approach. A brief description of the evolution of thought from Keynes to the
early 1970's is given in Section I, which then goes on to review the facts, both on
the relation of money and output, and on the joint behavior of prices, wages and
employment. It concludes that the research on the wage price mechanism had its facts

mostly right, and that the crisiswas one of theory, rather than one of empirical
adequacy. The rest of the survey is devoted to the reconstruction effort.
The initial strategy was to go back to a model with perfect competition, thus
avoiding the theoretical muddle in which previous research had fallen, but to relax
the assumption of perfect information. The initial model built by Lucas showed how,
with imperfect information, nominal money could affect output. Subsequent research
has examined, focusing on intertemporal decisions by firms and households, how money
shocks could have both large and persistent effects on output. This direction of
research is analyzed in Section II. Partly because of its own dynamics, partly
because of mixed empirical success, this research program has moved away from
studying the effects of nominal money and is now focused on the effects of real,
productivity, taste or fiscal shocks.

3

By contrast, much of the recent research on the real effects of nominal money
has been based on imperfect competition. While it has been labeled Keynesian, it
often bears only a distant resemblance to the earlier models, and certainly does not
yet constitute a unified whole. Recent developments are presented in Sections III and
Iv.

Section III starts by presenting the models built in the late 70's by Fischer
and Taylor, which showed that one could introduce rational expectations in models
with nominal wage and price setting and still get long lasting effects of nominal
money on output. These models made an important point and have become workhorses in
the field ; nevertheless they begged important questions, indeed the same questions
which had not been answered by earlier research on the "wage price mechanism". Long
lasting effects of money on output in the Taylor model for example require that two
conditions be satisfied. The first is that the elasticity of the desired real wage
with respect to movements in employment be small

we can think of this as "real wage

rigidity". The second is that, in addition, nominal wages be preset for some period
of time ; we can think of that as "nominal wage rigidity". Why both types of rigidity
are present is not answered in the model. Research has examined the two issues in
parallel. The rest of Section III reviews the research on real rigidities, on why
fluctuations in the demand for goods lead to movements in output with little movement
in markups of prices over wages, and why fluctuations in the demand for labor lead to
movements in employment with little movement in real wages.
Section IV describes research on nominal rigidities. It starts with the "menu
cost" argument, which holds that, under imperfect competition, and in response to a
change in aggregate demand, the private return to each price setter from adjusting
his price is smaller than the social return. The argument is important for two
reasons ; first, it implies that small menu costs may lead to nominal rigidities and

4
large output effects ; second it implies that the welfare effects of nominal

rigidities arising from small menu costs may be large. The argument is however a
static one, looking at the effect of a one time change in aggregate demand, starting
with identical prices. Subsequent research has shown that the argument does not
extend straightforwardly to a dynamic context. Individual price rigidity may or may
not lead to aggregate price rigidity, depending on the specific nature of price rules
and the interaction between price setters. The relation between welfare effects and
menu costs is also much less clear cut than in the static context. The second half of
Section IV reviews the current state of play.

Section V questions three implicit assumptions of the previous analysis. The
first is that prices are set in nominal terms. The first part of Section V looks at
the scope for indexation or other monetary reforms to automatically decrease or
eliminate the effects of money on output. The second is that more price flexibility
reduces the effect of money on output and the size of undesired output fluctuations.

But, ever since Fisher and Keynes, we have known that more price flexibility may in
fact be destabilizing, through its effect on real interest rates and through the
redistribution of claims in the economy. This is discussed in the second part of the
section. The third is that the economy, left to itself, eventually returns to its
natural level of unemployment. Recent analysis suggests that this may not always be
the case. If that analysis is correct, even short lived nominal rigidities may lead
to permanent effects of nominal money, or of aggregate demand shocks in general, on
output and employment.
Section VI concludes.

S

Section I. From Keynes to the early 1970's

1. From Keynes to the neoclassical synthesis

Keynes' explanation in the "General theory" of the effects of nominal money on
output was based on two main assumptions. He accepted the classical principle that
employment could only increase if real wages decreased. But he added the assumption
that, because workers focused mostly about nominal wages, nominal wages were more

rigid, "sticky" (the word appears to be Keynes') than prices. An increase in money
would then lead to an increase in prices, •a reduction in real wages and an increase
in output.

It will be convenient to use throughout a simple log linear structure to point
out the major differences between models. As the focus is on aggregate supply, I
shall for the most part use a simple —indeed simplistic— representation of aggregate
demand, expressing output demand only as a function of real money balances, without
any dynamics. I shall also ignore unimportant constants so as not to clutter the
notation. The aggregate demand—aggregate supply framework corresponding to the
General Theory can then be expressed as
(1.1)

y=

a(m—p)

a>0

(1.2)

y=

b(w—p)

b(0

(1.3)

w

wherey is the log of real output, m, p and w the (logarithms of) nominal money,
nominal

prices and nominal wages respectively. If nominal wages are fixed at level

w*, increases in m increase both output and the price level. Aggregate demand
increases with real money balances, and aggregate supply increases with the decrease

6

in

the real wage1.

This

model is a familiar one and has made it to the textbooks up to this day. It

was however discarded by macroeconomists soon after the "General Theory" as it became
quickly clear that it was in contradiction with the facts. Dunlop [1938] showed that,
for the UK, real wages were if anything procyclical, an assumption difficult to
reconcile with decreasing returns to labor and marginal cost pricing2. lie also

showed, using informal evidence, that unions often cared explicitly about the cost of

living and suggested that the assumption that workers cared more about nominal than
real wages may not be appropriate. These findings led most economists, including

Keynes himself (1939], to conclude that a more drastic departure from classical
theory was needed and that price setting in particular could only be understood by
appealing to imperfect competition.

This task was however not taken up by macroeconomists working within the
"neoclassical synthesis", the consensus view of macroeconomics which emerged in the
1950's and 1960's and within which most of the major developments of post war

macroeconomics took place. The main achievement of the synthesis was to give solid
theoretical foundations to many of the decisions taken by individuals and firms such
as consumption or investment. But price and wage decisions were left out and few
formal attempts were made to link them explicitly to, for example, bargaining models
in the labor market or imperfect competition in the goods market. The prevailing mode

There is obviously more to Keynes [as always...) than this
simplistic characterization. We shall return to some other aspects later in
the chapter.
Tarshis [1939] who is often credited with the same observation, showed
instead that for the US there was a negative correlation between changes in
aanhours and changes in real wages.

7

of thinking about prices and wages was in terms of tatonnement, with prices and wages
adjusting to excess demand or supply in their respective markets, along the lines of
the dynamic process of adjustment studied by Samuelson in his "Foundations" (1948].
In retrospect there are probably two main reasons why the neoclassical synthesis
did not take up the task. The first is that it was hard, and the marginal return to
other explorations was higher. The second was the providential role played by the
discovery of the "Phillips curve't relation between the rate of changes of nominal

wages and unemployment (Phillips (1958]): the existence of a reliableempirical
relation made less urgent the need for better microeconomic underpinnings of price
adjustments. Because the facts seemed to be clear and progress on the theoretical
front difficult, most of the research on wage and price behavior was, until the early
70's characterized by its strong empirical bent and a rather eclectic use of
microeconomjc justifications.

2. The wage—price mechanism as of the early 1970's

By

the

early 70's, there was a wide consensus as to the main empirical

characteristics

of the "wage—price mechanism". This consensus, summarized in a survey

paper by Tobin (1972] (see also the survey by Santomero and Seater [1978]) was
roughly

the following

Prices were markups over unit costs at standard rates of output and capacity
utilization : they did not seem to respond to demand movements. The response to
changes in input prices was quick, so that prices played a passive role in the
adjustment of the price level to changes in nominal money : they reflected wage
increases quickly and fully.

8

Wages were explained by the "augmented" Phillips curve. After its
transplantation in the (IS by Samuelson and Solow (1960], the Phillips curve

specification, augmented to allow for an effect of price inflation, had had an
excellent track record in the 1960's. The rate of change of nominal wages was a
function of the level of unemployment and of current and past price inflation. The
question of whether the sum of coefficients on past inflation was equal to one was
treated as an empirical issue, to be settled by the data. By the early 70's the
consensus was that, while it had increased over time, the coefficient was still less
than one, although not significantly so (Gordon (1972)). This implied the existence
of a long term trade—off between inflation and unemployment.

In terms of our log linear model, the wage—price mechanism summarized by Tobin,
can be written as
= a(m—p)

(1.1)

y

(1.4)

p

(1.5)

w—w(—1) = b(p(—1)—p(—2)) +

c y ; 0<b<1, c>0

Equation (1.1) is aggregate demand. Equation (1.4) is the price equation and
embodies the assumption of quick passthrough of wage costs and no effect of demand.
Equation (1.5) is the wage equation, giving wage inflation as a function of lagged
price inflation and output, used as a proxy for unemployment3. This system reduces to
a second order difference equation in p. It a is positive, the equation is stable,
possibly with complex roots. An increase in the level of money leads to an increase

For simplicity, I shall assume throughout the models presented in this
chapter, the existence of a linear relation between the logarithm of output,
the logarithm of employment and the level of unemployment. I shall therefore
use them interchangeably, as I do in equation (1.5).

9

in output ; output returns to normal over time, with or without oscillations. The
model shares with the earlier Keynes' model the fact that aggregate demand determines
output in the short run ; in contrast to the earlier model however, the real wage
remains the same throughout ; this is the result of markup pricing by firms, as
characterized in equation (1.4).

The wage—price blocks of the large macroeconometric models built in the early
70's were similar in structure to equations (1.4) and (1.5), with the implication
that movements in money led to a slow adjustment of prices and wages, a long lasting
effect on output and little or no movement in the real wage along the way.

3. The counterrevolution : the theoretical attack

It was clear even then that while the wage—price mechanism appeared to fit the
facts successfully, its components were at sharp variance with standard neoclassical
theory. In the price equation, whether the lack of effects of demand on the markup of
prices over labor costs was due to flat marginal cost, or to a squeeze in profit
margins as output increased, was not resolved (see Nordhaus [1972] for a critical
analysis of those price equations). In the wage equation, letting the data decide
whether the coefficient on inflation was equal to one was in contrast with, for
example, the sophisticated derivation of the appropriate user cost under inflation in
the investment literature. It was also not clear why unemployment affected the rate
of change of wages independently of their level. While consistent with a tatonnement
assumption that wages moved as a function of excess supply, measured by unemployment,
it was in contradiction with the idea that, at least in the long run, there should be
a relation between the level of the real wage and the level of labor supply.

10

These problems were clearer to some than to others. Two important contributions
had questioned the possibility of a long run trade off on a priori grounds. Both
Phelps [1967] and Friedman [1968] had argued that there could only be one equilibrium
rate of unemployment, the "natural" rate and that there was no permanent trade off

between unemployment and inflation ; unemployment could only remain below its natural
rate if inflation accelerated. This "accelerationist hypothesis" was further refined
in an influential book by Phelps et al [1970], which explored how models of search in,
the labor and goods markets could or could not explain wage and price behavior as
embodied in the wage—price mechanism.

The proximate cause of the crisis however was the introduction of rational
expectations. Together with the natural rate hypothesis, it implied that unemployment

could only be associated with unexpected inflation, thus with unexpected demand
movements. Furthermore, it was shown by Lucas in his celebrated critique (1976) that
the natural rate—rational expectations hypothesis could be true while the sum of

coefficients on inflation in the Phillips curve, which had been the subject of so
much attention, was less than one. His argument was the following. Suppose that the
true Phillips curve had the following form
w—w(—l) = (Ep—p(—1)) +

cy

where E denotes the expectation of the price level based on past information, so that
wage inflation depended on expected price inflation with a coefficient of one. Assume
also that price inflation followed a first order autoregressive process
p—p(—1) = P (p(—1)—p(—2)) + e

Then, if workers had rational expectations and formed expectations of inflation
based on past inflation, the observed Phillips curve would be
w—w(—1) = P (p(—1)—p(—2)) +

cy

11

As long as P was less than one, the Phillips curve would appear to imply a long
run trade off when in fact there was none. A change in the inflation process, coming
for example from an attempt by the government to lower unemployment would lead to a
change in P and a change in the coefficient on lagged inflation in the Phillips
curve. The trade off would vanish as the government tried to exploit it.

The critique implied that the theoretical issue of whether there was a long run
trade off could not be settled simply by looking at the sum of coefficients on lagged
inflation. But the influence of the critique went far beyond that. It had in
particular the effect of focusing attention on the underlying microeconomic
underpinnings of the wage—price mechanism, and many found them lacking. What has
happened since the mid 70's is best described as a return to basics (sometimes very
basics), a search for theoretically consistent explanations of the movement of
nominal wages and prices.

4. The counterrevolution ; the facts

The above account emphasizes the crisis in theory. Some have emphasized the
empirical failure of the wage—price mechanism. In a polemical article, Lucas and
Sargent [1978] conclude to "an empirical failure on a grand scale". This is a
considerable overstatement. It is true that estimated coefficient on lagged inflation
kept rising with inflation, and that the estimated equations initially failed to
predict the inflationary effects of the oil shocks of 1974—5. But once the
coefficient on lagged inflation was increased, and the price equation was respecified
so as to allow for materials costs, the equations were once again on track and have
performed decently since then (see Englander and Los [1983] for example). This decent
empirical performance should come as no surprise and may be seen as the result of the
rather a—theoretical approach to the data which we described earlier.

Table 1. Effects of a 1% permanent increase in Ml in the MI model

4

8

12

16

20

24

Real GNP

0.7

1.4

0.8

—0.5

—1.1

—0.8

WPI

0.7

1.4

1.7

1.6

1.6

1.6

PGNP

0.0

0.4

1.0

1.3

1.4

1.3

CPI

0.1

0.4

0.7

1.0

1.2

1.3

AHE

0.1

0.5

1.0

1.3

1.4

1.3

Ml/PGNP

1.0

0.6

0.0

—0.3

—0.4

—0.3

AHE/YPI

—0.6

—0.9

—0.6

—0.3

—0.3

—0.3

AHE/PGNP

0.1

0.1

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

AHE/CPI

0.0

0.1

0.3

0.3

0.2

0.0

Quarters
Effects on

Source

All

MI Nodel, 1985

variables measured as % deviations from initial path.
GNP
wholesale price index ; PGNP
real gross national product ; liPI
price deflator for GNP ; CPI Consumer Price index ; AHE : average hourly
earnings in manufacturing.

12
Indeed, while macroeconoinists have been working on rebuilding theoretical

foundations, the wage—price component of empirical macroeconometric models has not
changed much since the early 70's. Major modifications have been the elimination of
the long run trade off, the introduction of exchange rates, affecting both price

behavior in sectors exposed to foreign competition, and introducing a wedge between
producers' prices and consumer prices. Table 1 gives the results of a dynamic
simulation of the 1985 version of the DRI model. An increase in money of 1% increases
GNP for about 3 to 4 years ; it takes many more years for output to return to normal,

and only after long and slightly damped oscillations. The behavior of the real wage
depends very much on which price deflator is used. The real wage in terms of the GNP
deflator varies with output. The real wage in terms of the CPI moves very little,
increasing slightly before it returns to normal.

That empirical macroeconometric models have not changed suggests that, whether
or not their structural interpretation of the data is appropriate, they capture
accurately the important cross correlations present in those data. In what follows, I
review the empirical evidence on the effects of money on output. That evidence can be
divided into direct reduced form evidence on the relation between money and output,
and evidence on each of the components of the wage—price mechanism.

Reduced form evidence on money and output

That money had a strong impact on output was the major theme of Friedman and
Schwartz (1963). Relying on evidence from the period 1867—1960, and in particular on
a study of turning points in money and output, they concluded that there was a strong
and stable relation between money, nominal and real income, with the causality often
running from money to economic activity. Much of the research on reduced form

13

evidence since then has taken the sane approach, but relied on formal econometric

methods instead. To see what can be learned from such an approach, suppose that
output is affected by money and other variables according to the reduced form
relation
(1.6)

y = S at y-i ÷ S bi rn-i + S

x-ict

+ e

where y is some measure of output, such as the logarithm of GNP, m a measure of
nominal money, such as the logarithm of Ml, x a vector of other variables, such as
fiscal policy or exports, and e is serially uncorrelated. Sums run from 1 to n for y,
from 0 or 1 to k for m and x.

When will estimation of this equation by ordinary least squares give unbiased
estimates of the effects of nominal money on output ? Two conditions are required.

The first is that all right hand side variables be uncorrelated with the current
innovation in output, e. The second is that, if current money or x are not included,
their true coefficients be equal to zero4

Causality tests were first introduced by Sims [1972] to characterize the dynamic
interactions between money and output. Bivariate causality tests are based on
equations such as (1.6), but allowing for no other variables than y and m, and
excluding current m. When applied to the relation between money and output, they
typically have found that the estimated at's and bi 's imply a strong dynamic response
of y torn (The dynamic response of y to m is given by the coefficients of (1—a(L))

'b(L), where a(L) and b(L) are the lag polynomials in (1.6)). A typical response

These conditions are regularly rediscovered. They were emphasized in the
discussion of the Saint Louis model, and more recently when economists tried
to understand what could or could not be learned from causality tests (see
[Cooley and LeRoy 1985])

Table 2 Reduced form dynamic effects of money on output

Effects of a 1% permanent increase in nominal money
from Sargent
on :

from Mishkin

unemployment

output

anticipated

unanticipated

Quarters

Sources

o

0.0

1.3

2.0

2

—0.3

1.9

2.3

4

—0.4

1.8

2.2

6

—0.3

1.3

2.0

8

—0.2

0.7

1.6

12

0.0

—0.4

0.5

16

0.1

—0.6

—0.4

20

0.1

—0.1

—0.3

Sargent (1976a] table 1, line 1.
Mishkin (1983] table 6.5

14

pattern, from Sargent [1976a] is given in Table 2, column 1. It shows a response of
unemployment to Ml peaking after 5 quarters and becoming negative after 11 quarters
Many bivariate causality tests have been run, using different empirical counterparts
for the quantity variable and for money, different periods and sampling intervals,
and different treatments of non stationarity in in and y. The effect of money has been

found to be usually significant, although the level of significance depends on the
method of detrending (stochastic, or deterministic) (Stock and Watson (1987]).

Eichenbaum and Singleton [1986], for example, using first differences of log GNP and
second differences of log Ml, and monthly data from 1949 to 1983, find the effect of
money on output to be barely significant.

Given our discussion above, it is clear that the conditions under which this
estimated dynamic response is the true dynamic response are unlikely to be met.

First, there are surely other variables than money which affect output and are
correlated with money. Second, it is quite likely that current money is affected by
e, innovations in output. It may even be that lagged money is correlated with the
current innovation in output. This will be the case if the central bank has
information about future output beyond what can be learned from the history of money
and output ; in this case lagged money will help predict output even if it does not
affect it (this is the stochastic extension of the "Post hoc, ergo propter hoc"

argument made by Tobin [197O]). The simultaneity problem may be less serious for
some components of money than for others. King and Plosser [1984], using annual data
from 1953 to 1978 find a weaker and shorter effect of high powered money than of Ml.
A possible interpretation is that the strong effect of Ml on output found by others
comes in fact partly from the reaction of inside money to output.

These problems of economic interpretation of causality tests were pointed
out by Sims ; users of causality tests have not always resisted the temptation
to make unwarranted inferences.

15

Multivariate causality tests, that is tests in which other variables than y and
a are allowed on the right hand side of (1.6) have also been implemented. Sims (1980]
in particular has found that when short nominal interest rates are added to nominal

money in (1.6), money no longer has a significant effect on output. What it means is
however unclear and open to many interpretations ; McCallum (1983a) has shown that

these results would arise if for example the Federal Reserve used money to peg
interest rates.

Another line of research has looked at the effects of money while more
explicitly controlling for the presence of other variables, the x variables in (1.5).
The first attempt was made by Andersen and Jordan in the Saint Louis model (1970].

More recently, work by Barro [1977] has spurred a new set of estimates. Barro ran an
equation similar to (1.6) ,

allowing

for the presence of a time trend and a proxy for

exogenous government spending in x. He also decomposed money growth into two
components, one "unanticipated", obtained as the residual from a forecasting equation
including lagged money and other variables, and one "anticipated" and equal to the
forecast value. Using annual data for the period 1946 to 1976, he concluded that the
hypothesis that only the unanticipated component affected output could not be
rejected, and that this unanticipated component affected output for up to three
years. In Barro [1978], this approach was extended to look at the joint response of
output and prices, and in Barro and Rush [1980] the same approach was used on
quarterly data. The data have been reexamined by Mishkin [1983] who, using quarterly
data for 1954—1976 and longer lag structures, concludes that both the unanticipated
and the anticipated components have a long lasting effect on output. The dynamic
response

of output to an "anticipated" and an "unanticipated" permanent change in

money, from Mishkin, is given in table 2, column 2. Both components of money have
1

16
large and long lasting effects on output. It is clear however that, while this
approach is more careful about the inclusion of other variables than money in (1.6),
the interpretation of the dynamic response as structural still depends on the

maintained assumption of zero correlation between the innovation in output and
current and lagged money, anticipated or unanticipated'.

The decomposition of money between anticipated and unanticipated components has
also been questioned. Sargent [197Gb] has pointed out that, if expectations of money
were based only on past money, there would be infinitely many ways of decomposing a
distributed lag of money as the sum of two distributed lags in anticipated and
unanticipated money. Identification depends on the presence of explanatory variables
other than money in the equation for money, and may therefore be weak. Fischer (1980]

has also noted that the data are unlikely to be able to distinguish between Barro's
specification and a specification in which output depends on anticipated money and
unanticipated money n periods —rather than one period— ahead. The two specifications
have however drastically different policy implications.

Poterba, Rotemberg and Summers [1986) have adopted an indirect approach to
testing nominal rigidities that avoids this simultaneity problem, by looking not at
the effects of money but at the effects of shifts between direct and indirect
taxation. In the absence of nominal rigidities, it should not matter which side of
the market a tax is collected on. In the presence of nominal rigidities, it may

6

It is interesting to note the qualitative similarity of the dynamic
responses in table 2 to those in table 1, obtained from the DRI model. Reduced
form estimates are however larger that those obtained from simulations of
structural models. This was already noted and discussed in the context of the
Saint Louis model. Potential explanations involve the bias in reduced form
estimation discussed above, or the neglect of some transmission channels in
structural models.

17

however affect the price level and output

if for example, nominal wages are fixed,

the shift from direct taxation to a value added tax will increase the price level and
decrease output. To the extent that changes in taxation are more exogenous than
money, this avoids some of the problems mentioned above. Their analysis of the
empirical evidence leads them to conclude that there are substantial nominal
rigidities, both in the US and the UK.

Reduced form evidence thus suggests a strong relation between money on output.
Part of it may be due to the effect of output on money. Part of it surely is not. The
event studies provided by the UK and US disinflations of the early So's, in addition
to those described by Friedman and Schwartz, strongly support the view that monetary
policy affects output.

Evidence on the components of the wage—price mechanism

It would take us too far afield to review the empirical work on wage and price
behavior in any detail (we shall discuss some of it in relation to specific
theoretical developments later on). But, in the spirit of the general skepticism that
has permeated macroeconometrics since the mid 70's, research has proceeded to see
whether the stylized facts on which the wage—price mechanism was based were actually
present in the data.

The first stylized fact was the lack of response of the markup of prices on
wages to movements in output or, put another way, the lack of a negative correlation
between real product wages and employment, as would be expected if the economy moved
along a stable demand for labor. Sargent [1978) suggested that the presence of costs

18

of adjustment for employment implied a more complex dynamic relation between real
wages and employment and could be consistent with little contemporaneous negative
correlation between the two. His attempt to explain the data in this way was however
not very successful. Later research along the same lines has confirmed that there is
no clear correlation at any lag between product wages and employment in the US, but
has shown the existence of a negative correlation between lagged real wages and
employment in some other industrialized countries (see Bruno and Sachs [1984], Geary

and Kennan [1982]). Bus [1985], using US panel data on individual workers, concludes
that the real consumption wage is procyclical.

The other main stylized fact was the Phillips curve, a relation between wage
changes, past price changes and unemployment. Causality tests have consistently shown
that lagged employment does not Granger cause real wages (Sargent [1978), Neftci
[19781). While this has been taken as evidence against the Phillips curve, it does

not look at the same set of correlations ; the Phillips curve is a relation between
nominal wage inflation, lagged inflation and current as well lagged employment, not
necessarily between actual real wages and lagged employment. If the economy had both
a Phillips curve and mark up pricing for example, there would be no relation between
real wages —which are constant— and employment.

Looking at reduced form evidence on wages, prices and employment, I have asked
whether an econometrician who ignored the existence of the wage—price mechanism
described by Tobin could find it in US data (Blanchard [1986b]). To do so, I wrote
down a structural model, with a wage, a price and an aggregate demand equation, and
then derived and estimated the unconstrained reduced form. I then asked what
structural price, wage and aggregate demand equations were consistent with the
reduced form evidence and concluded that the reduced form evidence was roughly
consistent with the existence of the structural wage price mechanism described by
Tobin.

19

5. The reconstruction effort

To summarize, the crisis of the 70's arose not because the wage—price mechanism
was in contradiction with the facts, but because its explanation of the facts was at
variance with theory. Thus, the reconstruction effort has been largely theoretical.

It is part of a much larger enterprise affecting all of macroeconomics, and it
interacts with it. For example, if we think of contracts under asymmetric information
as being an important factor in labor markets, then the price level is a potential
signal and the study of why nominal wages are not fully indexed should start from
there. Or if we think of imperfect competition as being important in goods markets,
this may explain why, as price may exceed marginal cost most of the time, firms may

be willing to accomodate increases in demand at a given price. We shall touch on
those other developments only to the extent that they are relevant to the issue at
hand.

Research has taken two radically different directions.

The first has explored whether the stylized facts could be reconciled with a
more standard neoclassical model. Thus, it has worked under the maintained "as if"
assumption of perfect competition in all markets but relaxed the assumption of full
information. It has focused both on the impact effects of disturbances such as money
and on the channels for persistence. I shall refer to this approach as the "imperfect
information" approach and review it in the next section.
The second has explored instead whether the many leads and insights of the
earlier literature could be made more rigorous and could form the basis for a
theoretically consistent explanation of the effects of money on output and of the
wage—price mechanism. I shall refer to that approach as the "imperfect competition"
approach and study it in sections III and Iv.

20

While the two approaches differ in their philosophy, they share two common
methodological precepts. The first is that any explanation for the effects of money
on output should hold even under rational expectations. Nearly all of the research
has indeed assumed rational expectations as a working hypothesis. The second, which
we shall not focus on, is that fluctuations should be analyzed using the Frisch—
Slutzky impulse—propagation framework in which fluctuations are thought of as the
result of stochastic impulses affecting variables through a propagation mechanism1;

this approach, which is consistent with time series methods, has allowed a better
integration of macroeconomic theory and econometric methods ; this integration is
perhaps as important a development as the substantive results described below.

Because linear stochastic processes are easier to deal with, work on
non linear dynamic systems, which had been popular earlier, has dwindled.
There has however been recently renewed interest in non linear deterministic
systems which can generate rich dynamics or even dynamics similar to those of
stochastic processes (see for example Grandmont [1985]). There are few results
to date using this approach on the issues studied in this chapter.

21

Section XI Imperfect information

Models of search, developed initially by macroeconomists to explain the various
aspects of the wage price mechanism had shown the importance and the potential of
relaxing the assumption that markets were cleared by a fully informed auctioneer (see
the introduction by Phelps to his volume [1970]). This had two main implications.
First, because of imperfect information on the part of buyers and sellers, whoever
set a price was likely to have at least transient monopoly or monopsony power.

Markets could no longer be viewed as competitive. Second, if individuals had limited
information, there was the potential for aggregate nominal shocks to affect output.
The reason was sketched by Phelps. Individuals and firms faced both individual and
aggregate shocks. Because they had limited information, they could not distinguish
accurately between the two. Even if they had wanted to react only to individual
shocks, they ended up reacting also to aggregate shocks such as changes in nominal
money. Nominal money therefore could affect output.

Developing general equilibrium models with optimal price setting under imperfect
information proved however difficult and, early on, the choice was made to examine
the implications of imperfect information while maintaining the assumption of perfect
competition in all markets. This was an important choice, making for more tractable
models at the cost of eliminating important issues. The first macroeconomic models
along those lines were developed by Lucas

The material in this section is covered more extensively in chapter 21,
from a different angle.

22

1. The Lucas Model

Lucas [1972] constructed a macroeconomic model with optimizing agents,

decentralized markets and imperfect information. A streamlin!d version was given in
[1913] and has the following structure

(2.1)

y =

(2.2)

Pt =p+e

(2.3)

yt = b(pt—Eip)

a(m—p)

No distinction is made between workers and firms. Output is produced by n firms,

indexed by i, each operating as a price taker in its own market. Equation (2.1) is
aggregate demand. Equation (2.2) gives the price facing each firm, pi ; pi differs
from the price level p by a random variable ei ,

which reflects movements in relative

demands across markets. The et are uncorrelated across firms and are white noise. The
supply of each firm is given by equation (2.3) : Eip is the expectation of the price
level by firm i, based on its observation of pi. Firms react only to perceived
relative price changes.
When firms observe a high value of pi,

this

may reflect either a high value of

m, or a high value of ei, or both. This leads them to revise upwards their
expectation of p, according to Eip =

Em

+ k(pi—Em), where Em is the expectation of m

(and p) they held before observing pi. The parameter k depends on the relative
variances of unanticipated money and of the shock et , and is between zero and one.

Replacing in (2.3) gives yj = b(1—k)(i—Em). The higher the nominal price it
observes, the higher its conditional expectation of a relative price shock et ,

the

higher the supply of firm i. Aggregating over firms gives ai aggregate supply curve

23

(2.4)

y = b(l—k) (p—Em)

Solving (2.3) and (2.4) gives
p = d Em + (1—d)
(2.5)

y = ad

where

it

d = b(1—k)/(a+b(1—k)) and

(rn—Em)

Imperfect information leads therefore to an effect of unanticipated money on
output. This is because firms partly misperceive money shocks for relative price
shocks. The counterpart is that firms partly misperceive relative price shocks for
money shocks and thus underreact to those ;

this

however has no macroeconomic

implications.

The (1972] and (1973] models showed how, under market clearing and imperfect
information, unanticipated money could affect output. Neither however showed why
money could have lasting effects on output9, nor did they try to explain the specific
behavior of firms versus workers, wages versus prices. Those issues were taken up by
-

subsequent research.

2. Impulse and Propagation mechanisms

Intertemporal substitution

•

While the 1973 model includes lagged output in the supply equation,
leading to lasting effects of unanticipated money on output, it is, as Lucas
indicated, an assumption without justification within the model.

24

The mechanism through which money had a positive effect on output in the Lucas
model raised two questions. The first was asked by Lucas himself

how could

misperceptions about money have such large effects on supply ? The second was raised
most explicitly by Friedman [1978)

why was it that suppliers rather than buyers

were the ones who misperceived prices ? If the information structure was such that
suppliers observed prices accurately, but that buyers were misled in thinking that a
high price meant in part a high relative price, wouldn't this lead to a decrease in

demand and anoutput contraction instead ?
The answer to the first question had already been suggested by Lucas and Rapping
[19691 who had focused on workers and labor supply. Perceived permanent changes in

the real wage were unlikely to lead to large supply responses, because of conflicting
income and substitution effects. Perceived temporary changes however had mainly
substitution effects and could lead to large responses. }lore generally and more

formally, the relevant intertemporal relative price to a supplier i was
(Pi/P)/(1+re) (p1t/p0) ,

the ratio of his perceived relative price (the real wage for

workers) to his expected relative price discounted by the expected real interest
rate. If when suppliers observed an increase in their price, they infered that it was
partly due to a favorable shift in demand, and if they did not expect these shifts in
demand to be permanent, they would then respond to nominal shocks by increasing
supply.

The issues raised by the second question were analyzed by Sarro who, in a series
of papers, constructed models allowing for intertemporal substitution and
misperceptions on both the supply and the demand side. A general equilibrium model
where money is the only asset so that the real interest rate is the negative of the

rate of inflation and the relevant relative price is simply j/1je was developed in
Barro [1976) ; It was extended in Barro [1981) to allow for other assets than money

25

and to deal with the endogeneity of the real interest rate. These models show how
intertemporal substitution and specific information structures can deliver positive
effects of money on output ; they do not however make a convincing case for the
specific information structure and set of structural coefficients which deliver such
positive effects.

Persistence
The second issue was how the initial misperception could have long lasting
effects on output and employment. Two types of channels were later identified
First? if the initial misperception led firms or workers to change a state
variable, a variable which affected their decisions in subsequent periods, the
initial impulse would have lasting effects. Lucas [1979] emphasized the role of
capital in creating persistence. If misperceptions led firms to both sell and invest
more, the higher capital stock would later on lead to a higher profit maximizing
level of output. Output would be higher until firms decreased their capital back to
equilibrium. While capital accumulation appears to be an unlikely channel for
cyclical persistence, similar effects, but working through inventories or through
employment in the presence of costs of adjustment were characterized by Blinder and
Fischer [1981] and Sargent (1979] respectively. Howitt [1986] has recently shown that
persistence also emerges from an explicit search model of the labor market, where
persistence arises from costs of changing employment.
Another channel for persistence was identified by Taylor (1975] and Lucas (1975]
if direct information about nominal shocks was not available even ex post, large
permanent changes in money could be misperceived for relative price changes for a
long time, during which they would have an effect on output.

26

Those extensions still imply that only unanticipated changes in nominal money
matter, but their effects on output can now be long lasting. There is however an
obvious tension between the factors needed to get large impulses and those needed to
get persistence. Strong intertemporal substitution, for example, leads to a strong
response of labor supply to misperceptions, but through the accumulation of wealth,

also leads to lower labor supply later, to negative serial correlation of output in
response to shocks. Costs of adjustment on the other hand lead to more persistence,
but to smaller initial effects of shocks.

Policy Implications

Most of the models above share the same policy implications. These were first
pointed out by Lucas [1973), Sargent (1973] and Sargent and Wallace [1975)

Anticipated money had no effect. Unanticipated money could in general affect output
but, if the monetary authority had no more information than the public, this effect
was unlikely to improve welfare

if the policy maker had no more information than

the public, unanticipated monetary movements would be uncorrelated with other shocks,

increasing noise and making signal extraction more difficult for individuals and
firms, decreasing the allocative efficiency of the price system. If the policy maker
had more information, money could then obviously be used to offset other shocks and
improve welfare but an equally efficient way of achieving the same outcome would then
be simply to make information, available to the public. These conclusions have been

slightly qualified later. Weiss [1980] and King [1982] have shown that policy rules
based on public information can sometimes affect the outcome by changing the
information content of observable prices. Other examples have been constructed of
economies with other distortions in which additional noise can be welfare improving.
These qualifications not withstanding, the role for monetary policy is drastically
reduced from the role it can play under the standard wage price inechanim.

27

3. Empirical Evidence

Reduced form evidence

money1 output and the price level

The most striking implication of imperfect information models, and the most at
variance with previous beliefs is that anticipated money does not matter. The
evidence on the relation between money and output has been reexamined by Barro in a
series of articles (1977, 1978, 1980] which we have already briefly described.

Dividing money into two components, unanticipated and anticipated money, Barro
concluded that he could not reject the hypothesis that anticipated money did not
affect output. Further work by J4ishkin [1983] has shown however that anticipated

money also affects output, although by less than unanticipated money. These results
were shown in table 2.

While money stock figures are published with little delay, they are subsequently
revised. A literal interpretation of imperfect information models suggests that only
the unperceived component of money, that is the difference between the final revision
and the initial announcement, should affect economic activity. This was tested by
Barro and Hercowitz (1980] and Boschen and Grossman (1982] and decisively rejected
this is however a rejection only of an extreme and absurd version of imperfect
information models.

An other implication of most —although not all— imperfect information models is
that money affects output through price level surprises. An equation relating output
movements to unanticipated price level movements was first run by Sargent (1976a] who
found only weak evidence in favor of such an effect. Fair (1979] found instead, by
extending the sample period to include the 1970's, a positive correlation between

28

unemployment and price level innovations

These results have been challenged by Gray

and Spencer [1984] who argue that whether the correlation between price level and
output innovations are positive or negative depends on whether supply or demand
shocks dominate the sample. Specifying unemployment as a function of price level
surprises, energy price surprises and proxies for frictional unemployment, they find
that price level surprises have a significant effect on unemployment. Using annual
data, they find the following relation between unemployment and unanticipated price
level movements
u = —.4 (p—E(pI—1))—l.4(p—E(p—2))—.8(p—E(pI—3)) +

(supply

factors)

where u is the unemployment rate, and E(p—i) is the expectation of the (logarithm of
the) price level at time t based on information available at time t—i'°. Note that
this relation can be rewritten as a price—price Phillips curve, namely as
p = —.4 u +

(.1

E(ph-1)+.6 E(p—2) + .3 E(pI—3)) + (supply factors)

What Gray and Spencer have thus shown is that the set of correlations
traditionally summarized by the Phillips curve can also be given an alternative
interpretation, an interpretation more consistent with the imperfect information
approach'1. }lore generally, one may conclude from a reading of the research on

reduced form evidence that the comovements of output, prices and money are consistent
with the view that unanticipated money has weaker effects on the price level and
stronger effects on output than anticipated money'2.

10

The presence of lagged expectations is easier to justify in a contract
model, such as those studied in the next section than in an imperfect
information model. Gray and Spencer derive their specification from such a
contract model.
Li
The presence of lagged expectations is however easier to justify in the
context of models with nominal rigidities reviewed in the next section.
12
See however the discussion of identification of unanticipated versus
anticipated money in the previous section.

29

Intertemporal substitution, the real wage, labor supply and consumption

While most imperfect information models share the same reduced form implications
for output and prices, they differ in their implications as to the relation between
real wages and employment, which depends crucially on the source of disturbances and
the information structure. If firms perceive prices and wages accurately, money
shocks must lead to movements along the labor demand of firms and are likely to imply
a negative correlation of real wages and employment. But if instead workers perceive
wages and prices accurately, movements take place along labor supply, with a likely
positive correlation between real wages and employment. In all cases however,
intertemporal substitution by workers in response to correctly or incorrectly
perceived opportunities must be an essential part of the model. Thus, intertemporal
substitution has been subject to exhaustive econometric examination
If variations in individual wages largely exceed aggregate variations,

misperception of current real wages because of incorrect perceptions of the price
level, while essential to explain aggregate fluctuations, may be a minor issue for
individual workers'3. Thus, even if aggregate fluctuations are due to imperfect
information, panel data on real wages and employment can still be used to estimate

the elasticity o substitution. If individuals are formalized as intertemporal
utility maximizers with additively separable utility in consumption and leisure,
there are two ways in which the elasticity of substitution can be estimated. The
first is to look at the effects of changes in wages on hours worked, controlling for

The fact that business cycle fluctuations are small compared to
fluctuations in individual fortunes was stressed by Lucas (1977)

30

total wealth. The other is to estimate the static first order condition, which gives
a relation between consumption, leisure and the real wage. Empirical evidence using
both approaches is reviewed by Ashenfelter (1984] (see also Altonji (1986]). Most of
the evidence points to a small positive elasticity, surely insufficient to explain
the fluctuations in aggregate employment.

Mankiw, Rotemberg and Summers [1985] have examined the joint behavior of
aggregate consumption, employment and real wages, to see whether consumption and
employment could be explained as the result of optimal intertemporal choice by a
"representative" individual. This approach implicitly assumes that workers can
observe actual real wages and have common expectations about the future. They show
that the joint behavior of aggregate employment, consumption and real wages is
inconsistent with such assumptions. The reason why is a simple and important one
business cycles are characterized by conovements in consumption and employment, or
equivalently by opposite movements in consumption and leisure. If utility is
additively separable in time, this can only be explained by large procyclical
movements in the aggregate real wage (this point is further developed by Barro and
Ring [1984]) ,

which however are not present in the data. Attempts to reconcile the

behavior of the real wage, consumption and leisure by allowing for non time
separability in utility have not been successful (Eichenbaum, Hansen and Singleton
[1987]). There appears to be only two ways to reconcile the data with large

intertemporal substitution effects : the first is that business cycle fluctuations
are largely the result of taste shocks, taste shifts between consumption and leisure.

The other is that the real wage is not equal to the marginal rate of substitution
between leisure and consumption

this would be the case if labor contracts provided

insurance through real wages'4. In this latter case, the marginal rate of

14

We describe briefly the implications of such contracts in the next

section.

-

31

substitution should still be equal to the marginal product of labor ; thus,
intertemporal substitution may still be testable.

Current developments
Research on macroeconomic models with imperfect information has dwindled in the
1980's. Many of its proponents have moved on to develop real business cycles models,

models in which money and misperceptions play little or no role and where shocks come
instead from either government spending (Barro [1986]), or tastes and technology (see
for example Prescott [1986]). In those models, the correlation between money and
output is explained by reverse causality ; money may precede movements in output if,

for example, it is an input in production and production takes time (King and Plosser
[1984] ,

Eichenbaum and Singleton [1986]) . There are probably two reasons for this

shift in focus

The first is that, as the emphasis has shifted more and more to intertemporal
choice, it has proven convenient to work with explicit representative agent models,
in which cycles are formalized as the result of equilibrium with intertempora].ly

maximizing identical firms and identical individuals. These models have complex
dynamics even in the absence of money and imperfect information. The focus on real

business cycles may then be justified as a tractable and necessary firststep.
The other reason arises from the mixed empirical success of the imperfect
information—money shocks approach. Focusing on other types of shocks may help
reconcile the behavior of quantities and prices. Allowing for taste shocks for
example may help explain the opposite movements in consumption and leisure in the
face of little movement in real wages. It is too early to tell whether this approach
will be more successful (see Summers [1981] for a negative forecast). But it surely
falls outside the scope of this chapter and is covered at length in Chapter 21.

32

Section III Imperfect Competition

For those who believed that the wage—price mechanism was generally sound despite
its weak theoretical foundations, the immediate task was to explore how it could

accomodate rational expectations. Two important papers, by Fischer [1977a] and by
Taylor [1980], developed models which embodied nominal rigidities and rational

expectations, and which implied a role for policy in general and for monetary policy
in particular. The section starts with them. While these models answered the

immediate challenge, they did not however dispose of most of the earlier theoretical
objections to the wage—price mechanism. Much of the research since has attempted to
put price and wage determination on more solid foundations. This is reviewed in this
and the next section.

1. Price and wage setting, and the effects of money on output

The Fischer model

Fischer (1977a] introduced the following model '

15

(3.1)

y = (m—p) + u

(3.2)

y = —(w—p)

A closely related model was presented at the same time by Phelps and
Taylor [1977]. It is interesting to note that Phelps, in presenting his model,
thought of it as a natural extension of the work presented in the Phelps
volume, in particular of the work on the implications of imperfect information
on price setting. In that sense, both the imperfect information and imperfect
competition approaches trace back to the same origin.

33

w = E(pI—l)

(3.3)

Equation (3.1) is aggregate demand, with, for convenience, unit elasticity of
output with respect to money balances. u is a non policy demand disturbance. Equation
(3.2) is output supply, obtained from profit maximization, with again for

convenience, the assumption of unit elasticity of output supply with respect to the
wage16. The important equation is (3.3), which says that nominal wages are preset at
the beginning of the period, on the basis of available information so as to achieve,

in expectation, a constant teal wage and constant employment. The information
available when the nominal wage is set includes lagged but not current values of m
and u.

Solving for w under rational expectations and replacing gives'7
y = (1/2)((m—E(m—1)) + (u—E(uI—1)))

Thus, demand and money shocks affect output only to the extent that they are
unanticipated ; the reduced form relation is very similar to that of the Lucas model.
But the channel is the same as in Keynes : as prices are flexible but nominal wages
fixed within the period, demand shocks increase prices, decrease real wages and
increase output.

In this first model, if policy makers cannot act more often and do not have more
information than wage setters, there is no role for policy to stabilize output. But
this is no longer true when nominal wages are set for periods of time longer than the
time between policy decisions. This is shown in the second model presented by

16
-

Fischer

introduces also a supply disturbance v ; in the presence of

such a disturbance, workers cannot in general choose nominal wages so as to

achieve both constant expected real wages and constant expected employment. I
do not want to deal with those issues here and put v equal to 0. I return to
those issues when I study indexation below.
17
For the mechanics of solving linear models with rational expectations,
see Taylor (1986b)

34

Fischer. In that model, at the beginning of each period, half of the labor force now
presets its nominal wages for two periods, the current and the next. Each nominal
wage is again set so as to achieve a constant expected real wage in each of the two
periods. The model becomes
(3.1)

y = (m—p)+u

(3.2')

y = —(1/2)[(w—p)+(w(—1)—p)]

(3.3)

w =

E(pI-l)

w(—l) = E(p—2)

Equation (3.2') gives the wage relevant to firms. It is a weighted average of
the nominal wages currently in existence. The first, which applies to half of the
labor force, is the wage chosen for this period at the beginning of this period ; the
second is that chosen for this period at the beginning of the previous period. They
are denoted w and w(—l) respectively. Equation (3.3) states that each of these two
nominal wages is in turn equal to the expectation of the current price level based on
information available as of the time the wage was set

wages are set so as to

achieve, in expected value, a constant real wage. Solving for output under rational
expectations gives
y = (l/2)[(1/3)(m—E(mI—1)+(2/3)(m—E(m—2)] +

(1/2)N1/3)(u—E(u—1)+(2/3)(u—E(ul—2)]
Output movements still depend only on unanticipated money and demand shocks. But
unanticipated money is now equal to money minus a weighted average of money
anticipated as of this and the previous period. This has two implications. The first
is that the effects of money on output last for two periods. The second is that
monetary policy based only on information available at the beginning of the period
can decrease output fluctuations. To see this, assume for example that u follows a
random walk, say u = u(—1) +

would follow

v,

where v iswhite. Then, if money was constant, output

35

y

(1/2)[v+(2/3)v(—1)]

If instead, monetary policy follows the rule m = —(2/3)v(—1), output follows y =

(l/2)v

and has smaller variance. The reason for why money works is simple : in

response to unexpected demand disturbances this period, nominal wage setters would
like to readjust their nominal wages for next period. Half of them cannot but the
monetary authority can, by adjusting money for next period, cancel the effect of the
unexpected demand disturbance on next period's price level.

An implication of this result is that if an optimal feedack rule is used for
money, the variance of output does not increase with the number of periods during
which nominal wages is fixed. Thus, activist monetary policy can offset the effects
of multiperiod predetermination of wages. The model makes a strong case for activist
policy.

The Taylor model

Following an earlier paper by Akerlof (1969], John Taylor (1980] introduced a
model similar in most respects to the two period staggered wage setting model of
Fischer but with one important difference

wages were not only predetermined but

fixed for two periods, that is set at the same nominal level for those two periods'8.
A simpler version was presented by Taylor (1979] and has the following structure

18

the two other differences are unimportant. In Fischer, firms operate
under decreasing returns and workers desire a constant real wage. In Taylor,
firms operate under constant teturns to scale and workers desired real wage is
an increasing function of employment. Thus, in Fischer, output appears in the
price equation, but not in the wage equation. In Taylor, output appears in the
wage equation, but not in the price equation. As long as labor supply and
labor demand are not both infinitely elastic with respect to the wage, whether
output appears in one or in the other or in both equations does not affect the
qualitative effects of money on output. It does affect however the qualitative
effects of money on real wages. In Taylor, real wages are constant ; in
Fischer, they are countercyclical.

36

(3.4)

y = (m-p)

(3.5)

p =

(1/2) (w

(3.6)

w =

(l/2)[p+E(p(+1H-l]

+ w(—1))

+(1/2)a[E(yl—l)+E(y(+1H-1)J

Equation (3.4) gives aggregate demand. We do not allow here for shocks other
than nominal money.

Each period, half of the labor force chooses a nominal wage for the current and
the next period ; this wage is denoted w. Thus in the current period, halt of the
labor force is paid w, and half is paid w(—1). Equation (3.5) gives the price level
as a weighted average of these two wages. The markup of prices over wages is assumed
not to depend on the level of output.

Equation (3.6) gives w, the wage chosen this period for the current and the next
period. If workers could choose their nominal wage each period, it would be an
increasing function of the price level, with unit elasticity, and of output
(employment), with elasticity a. As they preset their nominal wage for two periods,

the nominal wage w depends on the price level and on output this period and expected
for the next. Money is assumed to be known only after wages have been set and is
therefore not in the information set when w is chosen.

Replacing p and E(p(1fl—l) from (3.5) in (3.6) and reorganizing
(3.7)

w = (1/2)[w(—l)+E(w(+1H—1J + a [E(yl—1)+E(y(+1fl—1)]

This suggests an alternative interpretation of wage behavior. Workers care about
relative wages, thus about w(—1) and E(w(+1) I—i) ,

the wages paid to the other half of

the labor force this period and next. This is the interpretation given byTaylor'9.

It is sometimes argued that the Taylor model depends on the assumption
that workers care directly about their wages in comparison to other wages, an
assumption which is thought by some to be unattractive. As the first
presentation of the model in the text should make clear, this is not the case.

37

To solve this model under rational expectations, it is easier to specify a
process for m. If in follows for example a random walk, the solution is given by
w = k w(—1) + (1—k)m(—1)
p =

(1/2)

(w+w(—1))
-

y=(m-p)

where k = (l—va)f(1+va) < 1
Consider the dynamic effects of an unanticipated increase in money. Because
wages are set before money is observed, money has no effect on wages or prices in the
current period and thus has a full effect on output. Over time however, nominal wages
adjust and so does the price level. Output returns to equilibrium over time at an
exponential rate. The smaller the parameter a, which measures the effect of labor
market conditions on wages, the closer is k to one and the longer lasting the real
effects of money.

These results differ from those of Fischer in one important way

the effects of

money last for much longer than the time during which each nominal wage is fixed. The
intuition behind this result is that, as shown in (3.7), staggering implies that
workers care indirectly about relative wages. If the effect of labor market
conditions is weak, workers choose a new nominal wage w close to the existing wage
w(—1) ; nominal wages and thus the price level adjust slowly to equilibrium20

The issues

20

Although we do not show it here, this wage setting structure also
implies that anticipated money affects output.

38

While the models of Fischer and Taylor showed that rational expectations could
be introduced in the "wage—price mechanism", could generate long lasting effects of
nominal money and leave a role for policy, they left many issues unanswered. Taking
the Taylor model as an example, that model raises for example two sets of issues
Long lasting real effects of money require k to be close to unity. This in turn
requires a, the elasticity of the (target) real wage with respect to employment to be
small. Taylor assumes that the markup is insensitive to movements in output but, if
we were to relax this assumption and allow the markup to be a function of demand, say
with elasticity equal to b, a parallel condition would emerge

long lasting real

effects of nominal money would require b to be small as well.

More generally, a necessary condition for persistent real effects of money is
the presence of real rigidities. Put another way, which is more intuitive but
slightly misleading, long lasting effects of money require flat supply curves for
goods and labor21. The issue is then to reconcile such required small values of a and
b with the presumption that, ruling out strong intertemporal substitution effects,
the elasticity of labor supply with respect to wages is likely to be small and with
the presumption that, if capital is fixed in the short run, marginal cost is upward
sloping. I discuss this first set of issues in the next subsection.

Real rigidities are a necessary but not a sufficient condition for persistence
if wages and prices adjusted continuously, money would still be neutral,

21

The way in which this is misleading is that if, for example, when a
price is set by monopolist, or a wage determined as a result of bargaining
between a firm and a union, there is no such thing as a supply curve. There is
however a relation between prices and output, or wages and employment, which
is traced out by shifting demand, which can be thought of an implicit supply
curve.

39

independently of the values of a and b. In the Taylor model, the two elements, the

nominal rigidities, which imply non neutrality of money are presetting of nominal
wages, and staggering of wage decisions. But this raises a second set of issues. If
the reason why wages are set only at discrete intervals of time is the presence of
costs of changing wages, can such costs, which are likely to be small, explain the
fluctuations in output we actually observe ? If wage setters are tree to choose the
timing of their decisions, is staggering an equilibrium ? If nominal wage setting and
staggering are the result of optimal wage setting by individuals or firms, doesn't
this imply that fluctuations in output are optimal, when account is taken of the
costs of adjusting wages ? I discuss those issues in the following section.

2. Real rigidities

I review here research on the behavior of the goods and labor markets from a
narrow angle, namely by asking

Can models of the goods market explain why, in

response to shifts in demand, the adjustment falls mostly on quantities and not on
prices, given wages ? Can models of the labor market similarly explain why shifts in
the demand for labor fall mostly on employment and not on wages, given prices ?22

The goods market

22

I have made no attempt to give a complete bibliography of the work
presented in this subsection. Many of the references are themselves surveys
and serve that function.

40

Research on the goods market has focused on the implications of imperfect
competition. Imperfect competition per se does not imply price rigidity : it is well
known that the price rule followed by a monopolist in response to multiplicative
shifts in isoelastic demand is the same, up to a constant reflecting monopoly power,

as the supply curve which would follow from competitive behavior with the same
technology. But if technologies differ under perfect and imperfect competition, or if
the degree of monopoly power varies with the level of demand, imperfect competition
may then lead to more price rigidity
If imperfect competition leads firms to have more capital at a given level of

demand than would be the case under perfect competition, marginal cost may be flat
over a larger range of output : this may arise if entry leads firms with monopoly
power to dissipate profit (Hall [1986)) through excess capacity, or if excess

capacity serves as a barrier to entry (Fudenberg and Tirole [1983]) Is marginal cost
flat at normal levels of production ? This is doubtful. While labor productivity is
procyclical, the proportion of overtime labor, of labor paid time and a half, is
strongly procyclical. If firms had cheper means of increasing production, they would
not use overtime. Bils (1985], pursuing this line of reasoning, concludes that
marginal cost is upward sloping in most industries, so that this does not appear to
be the explanation for real price rigidity.

The monopolist example above assumes that the degree of monopoly power, which in
that example is only a function of the elasticity of demand, is constant. But, if
monopoly power is countercyclical, an increase in demand will lead to lower markups
of prices over marginal costs, thus to less movement in the markup than in marginal
cost. This may be the case if the elasticity of demand increases with the level of
demand, so that monopoly power is lower in booms (see Stiglitz [1984] for a review of
such cases) .

It

can also be the case if the sustainable degree of collusion is lower

when demand is high (Rotemberg and Saloner [1986a]).

41
Many stories do not however make a theory of price rigidity. They also suggest
that price rigidity should vary across markets, in particular as a function of market
structure. The evidence is however mixed, with some evidence that markups are more
cyclical in concentrated industries (Doaowitz, Hubbard and Petersen [1986]). A more
radical departure from standard price setting has been developed by Okun [1981] who
suggests that, in all customer markets, customers develop a notion of fairness. If
price changes are perceived as unfair, a firm may actually lose profit by increasing
prices in response to increases in demand. While there is evidence that fairness
plays an important role in goods markets (Kahneman et al [1986]), the issue becomes
that of what in turn determines fairness.

The labor market

If we believe that intertemporal substitution in labor supply is not of major
relevance for macroeconomic fluctuations, and that the elasticity of labor supply
with respect to permanent changes in the real wage is small, the fact that shifts in
demand for labor appear to fall mostly on employment rather than on wages is
puzzling. It also suggests that a radical departure from perfect competition is
needed. Research on real wage rigidity has explored three different directions
The first has been the implication of the presence of unions. Again, the
presence of a union does not necessarily imply more real wage rigidity than in a
competitive labor market (see the surveys by Oswald [1985] and Farber [1986]). But it
may

McDonald and Solow, (1981) concentrating on the case of bilateral monopoly

between a firm and a union, have shown that, if in response to shifts in demand, both
sides

decide to share gains from trade "fairly", the outcome will usually be one of

large employment fluctuations and small real wage fluctuations.

42

Large parts of the labor market are neither unionized, nor under threat of
unionization. Another direction of research has explored the scope and the
implications of implicit contracts between workers and firms. Initially, the
implications of insurance by risk neutral firms to risk averse workers were seen as
providing a potential explanation for real wage rigidities and large employment
fluctuations. It was soon realized however that while this could explain real wage
rigidity, it implied, absent income effects from insurance, exactly the same
employment pattern than under perfect competition and thus could not, if individual
labor supply was inelastic, explain large employment fluctuations (see Azariadis
[1979)). The theory of implicit contracts was then extended to allow for asymmetric

information between workers and firms. The employment characteristics of optimal
contracts under asymmetric information depend very much on the relative degrees of
risk aversion of firms and workers and on the information structure. There does not,
at this stage, appear to be good reasons to think that they will, in general, lead to
larger employment fluctuations than full information contracts (see the survey by
Stiglitz [1986)). Hart and Holmstrom [1986] discuss also the potential role of such
contracts in explaining macroeconomic fluctuations.

The last direction of research has focused on "efficiency wage" models, models
in which the wagfe may directly affect the marginal product of labor. One possible
reason, emphasized by Akerlof (1982], and closely related to the customer market
argument of Okun discussed above, is simply that workers form wage norms and sharply
decrease their effort if wages go below the norm. As in the case of fairness, the
issue is again here that of what determines those norms, given that they clearly
evolve over time, increasing for example as productivity increases. Other models
which do not rely on interpersonal comparisons of utility have also been developped
(see the surveys by Yellen (1984] and Katz [1986] of the theoretical and empirical

43

evidence). If, for example, effort can only be imperfectly monitored, it may be
optimal for a firm to pay a wage above the market : it is then costly for a worker to
be caught shirking and fired, and workers may then choose the optimal amount of
effort.

To see what efficiency wage theories may imply for the issue at hand, consider
the following example from Solow [1979]. Suppose that profit for a firm is given by
aF(e(If)L) — WL,

where L is the number of workers and e is the effort per worker.

Effort is assumed to be an increasing function of the real wage W. The firm chooses 1
and W so that the first order conditions are
= 1

(3.8)

e'(W)W/e(W)

(3.9)

e(W)aF'(e(V)L) =

W

The real wage chosen by the firm is given by (3.8) and is such the elasticity of
effort with respect to the wage is equal to one. Equation (3.9) in turn determines
employment.

In this example, there is complete real wage rigidity. A shift in a, which can
be interpreted as a shift in the relative price facing the firm, has no effect on the
real wage paid by the firm and falls fully on employment. The model however assumes
that effort depends only on the absolute level of the real wage. Suppose that effort
depends instead positively on the wage paid by the firm relative to the aggregate
wage, and positively on unemployment, as is the case in the shirking model. In that
case, the condition corresponding to (3.7) then gives the relative wage as a function
of unemployment. In equilibrium, all wages must be the same ; this in turn determines
a relation between the real wage and unemployment. In the model of Shapiro and
Stiglitz [1984], workers have a reservation wage below which they do not work and
above which they supply one unit of labor, so that, absent efficiency wage
considerations, aggregate labor supply has an inverted I. shape. With efficiency

44

wages, this labor supply locus is replaced by a smooth increasing equilibrium
relation between wages and employment. Thus, an economy which, absent efficiency
wages, operated at full employment with shifts in demand translating only into
changes in wages, will, with efficiency wages, experience movements in both wages and
employment. Employment fluctuations will be larger, and wage fluctuations smaller,
under efficiency wages than under perfect competition.

45
Section IV

Imperfect competition (continued)

1. Nominal rigidities

the static case

An old but vague Keynesian theme, starting with Keynes' own explanation of
nominal wage rigidity, is that of coordination problems. The argument is the
following

to be neutral, a decrease in money requires a proportional decrease in

all nominal prices, leaving all relative prices the same. But if price setters do not
want to change relative prices, none of them will want to decrease his price first.
The outcome will be nominal rigidity, or at best slow adjustment of nominal prices.
The argument is clearly right in the extreme case in which price setters want to
keep relative prices constant, in the case of complete real price rigidities. A
change in nominal money, at given prices, changes real balances, output and
employment but does not lead any price setter to change his price given others. The
analogy with Daylight Saving Time in the US, introduced by Friedman [1953) to make
the case for flexible exchange rates, is revealing. While it may be socially
desirable to change the hours during which stores are open in winter, this will not
happen without explicit coordination of decisions, as each store wants to keep the
same hours as other stores. A change in the clock achieves the result without need
for coordination. Woglom (1982] develops an economic model with the same structure.

The economy is composed of monopolists who face kinked demand curves. This leads
them not to want to change their relative price in response to changes in demand
this in turn leads to nominal rigidities and non neutrality of money.
But the argument, at least in this simple form, does not hold when the relative
price chosen by each price setter is an increasing function of the output he

lv

Tha

I

a

\

\
\N

MC

A

4-

b

.(Ei /(t5
I

P

rig

fr "•

1S

•t9LA:L4Lhfl,

ut1-p4-.

cv4

46

produces. In this case, an increase in nominal money, which increases demand and
output, leads all price setters to attempt to increase their relative price ; as this

is impossible, all nominal prices increase until real money balances are back to
equilibrium. The initial argument holds however in slightly modified form ;

its

structure has recently been clarified and I now present it.

Nominal rigidities, pecuniary externalities and menu costs

The argument requires some deviation from perfect competition and its specific
form depends on the specific deviation. I present it here in a simple general
equilibrium model with monopolistic competition, which follows Mankiw [1985],
Kiyotaki [1985] , Ng

[1986] and is extended in Blanchard and Kiyotaki [1986]. Akerlof

and Yellen [1985] have developed a closely related argument, but in a model with
efficiency wages in the labor market and imperfect competition in the goods market.

The economy is composed of n workers—producers, i1,..,n, selling differentiated
products, but otherwise identical. The demand facing producer i is a decreasing

function of his relative price (n/F) and an increasing function of aggregate real
money balances (M/P). Each producer also faces an upward sloping marginal cost
function, which reflects increasing marginal disutility of work and/or decreasing
returns to scale in production. Marginal cost, demand and marginal revenue functions
facing producer i are drawn in figure 1. Demand and marginal revenue are drawn for an
arbitrary level of aggregate real money balances.

The profit maximizing level of output for producer i is given by the
•

intersection of marginal cost and marginal revenue, with the associated price being
given by the demand curve, point A. In symmetric equilibrium, all prices must be the

47

same, so that N/P = 1. This in turn determines the equilibrium level of real money
balances and the price level.

If each producer acted competitively instead, the equilibrium would be at the
intersection of marginal cost and demand. In symmetric equilibrium, Pt/P would still
be equal to one, so that the equilibrium would be at point B instead. This in turn
implies that, as the demand curve must go through B, the equilibrium real money
balances would be higher under perfect competition, the price level lower. Note that,
as all producers have the same degree of monopoly power, monopoly power has no effect
on the relative price of produced goods. Monopolistic competition affects instead the
relative price of goods in terms of money, the price level, which is higher than

under competition. Welfare, measured by consumer and producer surplus23, is higher
under perfect competition.

The informal argument can now be formalized and proceeds in two steps.

(1) Associated with the manopolistically competitive equilibrium is a pecuniary
externality

A decrease in an individual producer's nominal price has two effects. First it
increases the demand for that producer's good ; second, by decreasing (slightly) the
price level, it increases real money balances, increasing demand and output of all
other producers. In equilibrium, prices are such that the first effect on profit is
equal to zero to a first order

each producer has no incentive to change his price.

But, because output is initially below its socially optimal level under monopolistic
competition, the second effect leads to an increase on welfare.

23

In Blanchard and Kiyotaki, marginal utility of income is constant and
the sum of consumer and producer surplus for a representative market is indeed
the appropriate measure of welfare.

48

Put another way —which will be convenient below— a small proportional decrease
in all nominal prices, a decrease in the price level, would increase output and have
a first order positive effect on welfare. But, no individual producer has an
incentive to decrease his own price given other prices, as he would experience a
second order loss in profit.

(2) In the presence of small costs of changing prices, "menu costs", the
pecuniary externality implies nominal price rigidity.

Instead of a small decrease in the price level given nominal money, consider a
small increase in nominal money given the price level. Output and welfare increase to
a first order ; but each producer has a second order incentive to increase his price.
Absent menu costs, the economy would return to the initial level of output with
higher prices. Small menu costs, that is second order costs but larger than the loss
in profit associated with not changing the price, will however prevent this
adjustment. If they do, nominal prices will not adjust and the change in nominal
money will affect output and have first order effects on welfare.

To summarize, imperfect competition implies that, in response to an increase in
nominal money, the incentive to adjust relative prices may be weak. Small costs of
changing prices will prevent adjustment of relative prices, thus of nominal prices,
leading to an increase in aggregate demand. Because price initially exceeds marginal
cost, firms will willingly increase output even if they do not adjust prices. Output
will go up and so will welfare.

Extensions : the role of structural parameters ; multiple equilibria

49

Two more sets of results can be derived from this simple framework.

(1) The first relates the size of menu costs needed to prevent adjustment of

prices to the parameters of demand and cost. Second order nenu costs are sufficient
to imply real effects of small changes in nominal money. But, with respect to larger
changes in nominal money, the size of the menu costs required to prevent adjustment
depends on the the characteristics of technology and market structure.

If marginal cost was constant, a condition which implicitly requires both
constant marginal disutility of work and constant returns in production, no price
setter would want to change his relative price and nominal prices would remain
unchanged even in the absence of menu costs. By continuity, as long as marginal cost
is fairly flat, small menu costs can prevent adjustment of prices. But, if the
disutility of work is a strongly increasing function of the level of work —an
assumption which would imply an inelastic labor supply in a competitive labor market—
the menu costs required to prevent price adjustment become implausibly large. This
shows the limits of the menu cost argument and the need to construct models which
combine menu costs with real rigidities. This has been for example the approach
followed by Akerlof and Yellen (1985] who develop a model with efficiency wages in
the labor market, and monopolistic competition and menu costs in the goods markets.
Their version of efficiency wages, which is the same as that in equations (3.8) and
(3.9) delivers movements in employment with no change in the real wage. As long as
there is unemployment, this implies that the labor market behaves as if labor supply
was infinitely elastic at the prevailing wage. Thus, as long as firms operate under
close to constant returns to scale, monopolistic competition and menu costs in price
setting easily deliver nominal rigidity of both prices and wages, and real effects of
nominal money.

50

The other main parameter in the model above is the elasticity of substitution
between goods, which determines the elasticity of demand with respect to relative
prices. The higher this elasticity, the higher the opportunity cost of not adjusting
relative prices and thus the higher the menu costs required to prevent adjustment of

prices. Rotemberg and Saloner [198Gb] use this argument to explain why prices appear
to be more rigid under monopoly than under duopoly in which each firm perceives a
more elastic demand curve.

(2) what has been shown above was that if menu costs were large enough, there

was an equilibrium with unchanged nominal prices. What has not been shown is that
this was the only equilibrium. Whether or not it is depends on the interactions
between prices. The argument has been formalized by Ball and Romer [1987b] and
Rotemberg [1987] and has the following structure
A change in the price level has two effects on the nominal price that an
individual price setter wants to set. Other things equal, an increase in the price
level leads to a proportional increase in the desired nominal individual price. But,
at the same time, an increase in the price level decreases real money balances,

shifting inwards the demand curve faced by the price setter, and leading him to
decrease his desired relative price. The net effect is in general ambiguous,

depending on the strength of the effect of real money on aggregate demand and on the
degree of substitution between goods. In the —more likely— case where the
substitution effect dominates, an increase in the price level increases the desired
individual nominal price ; following Cooper and John, this case can be called the
case of "strategic complementarity"24

24

Cooper and John (1985) have looked at the characteristics of equilibria
in games such as this one where the action of one player depends positively on
the actions of other players,. a condition they call "strategic
complementarity". They show that many "Keynesian" models exhibit such a
characteristic and that those games exhibit "multiplier effects" and may have
multiple equilibria.

51

Assuming strategic complementarity and the presence of menu costs, consider the
effects of an increase in nominal money. The incentive for a given price setter to
adjust his price is clearly stronger the larger the proportion of other price setters
who adjust theirs. This suggests that for some values of the menu costs, there may be
two equilibria, one in which all price setters adjust, making it optimal for each
price setter to adjust, and one in which no one adjusts, making it optimal for each
price setter not to adjust. The papers by Ball and Romer and by Rotemberg show that
this is indeed the case. This potential multiplicity of equilibria is more than a
curiosum. It appears in some guise in many of the dynamic extensions of the static
model which we describe below.

From statics to dynamics

the issues

The menu cost argument points to an important externality in price setting.
Before it can be used to conclude that macroeconomic fluctuations are in part the
result of such an externality, two sets of questions must however be answered
(1) The menu cost argument as we have presented it assumes that all prices are

initially equal and set optimally. In a dynamic economy and in the presence of menu
costs, such a degenerate price dis tribution is unlikely to prevail. But if prices are
initially not all equal or optimal to start with, it is no longer obvious that even a
small change in nominal money will leave all prices unaffected. It is no longer
obvious that money will have large effects on output.
(2) Even if nominal money has large effects on output, it must be the case that

money is sometimes unanticipatedly high, sometimes unanticipatedly low. When money is
high, output increases and so does welfare to a first order. When money is low,
output decreases and so does welfare, again to a first order. These welfare effects

52

would appear to cancel out to a first order. It is therefore no longer obvious that,

even if menu costs lead to large output fluctuations, the welfare loss of those
fluctuations largely exceeds the menu costs which generate them. This point is
developed by Ball and Romer [1987a] in the context of the static model above, but
assuming money to be a random variable.

I now review what we know about the answers to those two questions in dynamic
models. It turns out that the answers depend very much on the specific form of
nominal rigidities, on the specific price rules used by price setters. I start by
reviewing what we know about the effects of money if price setters use either time
dependent or state dependent rules. I end the section by discussing what rules are
likely to be chosen, and the nature of actual price and wage rules.

2. Time dependent rules and the effects of money on output

The simplest tine dependent rules are rules in which the time between price
decisions is fixed25. As the Fischer and Taylor models show, time dependent rules do
generate non neutrality. As the difference between the two models also shows, an
important issue, if prices are fixed —rather than predetermined— between price
decisions, is whether those decisions are synchronized or staggered. Staggering leads
to longer lasting effects of nominal money on output. Research has thus proceeded in
two directions. The first has studied the determination of the time structure of
price decisions. The second has studied the implications of alternative staggering

25

This however is not necessary. An example of a time rule with random
time between price decisions is given below.

53

structures, taking staggering as given. While the first logically precedes the
second, it is only recently that research has focused on the first.

Implications of alternative staggering structures

Research on the implications of wage staggering has focused on the implications
of staggering for monetary policy, in particular for disinflationary policies. Phelps
(1979] had shown that if wage setting was characterized by staggering and rational

expectations, there was in principle, and in sharp contrast to the implications of
the standard Phillips curve, a path of disinflation consistent with no output loss.

Taylor (1983] has extended this analysis by computing the actual path of disinflation
consistent with no recession given the actual staggering structure of wage setting in
the US. The path needed to decrease inflation from 10% to 3% at no output loss has
interesting characteristics

inflation goes from 10% to 9.9% in the first year, from

9.9% to 8.7% in the second, and from 8.7% to 3.6% in the third. The very slow initial
decrease is needed because past wage decisions which were taken before the change in
money growth have to be accomodated. But this slow initial decrease raises obvious
issues of credibility, as little happens in the first two years after the change in
policy. These issues have been studied by Fischer (1985] and are analyzed at more
length in chapter 23. Fischer (1984] has extended the analysis to the open economy to
study the implications of the change in real exchange rates implied by monetary
contraction. While the analyses of Taylor and Fischer are based on the assumption
that staggering is unaffected by changes in monetary policy, and are thus subject to
the Lucas critique, empirical studies of the 1979—1982 Us disinflation suggest that
there was indeed little change in aggregate wage behavior during the period
(Englander and Los (1983]).

54

I have studied the implications of staggering of price decisions. While most

prices change more often than wages, I have shown (Blanchard [1983]) that if output
is produced through a chain of production, with price decisions being taken at

different times at different production steps, there can be substantial price level
inertia even if each price setter takes price decisions very often. US empirical
evidence (Blanchard (1987)) shows this effect to be important

I find that, while

prices adjust fast to input prices and wages at the disaggregated level, interaction
between price decisions implies substantial aggregate price inertia. I conclude that
price level inertia in the US comes as much from staggering of price decisions than
from staggering of wage decisions. I have also studied (Blanchard (1986a]) the

implications of wage and price staggering, showing that, even under rational
expectations, such staggering generates a wage price spiral, as well as cost push and
demand pull inflation, ideas which had been emphasized in earlier work on inflation.

All staggering structures have in common that, after an increase in nominal
money which increases demand, price and wage setters attempt to increase or at least
to maintain relative prices and wages. Along the path of adjustment, there are
oscillations but no systematic movement in relative prices and real wages.
Implications of staggering for the variability of relative prices have been drawn and
examined by Taylor [1981] in particular.

All the above papers assume that price decisions are taken for fixed periods of
time and that the cost of changing prices is independent of the size of the change.
Two alternative formalizations have also been explored. Calvo (1982] has built a
model with a continuum of price setters, and in which the probability for a given
price setter to change his price at any point in time is constant. Together, these

55

two assumptions imply that a constant proportion of prices changes at any point in
tine, and give a very convenient continuous time specification of aggregate price
dynamics. Rotemberg [1982] has developed and estimated a model of monopolistic
competition with quadratic costs of adjustment of nominal prices, so that the cost
varies with the size of the change26. Most of the above papers focus on the effects
of price setting rather than on the relation between money and aggregate demand.

Svensson [1986] attempts to integrate the two strands of recent research on money
demand on the one hand and on price setting by monopolistic competitors on the other.

Determination of the time structure of decisions

The research reviewed above takes the structure of staggering as given. The
other direction of research has been to see whether such a structure can indeed arise
as an equilibrium if each price setter is free to choose both the length of time
between price changes and the timing of his decisions in relation to others.

The question has been studied by Parkin [1986] ,

Ball

[1986a] and Ball and Router

(1986] in models similar to the model of monopolistic competition sketched above.
Their argument has the following structure27

26

Julio Rotemberg has pointed out to me that, despite their different
motivations, his and Calvo's model have the same dynamics. This can be seen as
& justification for using the quadratic cost formalization as a convenient "as
if' approach.
27
The three models differ in various ways. The first two assume that
prices are predetermined between price decisions (a la Fischer) . The third
assumes that prices are fixed between price decisions (a la Taylor) . Parkin
assumes that money follows a feedback rule while the other two papers take
money as exogenous.

56

Suppose that nominal money follows a given stochastic process and that each
price setter takes price decisions at fixed intervals of time, say -by defining the
period appropriately— every two periods. Each producer still has the choice between
taking decisions at the same time as the others, say at even times, or at a different
time, at odd times. It is clear that symmetric staggering is an equilibrium : if
exactly half of the price setters take decisions at odd times and half at even times,

the stochastic environment faced by a price setter is the same whether he takes
decisions at even or odd times and he is therefore indifferent to timing28. But one
can ask whether this staggered equilibrium is stable, whether for example, if the
economy is characterized initially by asymmetric staggering and if individual price
setters are allowed to change their timing, the economy will converge to the
staggered equilibrium.

The answer turns out to depend on whether the strategic complementarity
condition described earlier is satisfied or not, whether an increase in the price
level increases or decreases the nominal price that an individual price setter wants
to set. In the more likely case where an increase in the price level increases
desired individual prices, staggering cannot be stable. The intuition for this result
is simple. Suppose that initially a larger proportion of price setters changes prices
at even than at odd times, so that the price level moves more on average at even than
at odd times. A price setter who was initially taking decisions at odd times has an
incentive to move so as to take decisions with the majority of price setters. The
stable equilibrium is one in which all price decisions are taken at even times. In

28

This assumes that the price setter is small compared to the economy, so
that in considering whether to change his price at even or odd times, he takes
the stochastic process folloed by the price level as given. Fethke and
Policano [1984] have studied the properties of the equilibrium when the number
of price setters is small.

57

the less likely case where an increase in the price level decreases individual
nominal prices, staggering can be stable but this hardly provides a convincing
explanation for the general presence of staggering in the economy.

The introduction of stochastic idiosyncratic shocks does not make staggering
more likely. With respect to idiosyncratic shocks, choosing odd or even timing is
irrelevant, so that, if strategic complementarity holds, price setters still have an
incentive to move with others and staggering is not a stable equilibrium. If
idiosyncratic shocks have however a deterministic, "seasonal" component, if for
example some firms experience shocks mostly at odd times, some mostly at even times,

staggering can then be an equilibrium, with each firm choosing its natural timing
habitat29. This will be the case if idiosyncratic shocks are large, or if the
strategic complementarity effect is weak. This is explored by Ball and Romer [1986]

who also analyze the welfare properties of the equilibrium. The empirical importance
of such shocks seems however limited, and insufficient to provide a general
explanation of staggering.

Two other ideas have been explored. The first, pursued by Ball and Cechetti
£1987] is that, in the presence of imperfect information, price decisions carry some
information and it may be optimal for a price setter to wait for the information
before deciding on his own price. The question is however of whether an equilibrium
will exist in such a context. If each price setter prefers to take decisions just
after the others, it is not clear that an equilibrium exists, at least not an
equilibrium with fixed timing of price decisions. The second, explored by }laskin and
Tirole [1986] ,

29

is

that staggering may change the nature of the game played by price

An example may be that of grocery stores which change prices with new
deliveries. Prices will then change as the delivery truck goes from store to
store, leading to staggering.

58

setters and allow price setters to achieve a more collusive sustainable outcome. Both
of these approaches have implications which go f at beyond staggering. Imperfect

information reintroduces some of the channels studied in Section II. Naskin and

Tirole show that games with staggered decisions may generate outcomes which resemble
for example those obtained with kinked demand curves. This last example shows that
further progress requires a better integration of the theories of real and nominal
rigidities.

It may well be that trying to generate staggering given fixed timing of

individual price changes is the wrong strategy. After all, it is plausible that if
price setters experience different histories of shocks, they will naturally change
prices at different times. This however points to state rather than time dependent
rules, rules in which the decision to change prices is a function of the state. I now
examine the aggregate implications of such rules.

3. State dependent rules and the effects of money on output

The simplest state dependent rules are Ss rules, which in our context, imply
that the nominal price is readjusted whenever the difference between the actual price
and a target price exceeds some fixed threshold value. Ss rules are optimal only
under restrictive assumptions ; because they are analytically convenient,research

has usually proceeded under those restrictive assumptions, or simply assumed the use
of Ss rules as convenient if suboptimal rules.

The optimal Ss rule for a monopolist facing random walk fluctuations in demand
was characterized by Barro [19721 under the assumption of no inflation. Sheshinski
and Weiss [1977] ,

(1983] derived instead optimal Ss rules in the presence of

59

deterministic or stochastic inflation and no demand uncertainty30. Benabou [1986a]

has extended their analysis to the case where goods are storable, showing that, even
in the absence of uncertainty, firms may resort to randomized strategies to avoid
price speculation in anticipation of price changes.

The important question, for our purposes, is that of the aggregate implications
of Ss rules. These rules, with their implication that the length of time between
individual price changes is random, seem to have the potential to explain staggering
and thus price level inertia. Rotemberg [1983] and Caplin and spulber [1985] have
shown however that this is not necessarily the case. In their paper, Caplin and
Spulber derive the aggregate behavior of prices and output in response to changes in
nominal money when individual price setters follow Ss rules. A simplified version of
their argument is the following3'

Suppose that there are n price setters. The (log of the) nominal price p*j that
each price setter would choose in the absence of costs of changing prices is only a
function of nominal money and an idiosyncratic shock. Furthermore, pj* is assumed to
be a non decreasing function of time (i.e there is enough average money growth that

even if there is an adverse idiosyncratic shock, pi does not decrease).
There are fixed costs of changing prices, which lead each price setter to adjust
the actual nominal price pt according to the following Ss rule

when the deviation

p*j—pj exceeds a threshold value 5, pi is readjusted so that the deviation is equal
to

s.
Caplin

and Spulber then show that

A mistake in Sheshinski and Weiss [1983] is corrected in Caplin and
Sheshinski [1987]
31
The formal model they develop does not have idiosyncratic shocks.

7ç
/4%.',

h#en.

êv

c

st.t

•1.

I

S

'1.

0

4

'S

—I

'1.

A ex4,e 13

3.

Ze k4tV.j

kPt. Ate
'ttoc4,

':1.

hM%

7:0

IL ' lit',

I
V

.2

I

.2

0

60

(1) For a given price setter, the deviation (p*j—pj) is uniformly distributed
between S and s. That is, if we observe (p*j-pj) at a point in time, we are as likely
to observe any value of the deviation between S and s. Furthermore, as long as the
idiosyncratic shocks are not perfectly correlated, the distribution of deviations
(p*i —p1)

across

price setters is alsojoint uniform :

uncorrelated for all

(p* —p1) and (p*j —pj )

are

and j ; together, these propositions imply that price

decisions will be, on average, uniformly staggered. While this would appear to
provide foundations for slow adjustment of the price level to changes in nominal
money, the next proposition shows just the opposite to be true.
(2) Chahges in nominal money lead on average to proportional increases in the

price level. Figure 2 provides the intuition for this result. Assuming that there are
4 prices in the economy and that the distribution of deviations is uniform between
[s=—l, S=+2], the initial distribution is characterized in the first column of Figure

2. An increase in nominal money of 1 increases all target prices by 1, one price is
adjusted and the new distribution is given in the second column, which is obviously
identical to the first. Although only one price has increased, it has increased by
four times as much as it would have, absent costs of adjustment. Thus, the price
level increases by as much as nominal money.

This result shows that menu costs do not necessarily imply non neutrality of
money. All which is needed for it to obtain is that the distribution of deviations be
uniformly staggered. It applies for example if desired prices depend for example on
the price level, real money balances and relative demand shocks. Benabou [198Gb]
constructs a general equilibrium model where consumers search optimally given the
dispersion of prices implied by Ss pricing by firms and in which Ss rules are optimal
given the search behavior of consumers. In his model as well, money is neutral.

61

The neutrality result in the above example follows from the tact that while only
one out of four prices is readjusted, it adjusts by four times the size of the change
in nominal money. Nore formally, the size of the price adjustment is equal to the
support of the distribution of deviations. This is not however a characteristic of
all Ss rules and thus not all Ss rules imply neutrality.
An example will show why. In Caplin and Spulber, the desired nominal price

increases through time. The firm just needs one threshold value, such that when the
actual price is too low, it is readjusted upwards. Suppose instead that the average
inflation rate is zero so that the desired nominal price increases or decreases

through time, with equal probabilit. The firm then needs a rule with both an upper
and a lower threshold (such as in Barro (1972]). Under such a rule, the price is
readjusted whenever it becomes too low or too high. Aggregation of such rules is
difficult and no general result is available ; changes in money do not however lead
in general to contemporaneous proportional adjustment in the price level. An example
is given in Figure 3. Assume that there are four prices, which are readjusted to
equal the target price whenever the deviation between actual and target price exceeds
1 in absolute value. Under such a rule, price deviations are more likely to be at the
return point, 0, than at —1 and +1 (see for example Barro (1972]), so that in Figure
3 two price deviations are assumed initially equal to zero, one to —1 and one to +1.
An increase in nominal money of 1, assumed to increase all target prices by 1, leads
to the readjustment of one price by 2, and to an increase in the price level of 1/2
only.

Whether aggregation of such Ss rules can explain long lasting effects of money
remains to be seen. An interesting implication of this line of research is that, the
higher the average rate of inflation, the closer Ss rules will be to the one sided

62

rules assumed by Caplin and Spulber, the more neutral money will be32.

4. Time or state dependent rules ?

To summarize, the static menu cost argument is an important insight. It does not
however extend straightforwardly to the dynamic case. With time dependent rules, menu
costs generate real effects of nominal money ; a complete analysis of the relation of
welfare effects to menu costs remains however to be done. With state dependent rules,
money may still be neutral. This raises two further issues.

The first is that of the type of rule price setters are likely to adopt. Why
would price and wage setters ever use time rather than state dependent rules ? One
simple possibility is that the state is costly to observe or verify ; in that case,

it may be optimal to collect information and revise the price at fixed intervals,
with the interval determined by the characteristics of the process determining the
underlying target price. This may explain why labor contracts, in which agreement on
the state may be costly are negotiated at fixed intervals of time. In general, the
optimal rule is likely to be both state and time dependent. What the implications of
such rules will be remains to be seen. Non neutrality of money is likely but little
else can be said.

The other issue is empirical. What type of rule do price and wage setters
actually use ? The answer is far from clear. Labor contracts are signed for fixed

This is true however only under the maintained assumption of fixed
values for S and s. For general stochastic processes for money, fixed Ss rules
are dominated by rules in which S and s are also functions of the state.
Tsiddon [1986] has shown that under such more general rules, a decrease in
money growth, rather than being neutral, would instead be initially
contractionary.

63

periods of time, and while nominal wages are not fixed for the duration of contracts,

cost of living adjustments are usually both state and time dependent. Many more
prices are changed in January in the US than would be expected from a uniform
distribution33, which suggests some time dependence. Evidence on individual prices
suggests that prices are adjusted faster in periods of higher inflation (Cechetti
[1986] on newspapers) ; this is however consistent with time dependent rules, where

the length of time between price decisions is a function of the underlying parameters
of the economy and thus changes over time. Evidence on individual price setting
within manufacturing is also provided by Carlton [1986] who reexamines the Kindahl
and Stigler data base. This reexamination does not lead to a simple characterization
of price changes or of price rules.

Finally, I have reviewed in this section only the research dealing specifically
with foundations of price setting ; in that research, the dynamics of output in
response to shocks arise mainly or exclusively from price and wage setting. This is
in sharp contrast to the research summarized in Section II and to the channels for
persistence emphasized there, such as costs of adjustment in employment, inventory
and capital accumulation. The contrast is much too sharp. Price and wage setting
equations such as those in Taylor have been integrated in larger models with richer
dynamics, and used to look at many macroeconomic issues. Taylor [1986a], for example,
has constructed a medium size multi—country model with staggering of wage decisions.
He uses the model to analyze the effects of monetary policy on the US and the rest of
the world and contrasts his results with those of traditional models. Reviewing those
applications would however take us too far afield.

I owe this fact to Julio Rotemberg

64

Section V. Indention and other issues

In this section, I study three issues. The first is that of indexation and
monetary reforms designed to make prices more flexible. The second is the
possibility, raised by Keynes in the context of the effects of deflation, that price
flexibility far from being stabilizing, may in fact exacerbate output fluctuations.
The third is the possibility that changes in nominal money may not be neutral even in
the long run.

1. Indexation and Monetary Reforms

The analysis of the previous sections suggests that changes in the price setting
process, which allowed prices to adjust more quickly to other prices would be

desirable. One such change is indention which, at least in principle, makes prices
or wages adjust quickly to changes in the price level.

Wage indexation

The debate about the effectsof wage indexation on fluctuations was formalized
in papers by Fischer [1977b] and Gray [1976]. Gray's model has a structure similar to
that of the early Keynesian model
(5.1)

y =

(5.2)

y = —(w—p) — u

(5.3)

w =

(m—p)

k p + (1—k) Ep

65

Equation (5.1) gives aggregate demand. Equation (5.2) gives labor •emand under
perfect competition, and allows for a supply or productivity shock, u, with expected
value Eu=Q. Equation (5.3) gives the wage setting rule, with the degree of indexation
being equal to k, which is between zero (no indexation) and one (full indexation).
The solution to those equations is, under rational expectations
(5.4)

y = ((1—a)I(2—kfl (rn—Em) — (1/(2—k)) u

With no indexation, both nominal and real shocks affect output. Real shocks
however, as they increase the price level, lead to a lower real wage, partly
attenuating the effect of the shock on output. Full indexation protects the economy
from nominal shocks but exacerbates the effects of real shocks as the real wage is
fixed. Thus, Fischer and Gray argued, full indexation is not optimal in an economy
with both real and nominal shocks34

Gray proceeded to derive the socially optimal

degree of indexation as a function of the variances of both sources of shocks.

The Fischer—Gray analysis has been extended in two main directions. The first
has allowed for more sources of shocks, such as external shocks for an open economy
the second has looked at the properties of alternative indexation schemes, such as
whether wages should be indexed to the CPI or to the GNP deflator, or to nominal
income (see for example Aizenman and Frenkel [1985])

The simple Fischer—Gray model implies that full indexation leads to complete
nominal and price flexibility. But actual indexation clauses index the nominal wage
not to the current price level but rather to the lagged price level. As a result,

The relevant distinction is between demand and supply shocks. Here, the
only demand shocks are nominal shocks.

66

they do not remove all nominal rigidities. The implications of actual indexation
formulas were sketched in Fischer [1917b] and have been studied by Simonsen (1983]

his conclusion is that actual indexation may in fact make disinflation harder and
more costly in terms of output loss. The model above also assumes that the only
source of nominal rigidities is wage setting. If price rigidities are important, as I
have argued earlier, eliminating wage rigidities may still leave large real effects
of nominal money. For both of those reasons, economies with different degrees of

indention are likely to have, at least at a given average rate of inflation, more
similar behavior than is implied by the simple Gray—Fischer model3.

Just as in the case of nominal price setting and staggering, we must ask

Is

the form of indention rules and the degree of indexation which arise from individual
decisions socially optimal ? I examined the question in Blanchard (1979] under the
assumption of competitive goods markets. I assumed that each contract faced a fixed
cost to indexing on the price level, and a further fixed cost to indexing in addition
to the real shock. I then asked whether if private contracts decided to index only on
the price level, this decision and the degree of indexation they chose were socially
optimal. The answer was that they were. This assumes however that the costs of
collecting information and designing indexation rules are private costs. It part of
those costs can however be shared by firms and is therefore a public good, it may
then be that indexation to more than just the price level, although not an
equilibrium, would be socially optimal. Ball (1986b] has extended the analysis to
monopolistically competitive goods markets.

Note the use of Itat an average given rate of inflation". It may well be
that wage indexation, because it changes the tradeoffs faced by policy makers,
leads to higher inflation. This is discussed in Chapter 23.

67

Generalized indexation and monetary reforms

If wage indexation decreases the real effects of nominal money, why not
introduce general indexation ? Various such schemes, which we can equivalently think
of as monetary reforms, have been suggested and I briefly review the issues involved.
General indexation presents a conceptual problem that wage indexation does not.
One can think of general indexation as a change in the numeraire, with all prices
being set in terms of the price level instead of in dollars ; but if all prices are
freely set in terms of the price level, only by coincidence will the average of those
prices be in turn equal to the price level. Thus, general indexation schemes have
considered the use of either one good or a small basket of goods as numeraire.
To see what such indexation may achieve, the analogy with Daylight Saving Time
is again useful. Suppose that all stores, instead of announcing opening hours with
reference to the clock, use a Sears and Roebuck standard, announcing for example they
will open at the same hours than Sears and Roebuck. It is clear that this solves the
coordination problem discussed in Section III. If it is desirable to change opening
hours in winter, all which is needed is for Sears and Roebuck to change its opening
hours in winter and it will do so as it knows that other firms will change hours
simultaneously. In the same way, general indexation allows for changes in the price
level without changes in relative prices.

The argument raises however further questions

Why is it better for the

economy to have one price setter setting the price level given money than for the
monetary authority to set money given the price level ? Or, in the context of the
Sears and Roebuck example, what is it that Searsnd Roebuck can do that the state
could not do before by changing the clock in winter ? Is it because the set of

68

incentives facing the price setter are different from those facing the monetary
authority ? Those questions must be answered before we understand the gains of
monetary reform over more active monetary policy in the present system.

2. Destabilizing price flexibility

Another line of work has questioned whether price flexibility is indeed
stabilizing. It is true that under complete and instantaneous adjustment of prices,
money has no effect on output36. It has been argued however that the relation between
price flexibility and real effects of money is in fact not monotone and that, given
the existing degree of flexibility, more flexibility may increase rather than
decrease output fluctuations. This is because aggregate demand, instead of depending
only on real money balances as we have assumed until now, depends also on the rate of
inflation.

The argument dates back at least to Irving Fisher and is part of Keynes'
argument for why, even if nominal wages were flexible, this would not be enough to
maintain full employment. Keynes was mostly concerned with the effects of deflation
in response to unemployment. While deflation led to a lower price level, increasing
real money balances and lowering nominal interest rates, its direct —price change—
effect was however contractionary. It increased the real interest rate given the
nominal rate (an effect now known as the Mundell effect) and led to transfers of
wealth from debtors to creditors, increasing bankruptcies and disrupting credit
markets. Both Fisher and Keynes thought that those direct effects might well offset
the indirect effect through the lower price level and Keynes saw this as a strong

36

Except

for the channels mentioned in the introduction

69

argument in favor of relying on expansionary monetary policy rather than deflation to
avoid recessions. This argument was formalized by Tobin [1975) who concluded that it

could indeed be that deflation led to increases in the real rate and could lead to
more rather than less unemployment.
The issue has been recently reexamined under rational expectations by Driskill
and Sheffrin [1986), DeLong and Summers [1986] and Chadha [1986]

,

using

the Taylor

model but expanding the specification of aggregate demand to allow for price change
as well as price level effects (See also Xccallum [1983b]). Their aggregate demand
specification is the reduced form of an ISLX specification, with the real interest
rate in the IS equation and the nominal rate in the LX equation and has the form
(5.5) y =

b(E(p(+lflQ)—p)

+

c(m—p),

b,c > 0

DeLong and Summers then characterize the dynamic effects of money on output when
money follows the first order process m =

r

m(—1) + e37. They compute the steady

state variance of output as a function of both the elasticity of desired real wages
to output (the coefficient a in equation (3.5)) and the length of time during which
each wage is set. They conclude that, in most cases and for most plausible
parameters, increased price flexibility —defined as an increase in a, or a decrease
in contract length— is likely to increase the steady state variance. Their result is
however quite different from the earlier Tobin result. In all cases, they find the
steady state variance to be finite ; equivalently, in no case do they find that
increased price flexibility may actually lead to an explosive path for output. The
increase in output variance comes from an increased short run reaction to nominal
shocks : in response to an increase in money, increased price flexibility has more

They actually look at the effects of IS shocks, assuming that the
nominal money supply responds to the nominal interest rate. Their equation can
however be reinterpreted as in the text.

70

effect on expected inflation than on the current price level, leading to a sharper
initial decline in the real interest rate.
Del.ong and Summers also show that although increased flexibility ultimately

leads to smaller real effects, this happens at degrees of flexibility far in excess
of those we observe. The conclusion one should draw is probably that of Keynes,

namely that price flexibility may not be a very good substitute for activist monetary
policy.

3. Hysteresis and long run neutrality

All the models we have seen impose long run neutrality of money as a maintained
assumption. This is very much a matter of faith, based on theoretical considerations
rather than on empirical evidence.

Summers and I, [1986) examining the evidence from both the current prolonged
European recession and the prewar US and UK depressions were led to question this
maintained assumption. We found that, in all three cases, high unemployment had,
after a while, little or no effect on disinflation. Put another way, it appeared that
equilibrium unemployment had eventually adjusted to actual unemployment. This has led
us to explore the possibility that equilibrium unemployment may be affected for long
periods of time by the history of actual unemployment.

We have explored in particular the implications of membership considerations in
the determination of wages. To see what they imply, we can again start with a
Fischer—like model, assuming that a union sets the nominal wage before money is
realized36 and that employment is chosen by firms after the realization of money.

In Blanchard and Summers [1986] we use a model with monopolistic
competition and many unions. This difference is unimportant for the issues
discussed in the text.

71

Assuming that the union chooses the nominal wage so as to achieve, in expected value,
employment of its members and solving the model gives a relation between employment

n, membership n, and nominal money of the form:
(5.6)

n =

n

+

a(m—E(m—1))

where a is a coefficient which depends on the parameters in the aggregate demand

and labor demand equations3. Employment deviates from membership to the extent that
unanticipated money differs from zero. The crucial issue is that of what determines

membership in the union. If n is fixed over time, then the dynamics of the model are
similar to those of the one—period Fischer model. But, if n* depends on the past
history of employment, if for example unions tend to represent mostly the currently
employed, the dynamics are very different. If, to take an extreme case, the union
represents only the currently employed, n*=n(_l) so that employment follows
(5.7)

n = n(—1) +

(1/2)(m—E(w—jj)

In that case, unanticipated changes in nominal money have permanent effects on
employment. The reason is a simple one

after a negative surprise for example, the

workers who are fired are no longer represented and there is no tendency for
employment to go back to its previous value.

The model generates hysteresis : the steady state of the economy depends on its
path, and unemployment does not return to any fixed equilibrium value. But its
conclusions are too strong : unemployed workers must always exert some direct or
indirect influence on wage setting, so that over time unemployment returns to an
equilibrium value. What the model points out is that, because of the dynamics of

The derivation is as in section 3, with two minor differences. The
equation gives employment rather than output, and n, which was constant and
thus put in the constant term in section 3, is now treated explicitly.

72

labor supply, the adjustment may be very slow. In that case, the real effects of
money do not come from prolonged price and wage rigidity .

In

the above model nominal

wage ridigidy lasts only for one period but the effects of money last forever.

73

Conclusion

Considerable progress has been made in the last ten years on why money affects
output. Some of it has come from clarifying old and fuzzy ideas, such as that of
coordination problems, in clarifying the respective roles of expectations, of nominal
and real rigidities. A lot of it has come from running into dead ends, such as the

failure to explain the joint price and output responses to money in "as if"
competitive models, or the failure of individual nominal rigidities to generate
aggregate price inertia under simple Ss rules.

Where should research go from here ? I believe that research on real rigidities
is the most urgent. It is a general feature of goods markets that fluctuations in
demand lead mostly to movements in output rather than in markups, and of labor
markets that fluctuations in the demand for labor lead mostly to movements in
employment rather than in real wages. Given these features, a very small amount of
nominal rigidity will lead to long lasting effects of nominal money on output.
Indeed, as was shown in section IV, if all suppliers were happy to supply more at the
same relative price, there would be no need for nominal rigidities

as no price

setter desired to change his relative price, nominal prices would not move in
response to changes in nominal money. While many reasons have been given (and
reviewed in Section III) for why we observe such real rigidities, the sheer number of
unrelated explanations is distressing. One cannot help but think that there might be
some general explanation. While "fairness" and "norms" pretend to give such a general
explanation, they remain at this stage vague and untestable ideas.

74

Work on nominal rigidities is also important. But in couhterpoint to the
previous paragraph, the amount of nominal rigidities may well have been
overemphasized. In recent empirical work (Blanchard [1987]), I have found that in the
post war US, the adjustment of nominal wages, and of prices to wages is more than 2/3
over within a year. Such lags may not be very difficult to explain, as a result of
short lengths of time between changes in individual wages and prices, together with
staggering. Work on time and state dependent rules and on the equilibrium time
structure of price decisions is just beginning and is important and exciting.

Bibliography
Aizenman, Joshua and Jacob Frenkel, "Supply Shocks, Wage Indexation and Monetary
Accomodation", NBER VP 1609, April 1985
Akerlof, George, "Relative Wages and the Rate of Inflation", QJE 83—3 (August
1969) : 353—374
Akerlof, George, "Labor Contracts as Partial Gift Exchange", QJE, 87, November
1982, 543—569
Akerlof, George and Janet Yellen, "A Near—Rational Model of the Business Cycle,
with Wage and Price Inertia", QJE, Supplement 100, (1985b), 823—838
Altonji, Joseph, "Interteniporal Substitution in Labor Supply
Micro Data", JPE, 94—3—2, June 1986, 5176—5213

Evidence from

Andersen, Leonall and Jerry Jordan, "The Saint Louis Model", Federal Reserve
Bank of Saint Louis", April 1970
Ashenfelter, Orley, "Macroeconomic Analyses of Labor Supply and Microeconomic
Analyses of Labor Supply", Carnegie Rochester Conference Volume 1984
Azariadis, Costas, "Implicit Contracts and Related Topics", in "The Economics of
the Labour Market", Hornstein ed, London, Her Majesty's Stationery Office, 1979
Ball, Laurence, "Externalities from Contract Length", mimeo NYU, March 1986 (a)
Ball, Laurence, "Is Equilibrium Indexation Efficient ?", mimeo NYU, 1986 (b)

Ball, Laurence and David Romer, "The Equilibrium and Optimal Timing of Price
Changes" mimeo NYU September 1986
Ball, Laurence and David Romer, "Are Prices Too Sticky ?", NBER VP 2171,
February 1987 (a)
Ball, Laurence and David Romer, "Sticky Prices as Coordination Failures", NYU
mimeo, March 1987 (b)
Ball, Laurence and Stephen Cecchetti, "Imperfect Information and Staggered Price
Setting", NBER VP 2201, April 1987
Barro, Robert, "A Theory of Monopolistic Price Adjustment", REStud, 34—1,
January 1972, 17—26
Barro, Robert, "Rational Expectations and The Role of Monetary Policy" JME,
1976—2, 1—32
Barro, Robert, "Unanticipated Money Growth and Unemployment in the United
States", Afl 67, March 1977, 101—115
Barro, Robert, "Unanticipated Money Growth, Output and the Price Level in the
United States", JPE 86, 1978, 549—580

Barro, Robert and Mark Rush, "Unanticipated Money and Economic Activity", in
"Rational Expectations and Economic Policy", Stanley Fischer, ed, University of
Chicago and NBER, 1980, 23—48
Barro, Robert and Zvi Hercowitz, "Money Stock Revisions and Unanticipated Money
Growth", JME, 6, April 1980, 257—267
Barro, Robert, "The Equilibrium Approach to Business Cycles", in "Money,
Expectations and Business Cycles, New York, Academic Press, 1981
Barro, Robert and Robert King, "Time Separable Preferences and Intertemporal
Substitution Models of the Business Cycle," QJE 99—4, 817—840
Barro, Robert, "Government spending, Interest Rates, Prices and Budget Deficits
in the United Kingdom, 1701—1918," University of Rochester mimeo, August 1986
Benabou, Roland, "Optimal Price Dynamics and Speculation with a Storable Good",
Chapter 1, MIT PhD Thesis, February 1986 (a)
Benabou, Roland, "Searchers, Price Setters, and Inflation", Chapter 2, MIT PhD
thesis, February 1986 (b)
Bils, Mark, "Essays on the Cyclical Behavior of Price and Marginal Cost", PhD
thesis, MIT 1985
Blanchard, Olivier, "Wage Indexing Rules and the Behavior of the Economy", JPE,
87—4, August 1979, 798—816
Blanchard, Olivier, "Price Asyrtchronization and Price Level Inertia", in
"Inflation, Debt and Indexation", Dornbusch and Simonsen eds, MIT press, 1983

Blanchard, Olivier, "The Wage Price Spiral", QJE,

101,

3—24

August 1986, 543—565 (a)

Blanchard, Olivier, "Empirical Structural Evidence on Wages, Prices and
Employment in the US", mimeo MIT, September 1986 (b)
Blanchard, Olivier, "Individual and Aggregate Price adjustment
Evidence", BPEA 1987—1

Empirical

Blanchard, Olivier and Nobu Kiyotaki, "Monopolistic competition and the effects
of aggregate demand", mimeo MIT, September 1986, forthcoming AER
Blanchard, Olivier and Lawrence Summers, "Hysteresis and European Unemployment",
NBER Macroeconomics Annual, 1, 1986, 15—89
Blinder, Alan and Stanley Fischer, "Inventories, Rational Expectations and the
Business Cycle," JME, 8—3, November 1981, 277—304
Boschen, John and Herschel Grossman, "Test of Equilibrium Macroeconomics using
Contemporaneous Monetary Data", JME, 1982, 10, 309—333
Bruno, Michael and Jeffrey Sachs, "Economics of Worldwide Stagflation", 1984,
Harvard University Press,

Bryant, John, "A Simple Rational Expectations Keynes-Type Model", QJE, August
1983, 98—3, 525—528
Calvo, Guillermo, "On the Microfoundations of Staggered Nominal Contracts : a
First Approximation," mimeo, Columbia University, January 1982.
Caplin, Andrew and Daniel Spulber, "Menu costs and the Neutrality of Money",
mimeo, December 1986, forthcoming QJE

Carlton, Dennis, "The Rigidity of Prices", AER, 76—4, september 1986, 637—658
A study of the Newsstand
Cechetti, Steven, "The Frequency of Price Adjustment
Prices of Magazines, 1953 to 1979", Journal of Econometrics 31, 1986, 255—274
Chadha, Binky, "Is Increased Price Inflexibility Stabilizing ? Some Analytical
Results", mimeo Columbia, August 1986
Cooley Thomas and Steven LeRoy, "Atheoretical Macroeconometrics

A Critique"

,JME, November 1985

Cooper, Russell and Andrew John, "Coordinating Coordination Failures in
Keynesian Models", mimeo, Cowles Foundation,745, April 1985
DeLong, 3. Bradford and Lawrence Summers, "Is Increased Price Flexibility
Destabilizing ?", AER, December 1986, 1031—1044
Diamond, Peter, "Aggregate Demand Management in Search Equilibrium", JPE, 90,
October 1982
881—894

Domowitz, Ian, Glenn Hubbard and Bruce Petersen, "Business Cycles and the
Relationship Between Concentration and Price Cost Margins", Rand Journal, 17—1,
Spring 1986, 1—17
Driskill, Robert and Stephen Sbeffrin, "Is Price Flexibility Destabilizing ?",
AER, 76—4, September 1986, 802—807

Dunlop, John, T , "The Movements of Real and Money Wage Rates", Economic
Journal, 1938, 413—434

Eichenbaum, Martin and Kenneth Singleton, "Do Equilibrium Real Business Cycle
Theories Explain Post War Business Cycles ?", in "USER Macroeconomics Annual",
Stanley Fischer ed, 1, MIT Press, 1986, 91—134
Eichenbaum, Martin, Lars Hansen and Kenneth Singleton, "A Time Series Analysis
of Representative Agent Models of Consumption and Leisure", forthcoming QJE 1987
Englander, Steve and Cornelius Los, "The Stability of the Phillips Curve and its
Implications for the 1980's", Federal Reserve Bank of New York, mimeo, January 1983
Fair, Ray, "An Analysis of the Accuracy of Four Macroeconometric Models", JPE,
87—4, August 1979, 701—718
Farber, Henry, "The Analysis of Union Behavior", MIT VP 355, November 1984,
forthcoming in Handbook of Labor Economics, 1986

Fethke, Gary and Andrew Policano, "Wage Contingencies, the Pattern of
Negotiation and Aggregate Implications of Alternative Contract Structures," Journal
of Monetary Economies, XIV (1984), 151—71.
Fethke, Gary and Andrew Policano, "Will Wage Setters Ever Stagger Decisions ?",
QJE, 101, November 1986, 867—877

Fischer, Stanley, "Long Term Contracts, Rational Expectations, and the Optimal
Money Supply Rule," JPE, 85, February 1977 (a), 163—190
Fischer, Stanley, "Wage Indexation and Macroeconomic Stability", in
"Stabilization of the Domestic and International Economy", Carnegie Rochester
Conference, Volume 5, 1977 (b), 101—147
Fischer, Stanley, "Anticipations and the Non Neutrality of Money", 87—2, April
1979, 225—252
Fischer, Stanley, "On Activist Monetary Policy with Rational Expectations", in
"Rational Expectations and Economic Policy", S. Fischer ed, NBER and U of Chicago
Press, 211—248
Fischer, Stanley, "Real Balances, the Exchange Rate and Indexation
Variables in Disinflation", NBER WP 1497, November 1984

Real

Fischer, Stanley, "Contracts, Credibility and Disinflation", in "Unemployment
Theory, Experience and Policy Making", 1985, Argy and Nevile eds, Allen and tJnwin,
London, 39—59
Friedman, Benjamin, comment on "After Keynesian Macroeconomics", by Robert E.
Lucas and Thomas Sargent, in "After the Phillips Curve", Conference Series, 19,
Federal Reserve Bank of Boston, 73—80
Friedman, Milton, "The Case for Flexible Exchange Rates", in "Essays in Positive
Economics", U of Chicago Press, 1953, 157—203
Friedman, Milton, "The role of Monetary Policy", American economic Review1 58,
1968, 1—17
Friedman, Milton and Anna Schwartz, 'A Monetary History of the United States,"
1867—1960", 1963a
Fudenberg, Drew and Jean Tirole, "Capital as a Commitment
to Deter Mobility", JET, December 1983, 31, 227—250

Strategic Investment

Geary, Peter and John Kennan, "The Employment Real Wage Relationship
International Study", JPE, 90, 1982

An

Gordon, Robert, 'Wage Price Controls and the Shifting Phillips Curve", BPEA,
1972—2, 385—421
Grandmont, Jean Michel, "On Endogenous Competitive Business Cycles",
Econometrica, 53—5, September 1985, 995—1046

Gray, J0 Anna, "Wage Indention : A Macroeconomic Approach", Journal of Monetary
Economics, 2, 1976, 221—235
Gray, Jo Anna and David Spencer, "The Role of Price Prediction Errors in a
Natural Rate Model
Some New Evidence", mimeo December 1984
Grossman, Sanford and Laurence Weiss, "A Transactions Based Model of the
Monetary Transmission Mechanism", American Economic Review, 73—5, December 1983, 871—
880.

Hall, Robert, "Market Structure and Macroeconomic Fluctuations", SPEA 1986—2,
28 5—3 38

Hart, Oliver, "A Model of Imperfect Competition with Keynesian Features", QJE
97—1 (February 1982) :109—138
Hart, Oliver and Bengt Holmstrom, "The Theory of Contracts", MIT WP 418, March
1986

Howjtt, Peter, "Business Cycles with Costly Search and Recruiting", rnimeo 1986

Kahneman, Daniel, Knetsch, Jack and Richard Thaler, "Fairness as a Constraint on
Profit : Seeking Entitlements in the Market", AER, September 1986, 76—4, 728—741
Katz, Lawrence, "Efficiency Wage Theories
Macroeconomics Annual, 1, 1986, 235—290

A Partial Evaluation", NBER

Keynes, John M., "The General Theory of Employment, Interest and Money", 1935
Keynes, John M., "Relative Movements in Real Wages and Output", Economic
Journal, 1939, 34—51
King, Robert, "Monetary Policy and the Information Content of Prices", JPE, 902, April 1982, 247—279
King, Robert and Charles Plosser, "Money, Credit and Prices in a Real Business
Cycle" AER 74—3, June 1984, 363—380
Kiyotaki, Nobuhiro, "Macroeconomics of Monopolistic Competition", PhD Thesis,
Harvard, May 1985
Lucas, Robert and Leonard Rapping, "Real Wages, Employment and Inflation", JPE,
77, September/October 1969, 721—754
Lucas, Robert E,, "Expectations and the Neutrality of Money", JET, 4, April
1972, 103—124
Lucas, Robert, E., "Some International Evidence on Output—Inflation Tradeoffs",
AER, 63, June 1973, 326—334
Lucas, Robert E., "An Equilibrium Model of the Business Cycle", Journal of
Political Economy, 83—6, December 1975, 1113—1144

Lucas, Robert E., "Econometric Policy Evaluation : A Critique", in "The Phillips
Curve and Labor Markets", Carnegie Rochester Conference Volume, Karl Brunner and
Allan Meltzer eds, 1, 1976, 19—46
Lucas, Robert, "Understanding Business Cycles", in "Stabilization of the
Domestic and International Economy", Karl Brunner and Allan Meltzer eds, 1977, 7—29
Lucas, Robert and Thomas Sargent, "After Keynesian Economics", Federal Reserve
Bank of Boston, "After the Phillips Curve : Persistence of High Inflation and High
Unemployment'1, 1978
McCallum, Bennett, "A Reconsideration of Sims' Evidence Concering Monetarism",
Economic Letters, 13, 1983, 167—171
McCallum, Bennett, "The Liquidity Trap and the Pigou Effect : A Dynamic Analysis
with Rational Expectations", Economica, 50—200, November 1983 (b), 395—405
McDonald, Ian, and Robert Solow, "Wage Bargaining and Employment", AER, 71—5,
December 1981, 896—908

Mankiw, Gregory, "Small menu costs and large business cycles : a macroeconomic
529—539
model of monopoly", QJE, 100—2 (May 1985)
Mankiw, Gregory , Julio Rotemberg and Lawrence Summers, "Intertemporal
Substitution in Macroeconomics", QJE, 100—1, February 1985, 225—253

Maskin, Eric and Jean Tirole, "Dynamics of Oligopoly, Part III ; Price
competition", mimeo 1986 MIT
Mishkin, Frederic, "A Rational Expectations Approach to Macroeconometrics", NBER
and the University of Chicago, 1983
Neftci, Salih, "A Time Series Analysis of the Real Wages—Employment
Relationship", 'JPE, 86—2, April 1978, 281—291
Ng, Yew—Kwang, "Mesoeconomics", Harvester Press, Brighton, Sussex, 1986
Nordhaus, William, "Recent Developments in Price Dynamics", in 0. Eckstein ed,
"The

Econometrics of Price Determination", Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve

System, June 1972, 16—49
Okun, Arthur, "Prices and Quantities ;

Institution,

Oswald,

Scandinavian

A Macroeconomic Analysis", the Brookings

1981

Andrew, "The Economic Theory of Trade Unions : An Introductory Survey",
Journal of Economics, 87, 1985,

Parkin, Michael, "The Output—Inflation Trade off when Prices are Costly to
Change", JPE, 94—1, 1986, 200—224
Phelps, Edmund, "Phillips Curves, Expectations of Inflation and Optimal
Unemployment Over Time", Economica, 34, August 1967, 254—281

Phelps, Edmund, Microeconomic Foundations of Employment and Inflation Theory",
Norton, New York

(1970) ,

Phelps, Edmund, "Disinflation without Recession
Adaptive Guideposts and
Monetary Policy", Weltwirtschaftlitches Archiv, 100—2, December 1978, reprinted in
Volume 1, Employment and Inflation, Phelps, Academic Press, New York 1979
Phillips, A.W. "The Relation between Unemployment and the Rate of Change of
Money Wages in the United Kingdom, 1861—1957", Economica 25, 1958, 283—299
Poterba, James , Julio Rotemberg and Lawrence Summers, "A Tax Based Test of
Nominal Rigidities', AER, 76—4, September 1986, 659—675

Prescott, Edward, "Theory Ahead of Busines Cycle Measurement", Federal reserve
Bank of Minneapolis, Staff report 102, February 1986
Rotemberg, Julio, "Monopolistic Price Adjustment and Aggregate output", REStud,
44, (1982), 517—531
Rotemberg, Julio, "Aggregate Consequences of Fixed Costs of Price Adjustment",
AER, June 1983, 343—346

Rotemberg, Julio, "A Monetary Equilibrium Model with Transaction Costs", Journal
of Political Economy, 92—1, February 1984, 40—58
Rotemberg, Julio, and Garth Saloner, "A Supergame Theoretic Model of Price Wars
during Booms", AER, June 1986, 390—407
Rotemberg, Julio and Garth Saloner, "The Rigidity of Prices under Monopoly and
Duopoly", MIT WP 414, April 1986
Samuelson, Paul, "Foundations of Economic Analysis", Harvard University Press,
1947

Samuelson, Paul and Robert Solow, "Analytical Aspects of Anti Inflation Policy",
AER, 5, 1960, 177—194
Santomero, Anthony and John Seater, "The Inflation Unemployment Trade Off
Critique of the Litterature", JEL, 16—2, June 1978, 499—544

A

Sargent, Thomas, "Rational Expectations, the Real Rate of Interest, and the
Natural Rate of Unemployment," BPEA, 2:1973, 429—472
Sargent, Thomas, "A Classical Macroeconometric Model for the United States",
JPE, 87—2, April 1976, 207—237

Sargent, Thomas, "Estimation of Demand Schedules under Rational Expectations",
JPE 86, 1978, 1009—1044
Sargent, Thomas, "Macroeconomic Theory", Academic Press, 1979
Sargent, Thomas and Neil Wallace, "'Rational Expectations', the Optimal Monetary
Instrument and the Optimal Money Supply Rule." JPE, 83—2, April 1975, 241—254

Shapiro, Carl and Joseph Stiglitz, "Equilibrium Unemployment as a Worker
Discipline Device", AER, 74, June 1984, 433—444
Sheshinski, Eytan and Yoram Weiss, "Inflation and Costs of Price Adjustment",
REStud, 44—2, June 1977, 287—303

Sheshinski, Eytan and Yoram Weiss, "Optimum Pricing Policy under Stochastic
Inflation", REStud, 50, 513—529, 1983
Simonsen, Mario Henrique, "Indexation : Current Theory and the Brazilian
Experience", in "Inflation, Debt and Indexation", Dornbusch and Simonsen eds, MIT
Press, 1983, 99—132
Sims, Christopher, "Money, Income and Causality", AER, 62, 1972, 540—542
Sims, Christopher, "Comparison of Interwar and Postwar Business Cycles
Monetarism Reconsidered", AER, 70—2, May 1980, 250—257
Solow, Robert, "An other Possible Source of Wage Stickiness", Journal of
Macroeconomics, Winter 1979, 1, 79—82
Startz, Richard, "Monopolistic Competition as a Foundation for Keynesian
Macroeconomic Models", mimeo, U. of Washington, 1986
Stiglitz, Joseph, "Price Rigidities and Market Structure", AER, May 1984, 74—2,
350—355

Stiglitz, Joseph, "Theories of Wage Rigidity", in "Keynes' Economic Legacy
Contemporary Economic Theories", Butkiewicz et al, eds, New York, Praeger, 1986
Stock, Jim and Mark Watson, "Interpreting the Evidence on the Money Income
Causality", NBER VP 2228, April 1987
Summers, Lawrence, "Some Skeptical Observations on Real Business Cycle Theory",
Fed of Minneapolis 1987

Svensson, Jars, "Sticky Goods Prices, Flexible Asset Prices, Monopolistic
Competition, and Monetary Policy", REStud, 53, 385—405, 1986

Tarshis, Lone, "Changes in Real and Money Wages", Economic Journal, 1939, 150—
154

Taylor, John, "Monetary Policy during a Transition to Rational Expectations",
JPE, 83, October 1975, 1009—1022
Taylor, John, "Staggered Price Setting in a Macro Model", AER 69—2 (May 1979):
108—113
Taylor, John, "Aggregate Dynamics and Staggered Contracts," JPE, 88 (1980), 1
24.

Taylor, John, "On the Relation between the Variability of Inflation and the
Average Inflation Rate", Carnegie Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy, 15,
1981, 57—86

Taylor, John, "Union Wage Settlements", AER, 73—5, December 1983, 981—993.

Taylor, John, "The Treatment of Expectations in Large Multicountry Econometric
Models", mimeo Stanford, February 1986 (a), forthcoming in "Empirical Macroeconomics
for Interdependent Economies
Where do we Stand ?", Brookings Institution.
Taylor, John, "New Econometric Techniques for Macroeconomic Policy Evaluation",
in "Handbook of Econometrics", Griliches and Intriligator eds, North Holland, 1986
(b)

Tobin, James, "Post Hoc Ergo Propter Hoc", QJE, flay 1970, 84, 310—317

Tobin, James, "The Wage Price Mechanism
Overview of the Conference", in in 0.
Eckstein ed, "The Econometrics of Price Determination", Board of Governors of the
Federal Reserve System, June 1972, 5—15
Tobin, James, "Keynesian Models of Recession and Depression", AER., May 1975,
195— 202

Tsiddon, Daniel, "On the Stubbornness of Sticky Prices", mimeo Columbia, 1987
Weiss, Lawrence, "The Role for Active Monetary Policy in a Rational Expectations
Model", JPE, 88—2, April 1980, 221—233
Wright, Randall, "Job Search and Cyclical Unemployment", JPE 94—1, February
1986, 38—55
Woglom, Geoffrey, "Underemployment Equilibria with Rational Expectations", QJE,
97—1, February 1982, 89—108
Yellen, Janet, "Efficiency Wage Models of Unemployment", Afl, 74—2, May 1984,
200—205

