NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

PREPAYMENT RISK AND EXPECTED MBS RETURNS
Peter Diep
Andrea L. Eisfeldt
Scott Richardson
Working Paper 22851
http://www.nber.org/papers/w22851

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 2016, Revised March 2017

We would like to thank Attakrit Asvanunt, Mikhail Chernov, Itamar Drechsler, Brett Dunn, Mark
Garmaise, Ronen Israel, Arvind Krishnamurthy, Francis Longstaff, William Mann, Tobias
Moskowitz, and Tyler Muir, as well as seminar participants at AQR, the Federal Reserve Bank of
New York, and NYU Stern for comments and suggestions. All errors are ours. Eisfeldt has an
ongoing consulting relationship with AQR. The views expressed herein are those of the authors
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2016 by Peter Diep, Andrea L. Eisfeldt, and Scott Richardson. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Prepayment Risk and Expected MBS Returns
Peter Diep, Andrea L. Eisfeldt, and Scott Richardson
NBER Working Paper No. 22851
November 2016, Revised March 2017
JEL No. E02,G12,G2
ABSTRACT
We present a simple, linear asset pricing model of the cross section of Mortgage-Backed Security
(MBS) returns in which MBS earn risk premia as compensation for their exposure to prepayment
risk. We measure prepayment risk and estimate security risk loadings using real data on
prepayment forecasts vs. realizations. Estimated loadings are monotonic in securities' coupons
relative to the par coupon, as predicted by the model. Prepayment risks appear to be priced by
specialized MBS investors. In particular, we find convincing evidence that prepayment risk prices
change sign over time with the sign of a representative MBS investor's exposure to prepayment
risk.
Peter Diep
AQR
2 Greenwich Plaza
Greenwich, CT 06830
peter.diep@aqr.com
Andrea L. Eisfeldt
UCLA Anderson School of Management
110 Westwood Plaza
Suite C4.10
Los Angeles, CA 90095
and NBER
andrea.eisfeldt@anderson.ucla.edu

Scott Richardson
AQR Capital Management
and London Business School
srichardson@london.edu

1

Introduction

We develop a model of the time series and cross section of treasury-hedged returns
to Mortgage-Backed Securities (MBS), and find robust empirical support for our
model’s main implications. Our model is a simple and transparent linear asset pricing
model. Its key feature is that prepayment risk which is not readily hedgeable using
US treasuries is priced by specialized MBS investors, as in Gabaix, Krishnamurthy,
and Vigneron (2007). These specialized investors require prepayment risk premia
which vary over time and across securities depending on the share of MBS which is
trading above par value. We find that a tradable strategy optimized according to our
theory across securities and over time has a Sharpe ratio which is 2.7 times that of a
passive, value-weighted MBS index.
While prepayments due to interest rate movements of government securities can
be hedged, the requirement of a hedging model leads to model risk. Moreover, it is
even more challenging, if not impossible, to hedge against prepayment risk driven by
shocks to spreads between government and mortgage rates, changing credit conditions, house price appreciation, and regulatory changes. As result, MBS which load
on the unhedgeable component of prepayment risk can exhibit risk premia even if
returns are effectively duration hedged to US treasuries. We show that this is indeed
the case by measuring MBS securities’ loadings on prepayment risk shocks measured
using actual forecast and realized prepayment data and showing that these risk loadings are priced. However, we also show that the factor risk prices change sign over
time. Such time varying risk premia have important implications for the time series
and cross section variation in MBS average returns. Indeed, failing to account for
time varying risk premia leads to estimates for expected returns which are misleading
because positive expected returns are biased towards zero.
We show that the composition of the market between discount and premium
securities drives the sign of prepayment risk premia. This idea, first proposed by
Gabaix et al. (2007), makes sense in the context of segmented markets and specialized
MBS investors. Discount securities trade below face value and are prepaid at face
value. Thus, for discount securities, or securities with prices below par, prepayment
is value increasing. The opposite is true for premium securities, whose value declines

1

with early prepayment at a face value which is lower than their market value. As
interest rates move, the moneyness of borrowers’ options to prepay, and the prices of
outstanding securities relative to the par security, vary considerably. As a result, the
composition of the MBS universe changes substantially over time, and the market
moves between being mainly comprised by discount securities to primarily premium.
Thus, prepayments can be value increasing for the market overall when the majority of
MBS, weighted by their remaining principal balance, are trading at a discount to their
face value, and value decreasing when the market features more premium securities.
We provide evidence that MBS markets are indeed segmented. In particular, when
prepayment is wealth decreasing for a representative MBS investor who holds the
MBS market, we find negative prepayment risk prices. On the other hand, when
early prepayment increases the wealth of such an investor, we find a positive price of
prepayment risk.
We provide a simple, linear asset pricing model for the cross section of hedged
MBS returns which features two prepayment risk factors, and prices of risk for these
two factors which vary with market composition. The first risk factor is a level factor,
which shifts prepayments across all coupon levels up or down. The second factor is a
rate-sensitivity factor. This factor determines how sensitive borrowers are to prepayment options, conditional on their option moneyness. Although active MBS investors
duration hedge, they cannot hedge shocks to the level of prepayments, or shocks to
borrowers’ sensitivity to their rate incentive. These “level” and ”rate-sensitivity” factors were termed “turnover” and “refi” risk by Levin and Davidson (2005). Chernov
et al. (2015) greatly extend this idea and, using a structural estimation, derive implied
time series for these two factors from their model and data on MBS prices.
Our study makes several contributions. First, we provide the first comprehensive
study explaining a long time series and broad cross section of MBS expected returns.
We study the pattern of expected returns in this important fixed income market using
a linear factor model which is straightforward to estimate and easy to interpret.
Second, we are the first to show that risk premia are earned on MBS investments
which load on prepayment risk in a study which uses actual prepayment data to
measure innovations to prepayment risk factors. We find substantial evidence that
non-interest rate driven prepayment shocks drive MBS returns, and this has important
2

implications for prepayment modeling. Third, our study helps to explain why option
adjusted spreads (OAS), which should be zero if MBS are only exposed to interest
rate risk, are non-zero on average and exhibit a U-shaped pattern in pooled time
series cross section data. This pattern is emphasized by Boyarchenko, Fuster, and
Lucca (2014) in their closely related study of the OAS smile using data on interest
only and principal only strips. Our findings suggest that OAS on MBS reflect premia
for prepayment risk which change sign so that the pattern of expected returns in the
cross section is downward sloping in discount markets, and upward sloping in premium
markets, leading to a U-shape in the pooled time series cross section. Importantly,
since OAS are model-specific, we use data on MBS returns to measure risk premia.
We show that average monthly returns display precisely this time varying pattern
in the cross section conditional on market type. Our analysis also explains why
studies using different time samples find different rankings amongst MBS strategies
which are long either discount, par, or premium securities. Duarte, Longstaff, and
Yu (2006) finds a ranking of discount, par, premium for average strategy level returns
using data up from 1996 to 2004. Using our sample from 1994 to the present, we
find the opposite ranking, consistent with the findings of positive prepayment risk
premia in Gabaix, Krishnamurthy, and Vigneron (2007). The difference is due to
variation in the composition of the MBS market over time. Discount securities were
more prevalent in the period studied by Duarte, Longstaff, and Yu (2006), implying
a negative prepayment risk premium. Finally, our study contributes to the mounting
evidence that markets are segmented, and that risks may be priced by specialized
investors. Our findings present evidence that MBS risk prices actually change sign
over time with whether prepayment is wealth increasing or wealth decreasing for a
representative MBS investor who is specialized in MBS and holds the MBS market.1
An accurate understanding and measurement of risk premia in MBS markets is
important of its own accord. The market for agency MBS pass-through securities
represents over $6.3 Trillion in market value.2 MBS are a very important part of the
fixed income portfolios of most banks, asset managers, pension funds, and insurance
1

That risk prices can change sign over time may be a more pervasive phenomenon. For example,
see Campbell, Pflueger, and Viceira (2016) for evidence of changing stock bond correlations.
2
See the Table describing US Mortgage-Related Issuance and Outstanding at www.sifma.org/
research/statistics.aspx.

3

company portfolios. Such securities constitute about 23% of the Barclays Capital
US Aggregate Bond Index, a key benchmark for fixed income portfolio allocations.
Moreover, the risk premia on MBS are key inputs into the pass-through from monetary
policy, which primarily operates through treasury pricing, and the mortgage rates
faced by borrowers. If MBS investors require substantial prepayment risk premia over
US treasuries, traditional monetary policy may be less effective in easing mortgage
market conditions.

2

Literature Review

We build on several recent contributions. Our study is most closely related to Gabaix,
Krishnamurthy, and Vigneron (2007). Their study provides convincing evidence that
MBS returns are driven in large part by limits to arbitrage. Importantly, they show
that although prepayment risk is partly common within a class of MBS securities,
the risk in MBS investing is negatively correlated with the aggregate risks born by a
representative consumer. The main differences between our study and theirs are that
they use a shorter time period, in which prepayment risk carries a consistently positive
risk premium, and they study Collateralized Mortgage Obligations (CMO’s), rather
than pass-through securities. We greatly extend their results on the cross section and
time series of MBS returns by using a long time series and broad cross section on MBS
pass-through returns. Pass-through securities constitute 90% of MBS outstanding,
while CMO’s comprise the remaining 10%. Finally, Gabaix, Krishnamurthy, and
Vigneron (2007) measure prepayment risk as errors from a stylized prepayment model,
rather than using actual data on prepayment forecasts and realizations as our study
does.
We also build on work by Levin and Davidson (2005), and, more recently, by
Chernov, Dunn, and Longstaff (2015). Levin and Davidson (2005) use principal
components analysis to decompose the shocks which drive prices. Chernov, Dunn,
and Longstaff (2015) use a structural model to derive more accurate MBS prices, and
back out the model implied shocks. Both studies provide convincing evidence that
there are systematic shocks to the level and rate-sensitivity of prepayments, and that
these shocks drive the level of MBS prices. By contrast, we focus on understanding
4

the cross section of returns, rather than the levels of prices. Another difference is
that both Levin and Davidson (2005) and Chernov, Dunn, and Longstaff (2015) use
their model, along with MBS pricing data, to back out the properties of the priced
turnover and rate-sensitivity risk factors. Implied risk factors can be sensitive to
model specification. By contrast, we use real variables as factors, and we measure
prepayment risk factors directly using prepayment data. Our factor measurement
is thus in the spirit of the macroeconomic factors constructed in Chen, Roll, and
Ross (1986). Chernov, Dunn, and Longstaff (2015) argue convincingly that MBS
pricing is driven by exposure to turnover and rate-sensitivity risks, and our finding
that exposures to these risks measured using actual prepayment data explain the
cross section and time series of MBS returns builds heavily on, and supports, their
findings.
Another closely related recent study is Boyarchenko, Fuster, and Lucca (2014),
who also argue that unhedgeable prepayment risk is priced in their study of the OAS
smile. They use interest only and principal only strips to show that more extreme
coupons seem to have higher prepayment risk exposure, and thus have higher OAS.
Again, our study focuses on actual MBS returns, and on risk loadings which we derive
independently from our pricing model.
Finally, our study follows many papers which study prepayment behavior and the
effect of prepayment on MBS pricing. Important examples include Dunn and McConnell (1981a), Dunn and McConnell (1981b), Schwartz and Torous (1992), Stanton (1995), Boudoukh, Richardson, Stanton, and Whitelaw (1997), Longstaff (2005),
Downing, Stanton, and Wallace (2005), and Agarwal, Driscoll, and Laibson (2013).

3

Model

We develop a linear pricing model in which risk premia are earned for loading (β)
on priced risks (λ). In particular, following Levin and Davidson (2005) and Chernov,
Dunn, and Longstaff (2015), we posit a two-factor model, in which prepayment shocks
arise from innovations to the level of prepayments, x, and innovations to the sensitivity
of prepayments to interest rate incentives, y. MBS investors price and hedge their
portfolios using pricing models in which interest rates are the main stochastic state
5

variable. Moreover, other variables which drive MBS cash flows, such as house price
appreciation and credit conditions, do not have traded derivatives, making hedging
changes in these state variables costly, imperfect, or infeasible. Thus, although MBS
investors duration hedge, the level and sensitivity of prepayments to rate incentives
varies, conditional on rate realizations. Our model is aimed at pricing prepayment
risk in treasury hedged MBS.
Further, we assume a segmented market in which the stochastic discount factor
(SDF) arises from a representative MBS investor who is undiversified and holds the
universe of MBS. Such a stochastic discount factor can be motivated by specialized
investors as in Gabaix, Krishnamurthy, and Vigneron (2007) and He and Krishnamurthy (2013). In particular, we assume the following SDF:
dπt
= −rf dt − λx dZtx − λy dZty
πt

(1)

where λx is the price of risk for “turnover” risk, xt , and λy is the price of risk for
“rate-sensitivity” risk, yt . We then derive our linear asset pricing model by computing
the difference in drifts in expected MBS returns under the physical and risk-neutral
measure as follows:
βi

βyi

z }| {
z }|x {
z
}|
{
∂Pi 1
∂Pi 1
(µi Pi − rf Pi ) dt = λx σx
dt + λy σy
dt,
∂x P
∂y P
E[Rei ]

(2)

using the notation E[Rei ] to denote expected returns, where e denotes the excess
return after treasury hedging, and i denotes the security. We define securities by
the coupon of the MBS security relative to the par coupon, and note that discount
securities have coupons lower than the par coupon, while premium securities have
coupons higher than the par coupon. Simplifying notation, this leads to the following linear model, familiar from linear equity pricing models, for the cross section of
treasury-hedged MBS returns:3
E[Rei ] = λx βxi + λy βyi .
3

See Cochrane (2005) for a textbook description of the theory and econometrics of linear asset
pricing models.

6

Following, Gabaix, Krishnamurthy, and Vigneron (2007) and Boyarchenko, Fuster,
and Lucca (2014), we develop the intuition for our model using a first order approximation of MBS prices around the no prepayment uncertainty case. There is a
constant par coupon rate, r, which represents the opportunity cost of capital for the
representative, specialized, MBS investor can reinvest portfolio proceeds in par MBS
securities, as in Fabozzi (2006). There is a securitized mortgage pool (MBS) with
prepayment rate φi and coupon ci . We normalize the initial mortgage pool balance
b0 to one and denote the remaining principal balance bt , with
dbit
= −φi bit .
dt

(3)

The first order linear approximation of the value of the MBS pass-through around
the no prepayment uncertainty case is then given by:
P0i

=

Z

∞

e
0

−rt

!

bit ci

−

dbit



dt =

bi0

i

+ (c − r)

Z

∞

e−(r+φ )t dt = 1 +
i

0

ci − r
r + φi

(4)

Thus, the value of the MBS is approximately its par value plus the value of the
coupon strip. The value of the coupon strip increases in the difference between the
coupon and current rates. The value of the coupon strip decreases with the speed
of prepayment if ci − r is positive, and increases with the speed of prepayment if
ci − r is negative. Using this first-order approximation, we can derive expressions for
the approximate factor loadings on turnover and rate-sensitivity shocks, βx and βy as
follows:
∂P i ∂φi 1
r − ci
∂φi
∂P i 1
= σx i
= σx
,
(5)
βx = σx
∂x P i
∂φ ∂x P i
(r + φi ) (φi + ci ) ∂x
and,
βy = σy

∂P i 1
∂P i ∂φi 1
r − ci
∂φi
=
σ
=
σ
.
y
y
∂y P i
∂φi ∂y P i
(r + φi ) (φi + ci ) ∂y

(6)

These expressions give us the first testable hypothesis of our model, which we state
in Lemma 1:
Lemma 1. If ci − r > 0, then βxi < 0 and βyi < 0. If ci − r < 0, then βxi > 0 and
βyi > 0.

7

In other words, premium securities, for which ci − r > 0, will have negative loadings
on turnover and rate-sensitivity risk. Intuitively, these securities have coupons that
are above current mortgage rates, and so their value deteriorates with faster prepayment. On the other hand, discount securities, for which ci − r < 0, load positively on
prepayment risk. Discount securities have coupon rates that are below the opportunity cost of re-invested capital, and hence their value increases if prepayment speeds
increase. This intuition is readily apparent from the right hand side of Equation
(4). The prepayment rate φi acts like an additional discount rate of the cash flows
in the numerator. When ci < r, the numerator is negative and an increase in the
prepayment rate essentially discounts that negative cash flow more, increasing the
value of the discount MBS. When ci > r, the numerator is positive and an increase
in discounting in the denominator, reduces the value of the premium MBS.
We further specify the following stylized model for prepayment, where our notation
now allows prepayment to vary over time in order make the connection with our
empirical work clear:

!
(7)
φit = xt + yt max 0, mi − mt ,

where we use mi to denote the borrowers’ loan rates for the loans underlying the
MBS (the MBS “Weighted Average Coupon” or WAC), and mt to denote the current
mortgage rate (measured by the Freddie Mac Primary Mortgage Market Survey rate,
for example). We assume that ci − r = mi − mt , so that the moneyness of the borrowers’ long prepayment options matches that of the MBS investors short options.
This assumption is not crucial but it helps facilitate exposition. Although we abstract from variation in the spread between the MBS coupons, ci , and the underlying
borrowers’ loan rates, mi , we will use separate data on each of these rates in our
empirical work and so we include use separate notation for clarity. The moneyness
of borrowers’ prepayment options (“borrower moneyness”) is measured by mi − mt .
The moneyness from investors’ perspective (“investor monenyess”), ci − r captures
how the security’s value changes with prepayment at par. We use borrwer moneyness
to estimate the prepayment risk factor, since the borrowers themselves make the prepayment decisions. Then, to define securities, and to study financial returns to these
securities, we use investor moneyness.
Figure 3 plots prepayment as a function of borrower moneyness and the realization
8

of the x and y prepayment factors. Using this model, we have for discount securities:
φi,t disc = xt ,

(8)


!
φi,t prem = xt + yt max 0, mi − mt .

(9)

and for premium securities

Further, we have that for discount securities,
∂φi
=1
∂x

and

∂φi
= 0.
∂y

(10)


∂φi ! i
= m − mt .
∂y

(11)

For premium securities, we have
∂φi
=1
∂x

and

Using these expressions in Equations (5) and (6) for βx and βy , we have the
following additional testable implications for the two prepayment risk factor loadings:
Lemma 2. For discount securities, using i to denote the security defined by ci − r
where for discounts ci − r < 0 we have:
(i) βyi,disc, = 0.
(ii) βxi,disc is monotonically decreasing in ci . That is, we expect securities which
trade at a larger discount to par have larger positive loadings on the turnover
prepayment risk factor.
For premium securities, using i to denote the security defined by ci − r where for
premiums ci − r > 0 we have:
(i) |βxi,prem | is monotonically increasing in ci . That is, we expect securities which
trade at a larger premium relative to par have more negative loadings on the
turnover prepayment risk factor.

9

(ii) |βyi,prem | is monotonically increasing in ci . That is, we expect securities which
trade at a larger premium relative to par to have more negative loadings on the
rate-sensitivity prepayment risk factor.
See Table 1 for a tabular summary the model’s main predictions for factor loadings
from Lemmas 1 and 2 describing the signs and relative absolute magnitudes of the
prepayment risk factor loadings across discount and premium securities defined by
their coupon relative to the par coupon.
With these results in hand, we now turn to our model’s predictions for the signs of
the prices of risk λx and λy . Because markets are segmented, and our representative
MBS investor must hold the market, the pricing of prepayment risk depends on the
composition of outstanding MBS. That is, we expect the prepayment risk prices
to vary over time, and to change sign as the market moves from discount heavy
to premium heavy. This is because, if the market is comprised mostly of discount
securities, then the representative investor is averse to states of the world in which
discount securities deteriorate in value, namely low prepayment states. On the other
hand, if the market is comprised mostly of premium securities, then the representative
investor demands compensation for securities which increase their downside exposure
in states of the world in which prepayment is high, causing premium securities to lose
value. In other words, the prices of risk are determined by the sign of the change in
wealth for a representative, specialized MBS investor who invests in the universe of
MBS securities.
Thus, in a premium heavy market, we expect that
EPM [Re,prem ] = λx βxi,prem + λy βyi,prem > 0,

(12)

where we use PM to denote the expectation conditional on “premium market” dates,
namely dates at which more than 50% of total MBS remaining principal balance
trades at a premium. Superscripts denote securities by relative coupon, i = ci − cpar
and prem indicates that the MBS is a premium security, i.e. ci − cpar > 0. Since βxi,prem
and βyi,prem are both negative, we expect that both λx and λy are negative in premium
markets.

10

By contrast, in a discount market, we expect that:
EDM [Re,disc ] = λx βxi,disc > 0

(13)

where we use DM to denote the expectation conditional on “discount market” dates,
namely dates at which 50% or more of total MBS remaining principal balance trades
at a discount. Superscripts denote securities by relative coupon, i = ci − cpar and disc
indicates that the MBS is a discount security, i.e. ci −cpar < 0. Since βxi,disc > 0, implies
that λx > 0 in discount markets. The sign on λy , however, is less straightforward
in discount heavy markets. The loading on y for discount securities is zero. If the
realized rate-sensitivity shock is high, our model predicts that there is no effect on the
valuation of discount securities. However, MBS investors should require compensation
from premium securities from their exposure to the y shock, despite the fact that
premium securities are a less important part of their portfolio in discount markets.
That is, λy should be negative in both premium and discount markets. This is because
discount securities, which drive risk pricing of level risk in a discount market, do not
load on the y shock and so these shocks should be priced by their (always negative)
effect on the cash flows from premium securities. This implies that, in principal, in a
discount market, expected returns on premium securities may be positive or negative:
EDM [Re,prem ] = λx βxi,prem + λy βyi,prem <> 0.

(14)

Then, we have the following hypothesis regarding the signs of the prices of prepayment
risk:
Hypothesis 1. In a segmented market, in which a representative MBS investor holds
the aggregate MBS portfolio, we have the following signs for the prices of level and
rate-sensitivity risk, depending on market type:

(i) Premium Market: When the market is comprised mainly by premium securities, the representative investor requires compensation for bearing the risk that
prepayment is higher than expected due to either factor. That is, we expect that
λy and λx are both negative. Given the predictions for the signs of the risk load11

ings (β’s) from Lemma 1, this implies that EPM [Re,prem ] > 0 and EPM [Re,disc ] < 0.

(ii) Discount Market: When the market is comprised mainly by discount securities, the representative investor requires compensation for bearing the risk
that prepayment is lower than expected. That is, we expect that λx > 0. Because discount securities should not load on rate-sensitivity risk (βyi,disc = 0), we
expect that λy < 0, the same as in premium heavy markets. Given the predictions for the signs of the risk loadings (β’s) from Lemma 1, this implies that
EPM [Re,prem ] <> 0 and EPM [Re,disc ] > 0.
Table 2 summarizes these predictions for the prices of risk by market type. Figure
2 graphs the model’s predictions for relative coupon expected returns by market type.

4

Data

The Appendix contains a detailed description of the data and its construction. The
following is a brief introduction to our data sources and methodology.
Our return data come from Bloomberg Barclays Hedged MBS Return indices. Index returns are available at a monthly frequency back to 1994. The indices are constructed using prices of liquid cash MBS that are deliverable in the to-be-announced
(TBA) forward market. The TBA market constitutes the vast majority of MBS
trading volume.4 We use hedged returns of coupon-level aggregates of Fannie Mae
30-year fixed-rate MBS pools. Hedged returns are computed by Barclays using a term
structure-matched position in Treasuries based on a key-rate duration approach. To
define securities, we compute the difference between the coupon of each liquid MBS
at each date, and the par coupon on that date. We compute the par coupon using
the TBA prices of securities trading near par.
We utilize two sources for prepayment data. The first is Bloomberg’s monthly
report of the median dealer prepayment forecast by coupon. Bloomberg collects
4

See Vickery and Wright (2013) for a detailed description of the TBA market. Gao et al. (forthcoming) study the relation between the TBA and cash MBS market. Finally, Song and Zhu (2016)
studies MBS financing rates implied by TBA market prices.

12

these data via survey. We use forecasts for Fannie Mae 30-year fixed securities for the
base rate scenario, since current rates should approximately reflect rate expectations
over the month. Indeed, because rates rarely move over 50bps within the month, our
results are robust to using the forecast for the realized rate scenario (although this
requires conditioning on future rate realizations). We collect realized prepayment data
for Fannie Mae 30-year fixed securities by coupon monthly from eMBS. To compute
prepayment shocks, we also measure the moneyness of borrower’s prepayment options
for each MBS coupon. To do this, we collect data on weighted average coupons (WAC)
for each MBS coupon. These WAC’s measure the underlying borrower loan rates.
Then, we compare these rates to the current mortgage rate as reported weekly by
Freddie Mac in their Primary Mortgage Market Survey (PMMS). We use a monthly
average of the weekly primary mortgage rates as the current mortgage rate.

5

Empirical Analysis

5.1

Prepayment Risk Factors

Our model is
E[Rei ] = λx βxi + λy βyi .
We estimate our linear factor model using standard Fama and MacBeth (1973) techniques, while providing additional pooled time series, cross section OLS results for
robustness. In order to measure βxi and βyi using the time series regression for the first
stage Fama McBeth regression, we need time series for shocks to xt and yt . We use
shocks to the level and rate-sensitivity factors, since expected prepayments should
not affect returns. To extract the prepayment shocks, we use the difference between
forecasted and realized prepayments. Each month, dealers provide Bloomberg with
their forecast for prepayments for each MBS coupon, and for several possible future interest rate scenarios. For our estimate of forecasted prepayments, we use the
Bloomberg median forecast for the base interest rate scenario for each coupon.5 We
5

Results using the ex-post rate realization forecast are similar, since few rate realizations are more
than 50bps different from the base interest rate. See also Carlin, Longstaff, and Matoba (2014), who
forecast TBA returns using a measure of disagreement regarding prepayment rates across dealers.

13

obtain realized prepayments for each MBS coupon from eMBS. Realized prepayments
are reported on the eMBS website on the 4th business day of the month for the prior
month. The Appendix contains further details on the data and our methodology.
We estimate innovations to the level and turnover prepayment risk factors as follows.
First, we estimate the following regression across available underlying borrower loan
rates using the forecast data in each month:

!
ppmtforecast
= xforecast
+ ytforecast max 0, mi − mPMMS .
t
t

(15)

We use the Weighted Average Coupon (WAC) of the loans underlying MBS with a
particular coupon i to measure borrower loan rates mi . The prevailing mortgage rate
mPMMS is obtained from the Freddie Mac Primary Mortgage Market Survey (PMMS).
The second term is positive for MBS with underlying borrower loan rates which are
above prevailing rates, and zero otherwise. In this regression, the estimated intercept,
x̂t measures the forecasted level of prepayments, while the forecasted slope on the
rate incentive for borrowers’ with in-the-money prepayment options is estimated by
ŷt . Next, we run the same regression in realized prepayment data for each month:
!

realized
realized
i
PMMS
ppmtrealized
=
x
+
y
max
0,
m
−
m
.
t
t
t

(16)

For parsimony, we use the notation xt and yt to denote these innovations. Unexpected
innovations in the level of prepayments xt are measured as
.
xt = x̂realized
− x̂forecast
t
t

(17)

Similarly, unexpected innovations in the rate-sensitivity of prepayments yt are measured as:
yt = ŷtrealized − ŷtforecast .
(18)
Figure 5 plots the time series for the two prepayment risk factors. We note that
our time series estimates of the turnover and rate-sensitivity prepayment risk factors are an additional contribution of our work, since prior studies use model implied
estimates, or principal components from pricing data to measure prepayment risk,
whereas our series are estimated from actual prepayment data. The correlation be14

tween the innovations in x and y is low, at 0.13. The series are, however, autocorrelated (0.78 for x and 0.66 for y). We argue that despite this measured autocorrelation,
these innovations should be considered “surprises” in the context of MBS price setting behavior. It is standard for dealers and investors to use statistical models to
forecast prepayment. When data which is inconsistent with the model arrives, they
face a tradeoff for updating their model. If they update the model too often, then
it is not a model, but instead just a statistical description of current data. On the
other hand, if the data consistently contradicts the model over a longer time period,
parameters are updated. This behavior leads to slowly changing prepayment models,
and persistent prepayment model errors. For example, the autocorrelation of Barclays’ prepayment model implied Option Adjusted Spreads across coupons is 0.83.
This high autocorrelation is consistent with persistent prepayment model errors. Elevated OAS may reflect persistent poor performance of prepayment models which only
feature stochastic interest rates when prepayment is being driven by other state variables. Despite being persistent, then, prepayment errors are correlated with returns
because investors’ prepayment model output feeds directly into MBS pricing on both
the buy and sell side. Indeed, the fact that first stage Fama MacBeth regressions of
returns on the estimated factors yield significant loadings supports the interpretation
of the xt and yt series as shocks.

5.2

Factor Loadings

With the level and rate-sensitivity factors in hand, we can estimate the following
regression for each relative coupon i.
E[Rtei ] = ai + βxi xt + βyi yt + ǫit .

(19)

We use the Barclays MBS Index Excess Returns, available at the coupon level. Barclays uses a proprietary prepayment model to compute key rate durations, and constructs hedged MBS returns using these key rate durations and US treasury returns.
Details regarding the index returns construction can be found in Phelps (2015). We
also provide further detail in the Appendix. We define securities by their coupon
relative to the par coupon, rather than by their absolute coupon. This is because
15

the sensitivities of securities’ values with respect to prepayment (the risk factor loadings) vary less over time for securities defined by their relative coupon than by their
absolute coupon, as can be seen in Lemma 2. On the other hand, an MBS with a
5% coupon has varied from being discount to par to being premium relative to par
over our sample. When the 5% coupon was discount, its value increased with prepayment speeds, and vice versa when it became premium. In fact, we will show that the
characteristic we use to define securities, relative moneyness, will have a monotonic
relationship with factor loadings. This supports our model as well as using relative
moneyness to define a “security”.
Table 3 displays summary statistics for each coupon relative to par, from -2% to
3.5%. Due to data limitations, we use full sample estimates for the factor loadings,
however we provide evidence below for stable loadings for securities defined by their
relative coupon. Table 4 presents our estimated loadings when we restrict βydisc = 0, as
in a strict interpretation of our model.6 The restricted estimates are exactly consistent
with the results of Lemma 1, which predicts positive loadings for discount securities,
and negative loadings for premium securities. Turning to the predictions of Lemma 2,
which uses the prepayment model in Equation (9), we see that the results also closely
match each of the more detailed predictions of the model stated in Lemma 2. Not
only do the signs match the model’s predictions, but also the loadings for both x and
y are monotonically decreasing in the absolute value of the relative coupon. Finally,
we note that the loadings tend to be more significant in the tails of the relative coupon
space, i.e. the pattern of significance follows the pattern of the absolute magnitude
of the coefficients. Figure 6 plots the coefficients for a visual description of the fit
between the model’s predictions and our empirical findings.
We present unrestricted results in Table 5. As can be seen, the results are very
similar, and the R2 do not change much between the unconstrained and constrained
specifications. The signs for the loadings in Table 5 also match the predictions of
Lemma 1. Lemma 1 uses only the pricing model, without a specific model for how x
and y affect prepayments across the coupon stack.
6

The intercepts in all our factor loadings are less than 0.1%, and insignificant, for all securities,
and so we do not report them.

16

5.3

Prices of Risk

With our estimated loadings in hand, we turn to estimating the two prices of risk, λx
and λy , using the cross section regressions
E[Rtei ] = at + λx β̂xi + λy β̂yi + ǫit .

(20)

As described in Hypothesis 1, we expect that the signs of the prices of risk depend
on the market composition. We measure market composition using the percent of
remaining principal balance (RPB) that is discount. We discuss alternative measures
in the Appendix. Figure 7 plots the market composition over time. We classify a
month as discount if greater than 50% of the outstanding MBS balance trades at a
discount, and premium otherwise. Table 6 presents summary statistics by relative
coupons and for the subsamples defined by whether the market type is premium or
discount. Figure 8 plots the average returns by relative coupon for all months, and
then by averaging within discount, and within premium months only. We note the
similarity between Figure 8 from the data, and Figure 2.
Note also that ignoring market type biases conditional return estimates towards
zero for months in which conditional average returns are positive. This can be seen by
the fact that, conditional on the market type leading to positive average returns for a
particular security, the green solid line plotting unconditional returns is closer to zero
than the line plotting returns conditional on market type. Thus, in discount markets, when discount securities earn higher average returns, the unconditional average
return estimate is lower than the estimate conditional on months in which 50% or
more of total remaining principal balance trades at a discount. Similarly, in premium
markets, when premium securities earn higher average returns, the unconditional average return estimate is lower than the estimate conditional on months in which more
than 50% of total remaining principal balance trades at a premium. This can also be
seen by comparing the unconditional summary statistics in Table 3 to the summary
statistics conditional on market type in Table 6. Using unconditional average returns
biases discount security average returns downward in discount months, and biases
premium security average returns downward in premium months.
One challenge with estimating λx and λy is that the loadings across factors are
17

highly correlated for each security, leading to a multicollinearity problem. This can
be seen in Table 4 and in Figure 6. To alleviate the multicollinearity somewhat, when
running the second stage regressions, we drop months in which the cross section
correlation amongst factor loadings is greater than 0.90. The results from the second
stage regression appear in Table 7. The signs are as predicted by Hypothesis 1.
In terms of statistical significance, two of the risk prices are significant at the 85%
significance level, and one is significant at the 90% level. This may seem relatively
low in the context of cross section tests in equity markets, but it is important to note
that we are restricted to a much smaller cross section. On average, we have seven
securities per month. We have at least five coupons 97% of all months. Figure 9
plots the predicted returns from the model using Fama MacBeth estimates for the
risk prices in the top panel, and realized average returns in the bottom panel. That
is, we plot:
ei ]
\
E[R
= â + λ̂x,m∈{DM,PM} β̂xi + λ̂y,m∈{DM,PM} β̂yi .
(21)
M∈{DM,PM}
All intercepts are very close to zero. We use M ∈ {DM,PM} to emphasize that we use risk
prices which are estimated conditional on market type, as defined by the composition
of total remaining principal balance between discount and premium securities. To
compute unconditional averages, we weight by the empirical distribution over market
types, i.e. we use the actual relative frequency of discount and premium market
months that is observed in our sample, and used in Figure 8. Comparing Figure 9 to
Figure 8 shows the relatively good fit of the model.
To confront the challenge presented by the multicollinearity of the factor loadings,
we perform two additional tests. First, the fact that the loadings on both turnover
risk and rate-sensitivity risk are monotonic in relative coupon suggests using the
characteristic, relative moneyness, as a single “factor”. Note that this monotonicity
is a prediction of Lemma 2, and thus this test also supports our model of priced
risk factor loadings, despite using a characteristic as a factor. In Table 8 we present
the results from a second stage Fama MacBeth regression in which we use relative
moneyness as the single risk factor. That is, we estimate λc using:
!

E[Rtei ] = at + λc ci − r + ǫit ,
18

(22)

where, consistent with the notation in Section 3, r denotes the par coupon rate. Consistent with our theory, the price of risk for discount securities is positive in discount
months and negative in premium months, and vice versa for premium securities. The
bottom panel of Figure 9 plots the predicted returns from the model using relative
moneyness as a single characteristic/factor. That is, we plot
!

ei ]
\
E[R
= â + λ̂c,m∈{DM,PM} ci − r .
M∈{DM,PM}

(23)

All intercepts are again very close to zero, and again we use the empirical distribution
over market types to compute unconditional average returns. As can be seen, the
predictions of our model are very robust across the two specifications for prepayment
risk exposure. Moreover, these results indicate that factor loadings are stable over
time, which supports our estimates of βx and βy using the full sample of data.
As a second alternative estimation strategy for λx and λy , we run a pooled time
series cross section regression, with interaction terms to capture the effect of market
type on the risk prices. Specifically, we run the following regression over all coupons
and across all months:
disc
disc
E[Rtei ] = a + κx βxi + κy βyi + δx βxi (%RP BBoM
− 50%) + δy βyi (%RP BBoM
− 50%) + ǫit .
(24)
We use BoM to denote observation at the beginning of the month, emphasizing that this
is a predictive regression. When the market is perfectly balanced, %RP B disc − 50% =
0, and κx and κy should thus be zero. Investors are naturally prepayment-risk-hedged
from their balanced portfolio of discount and premium securities, and thus should not
require prepayment risk premium. On the other hand, we expect that δx and δy should
both be positive. In discount heavy months, %RP B disc − 50% > 0, and since discount
securities have positive loadings βxi , and zero βyi , a positive δx leads to the modelimplied higher expected returns for discount securities in discount months. Similarly,
in premium heavy months, %RP B disc − 50% < 0, and since premium securities have
negative loadings βxi and βyi , positive δx and δy lead to the model-implied higher
expected returns for premium securities in premium months. Table 9 presents the
results. As predicted, the κ’s are zero, and the δ’s are positive. The δ ′ s are jointly

19

significant at the 87% level. Thus, the pooled time series cross section results provide
additional support for the model’s implications. We present standard errors clustered
by time.7 Note that we predict monthly returns with an R2 of 1% without time
fixed effects. However, in acknowledgment of the fact that, in addition to the risk
factors which change the shape of expected returns in the cross section, there are
likely to be shocks or risk factors that move the entire coupon stack of returns.
Thus, we also report results including a time fixed effect. Table 9 shows that the
results with time fixed effects are qualitatively similar. The raw loadings remain
very small and statistically insignificantly different from zero. Both of the interaction
coefficients increase in magnitude, and the interaction between βx and relative coupon
is statistically significant at the 10% level. Including time fixed effects, the δ ′ s are
jointly significant at the 97% level. Overall, these results are very consistent with our
pricing model, and with the Fama MacBeth results.
Another way of assessing our pricing model is to compare it to MBS market models
using constant risk prices. We consider two benchmark models. The first uses the
return on the RPB weighted market-level return to MBS as the single factor. That
is, we estimate:
E[Rtei ] = ai + β VWall RtVWall + ǫit ,
(25)
where VWall uses the hedged coupon return series, along with RPB by coupon, to
construct a value weighted index. Predicted returns from this model are:
VWall
ei
\
E[R
RtVWall .
t ] = ai + β̂

(26)

The second uses the return on a spread asset constructed by going long the maximum
coupon in each month, and short the minimum coupon in each month. We scale this
spread asset so that its return has equal leg volatility and constant volatility over time.
The intuition for this benchmark model is that it makes use of the monotonicity of
the factor loadings, but not the time varying risk prices. Thus, by comparing our
model to these two benchmark models we see that, (1) it is important to construct
7

In an asset pricing context, we expect it to be most important to cluster errors in the time
dimension, see Petersen (2011). Standard errors are smaller using coupon and time clusters, however
the size of the clusters becomes small.

20

loadings on prepayment risk factors, rather than on MBS market returns, and (2) it is
important to condition risk price estimation on market type. The second benchmark
model is estimated using:
E[Rtei ] = ai + β Max-Min RtMax-Min + ǫit .

(27)

Predicted returns from this model are:
Max-Min
ei
\
E[R
RtMax-Min .
t ] = ai + β̂

(28)

Figure 10 presents scatter plots of the results for these models conditional on market
type, and over the full sample. Each column is one model, and rows plot different
market types. We compare these results to the results for the models implied by our
theory. Figure 11 plots the results for the models described in Equations (21) and (23)
conditional on market type, and over the full sample. The superior performance of
the models implied by our theory is clear in the figures. The left column of Figure 10,
plots the benchmark model using the return on the RPB weighted market-level return
to MBS as the single factor. The estimated β’s from this model are approximately
equal to one for all relative coupons, thus, the predicted returns are nearly equal
whereas the actual realized returns display substantial variation. The right column of
Figure 10 plots the benchmark model using the return on a spread asset constructed
by going long the maximum coupon in each month, and short the minimum coupon
in each month. This factor creates more spread in β’s, and it performs slightly better.
The improvement in performance is primarily in premium market months. This is
because the loadings (not reported) are monotonically increasing in relative coupon,
negative for discount securities and positive for premium securities. The estimated
price of risk is positive. Then, in premium markets this model correctly predicts
that premium securities should have higher expected returns. In discount markets,
predicted returns are the same, however realized returns have the opposite pattern
and this model gets the wrong sign for the slope of returns across relative coupons. As
a result, the overall performance is poor, as can be seen in the plot for the full sample,
in the bottom row of the figure. The left column of Figure 11 plots the results for the
model described in Equation (21), with level and rate-sensitivity risk factors. Two
21

things improve the fit of this model. First, this model produces a larger spread in β’s
than either benchmark model. Second, allowing the price of risk to vary by market
type allows the model to match the slope of average returns in the cross section of
relative coupons in both market types, and hence in the full sample. The right column
of Figure 11 plots the results for the model described in Equation (23), with relative
coupon as the single factor/characteristic. This model is also implied by our theory,
and has a good fit. Thus, the two models which are consistent with our theory appear
to offer a substantial improvement over the benchmark models using passive indices.
The better performance of the two models we propose can also be measured by the
root mean squared errors for each model for the full sample, corresponding to the
bottom row of Figures 10 and 11. These are 0.68% for the value weighted market
model, 0.67% for the Max-Min model, 0.46% for the two factor model, and 0.21% for
the relative moneyness model.

5.4

Time Series Results: Timed Spread Asset

The results of our estimated model
E[Rei ] = λx βxi + λy βyi
suggest implementing an active strategy consisting of a long-short spread asset which
changes direction with market type. Since loadings are monotonic in coupon, and
given our estimated time varying risk prices, the results suggest going long the deepest
discount security and short the most premium security in discount heavy markets, and
vice versa in premium markets. Intuitively, this spread asset is designed to harvest
the risk premium earned for bearing prepayment risk that is hard to hedge with US
treasuries. To construct our active spread asset strategy, we restrict the asset to have
a constant volatility over time, and to have equal volatility in the long and short legs,
which is standard. The Sharpe ratio8 of this optimal spread asset is 0.76. This is
2.62 times the Sharpe ratio of a passive value weighted MBS index. Table 10 presents
results for the Sharpe ratios of passive spread assets, the optimally timed spread
asset, and passive indices over the full sample, and within discount and premium
8

Sharpe (1966).

22

months. The final row, using the full sample, shows the superior performance of
the optimally timed spread asset over all other strategies. The conditional Sharpe
ratios are also informative, since the Sharpe ratio for any strategy that is always
long discount securities has a Sharpe ratio that is positive in discount months, and
negative in discount months. The converse is true for any strategy that is always long
premium securities.
We also present Information ratios, a version of the active Sharpe ratio which
controls for the correlation between the actively managed portfolio and the passive
benchmark since it is the excess return relative to the standard deviation of the active
return less the benchmark return:
E [RActive − RBenchmark ]
σ (RActive − RBenchmark )
where RBenchmark is the benchmark return. Table 12 displays the excess return, tracking
error, and information ratio for our model-implied optimally timed portfolio relative
to three passive benchmarks, namely, a passive long maximum premium coupon short
minimum discount coupon portfolio with constant volatility and equal-leg volatility,
a passive long maximum premium coupon short par portfolio with constant volatility
and equal-leg volatility, and the remaining principal balance weighted MBS index. In
all cases, the information ratio is about 0.3, which seems high for our simple strategy.
To study the magnitude of risk loadings and α’s with respect to passive benchmarks, we regress the optimally timed spread asset returns on four passive benchmarks. That is, we estimate:
Rtmodel implied spread asset = α + β Benchmark RtBenchmark + ǫt

(29)

where RtBenchmark is one of four benchmark returns, namely, the remaining principal
balance weighted MBS index, VWall , the remaining principal balance weighted MBS
index amongst premium securities only, VWprem , an untimed long maximum premium
coupon short minimum discount coupon portfolio with constant volatility and equalleg volatility, Max - Min, and an untimed long maximum premium coupon short par
coupon portfolio with constant volatility and equal leg volatility, Max - Par. The

23

monthly α’s are all highly statistically significant. We note that, importantly, the returns to the active strategy are largely independent of the passive benchmark returns.
In particular, the loading on the remaining principal balance weighted MBS market
portfolio is -0.08 and the R2 of this regression is only 1%. The highest loading of the
optimally timed strategy, 0.45, is on the Max-Par benchmark, and this regression has
an R2 of 22%. The fact that the R2 is higher for this benchmark relative to the Max
- Min portfolio (9%) is reflective of the fact that despite the fact that it is always
optimal to hold the Max - Min portfolio, the long and short legs switch position over
time. All of these results are consistent with our finding that neglecting to control
for the time varying prices of prepayment risks biases estimates of positive average
returns towards zero.
Finally, we compute the cumulative returns from investing in the model-implied,
optimally timed spread asset vs. the alternative cumulative returns from the three
passive benchmark strategies with the next highest Sharpe ratios, namely, a passive
long maximum premium coupon short minimum discount coupon portfolio with constant volatility and equal-leg volatility, a passive long maximum premium coupon
short par portfolio with constant volatility and equal-leg volatility, and the remaining
principal balance weighted MBS index. Figure 12 plots the results, and shows that
cumulative returns over the last twenty years have been almost double that of the
next best strategy. Note that the difference in cumulative returns between the MaxMin strategy (blue line), and the optimal strategy (black line( is entirely driven by
optimally switching the long and short legs, conditional on market type. The market
has been dominated by premium securities since 2009, so the difference in cumulative
returns over this time between these two strategies is constant. The market type will
change to discount if rates increase in the future, and at that point the cumulative returns will again diverge. Recall also that these cumulative returns are net of treasury
returns, and so are compensation for prepayment risk only.

6

Conclusion

We present a simple, linear asset pricing model for the cross section of MBS returns.
We show that loadings on a turnover and rate-sensitivity risk factor are priced in the
24

time series and cross section. We measure the turnover and rate-sensitivity factors
using surprises in prepayment realizations relative to prepayment forecasts. Discount
securities load positively on turnover prepayment risk, while premium securities load
negatively on turnover and rate-sensitivity risk. The measured loadings are monotonic
in securities’ coupons relative to the par coupon. These predictions for risk loadings
are precisely as predicted by the simple pricing model. Using the relative fraction of
discount vs. premium securities in the overall MBS market, we show that the price of
prepayment risk is positive in discount markets, and negative in premium markets.
This leads to a downward sloping pattern of expected returns in the cross section
in discount markets, and an upward sloping pattern in premium markets. Overall,
in the pooled time series cross section, the resulting pattern for the cross section of
returns is U-shaped in relative moneyness. As a result, failing to account for the
market composition, and the associated prices of prepayment risk, leads to estimates
of average returns, and risk premia, which are biased. In particular, estimates are
biased downwards when they are positive conditional on market type; discount securities’ average returns are underestimated in discount markets and premium securities’
average returns are underestimated in premium markets.
Our study provides new evidence of segmented markets for mortgage-backed securities, populated by specialized investors who price market-specific risks. In particular, we show that the price of prepayment risk is determined by whether prepayment
is wealth increasing or wealth decreasing for a representative MBS investor who holds
the MBS market.

References
Sumit Agarwal, John C. Driscoll, and David I. Laibson. Optimal mortgage refinancing: A closed-form solution. Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, 45:591–622,
2013.
Jacob Boudoukh, Matthew Richardson, Richard Stanton, and Robert F. Whitelaw.
Pricing mortgage-backed securities in a multifactor interest rate environment: a
multivariate density estimation approach. Review of Financial Studies, 10:405–
446, 1997.
25

Nina Boyarchenko, Andreas Fuster, and David O. Lucca. Understanding mortgage
spreads. Working Paper FRB NY, 2014.
John Y. Campbell, Caroline Pflueger, and Luis Viceira. Monetary policy drivers of
bond and equity risks. Working Paper, 2016.
Bruce I. Carlin, Francis A. Longstaff, and Kyle Matoba. Disagreement and asset
prices. Working Paper, 2014.
Nai-Fu Chen, Richard Roll, and Stephen A. Ross. Economic forces and the stock
market. The Journal of Business, 1986.
Mikhail Chernov, Brett Dunn, and Francis A. Longstaff. Macroeconomic-driven prepayment risk and the valuation of mortgage-backed securities. Working Paper,
2015.
John H. Cochrane. Asset Pricing. Princeton University Press, 2005.
Chris Downing, Richard Stanton, and Nancy Wallace. An empirical test of a twofactor mortgage valuation model: How much do house prices matter? Real Estate
Economics, 33:681–710, 2005.
Jefferson Duarte, Francis A. Longstaff, and Fan Yu. Risk and return in fixed-income
arbitrage: Nickels in front of a steamroller? Review of Financial Studies, 20(3):
769–811, 2006.
Kenneth B. Dunn and John J. McConnell. A comparison of alternative models for
pricing gnma mortgage-backed securities. Journal of Finance, 36:471–483, 1981a.
Kenneth B. Dunn and John J. McConnell. Valuation of gnma mortgage-backed securities. Journal of Finance, 36:599–616, 1981b.
Frank Fabozzi, editor. Handbook of Mortgage Backed Securities. McGraw Hill Education, NY NY, 2006.
Eugene F. Fama and James D. MacBeth. Risk, return, and equilibrium: Empirical
tests. Journal of Political Economy, 81(3):607–636, 1973.
Xavier Gabaix, Arvind Krishnamurthy, and Olivier Vigneron. Limits of arbitrage:
theory and evidence from the mortgage-backed securities market. Journal of Finance, 62:557–595, 2007.
Pengjie Gao, Paul Schultz, and Zhaogang Song. Liquidity in a market for unique
aasset: Specified pool and tba trading in the mortgage backed securities market.
Journal of Finance, forthcoming.
26

Lakhbir S. Hayre and Robert Young. Guide to mortgage-backed securities. Citigroup
White Paper, 2004.
Lakhbir S. Hayre, Robert Young, Mikhail Teytel, and Kevin Cheng. Anatomy of
prepayment: The citigroup prepayment model. Citigroup White Paper, 2010.
Zhiguo He and Arvind Krishnamurthy. Intermediary asset pricing. American Economic Review, 103(2):732–70, 2013.
Alexander Levin and Andrew Davidson. Prepayment risk and option-adjusted valuation of mbs. Journal of Portfolio Management, 2005.
Francis A. Longstaff. Borrower credit and the valuation of mortgage-backed securities.
Real Estate Economics, 33:619–661, 2005.
Mitchell Petersen. Estimating standard errors in finance panel data sets: Comparing
approaches. Review of Financial Studies, 2011.
Bruce Phelps. Managing against the barclays mbs index: Prices and returns. Barclays
White Paper, 2015.
Eduardo Schwartz and Walter Torous. Prepayment, default, and the valuation of
mortgage pass-through securities. Journal of Business, 65:221–239, 1992.
William F. Sharpe. Mutual fund performance. Journal of Business, 39:119–138, 1966.
Zhaogang Song and Haoxiang Zhu. Mortgage dollar roll. Working Paper, 2016.
Richard Stanton. Rational prepayment and the valuation of mortgage-backed securities. Review of Financial Studies, 8:677–708, 1995.
James Vickery and Joshua Wright. Tba trading and liquidity in the agency mbs
market. FRBNY Economic Policy Review, May 2013.

27

Appendix
Constructing Prepayment Risk Factors
Prepayment Forecasts For our study, we use historical prepayment forecasts obtained from Bloomberg. Specifically, we use a Bloomberg-computed median of prepayment projections submitted by contributing dealers. Projections are available for
generic TBA securities defined by agency/program/coupon. In this paper, we focus
on prepayment projections for Fannie Mae 30-year TBA securities.
Dealers have the option of updating their prepayment projections on Bloomberg
on a daily basis and do so at their own discretion. Bloomberg computes a daily
median prepayment forecast based on whatever dealer projections are available at
the time. On average, there are about 8-10 contributing dealers. Bloomberg median
prepayment forecasts can be downloaded historically with a monthly frequency (i.e.
a monthly snapshot on the 15th).
Dealer prepayment forecasts are available for a range of interest rate scenarios. In
addition to the base case that assumes rates remain unchanged from current levels,
forecasts are also made assuming parallel shifts in the yield curve of +/− 50, 100, 200,
300 basis points. We utilize the base case projection for the purpose of our analysis.
The following is an example screen shot of this data:

The dealer prepayment forecasts on Bloomberg are quoted according to the PSA
convention. We convert that to an annualized constant prepayment rate (CPR) using
the standard conversion formula:
CP R = P SA ∗ min(6%, 0.2% ∗ weighted-average loan age).
28

For reference, we provide a more detailed description of PSA and CPR:9
• Constant Prepayment Rate (CPR) and the Securities Industry and Financial
Markets Association’s Standard Prepayment Model (PSA curve) are the most
popular models used to measure prepayments.
• CPR represents the annualized constant rate of principal repayment in excess
of scheduled principal amortization.
• The PSA curve is a schedule of prepayments that assumes that prepayments
will occur at a rate of 0.2 percent CPR in the first month and will increase an
additional 0.2 percent CPR each month until the 30th month and will prepay
at a rate of 6 percent CPR thereafter (“100 percent PSA”).
• PSA prepayment speeds are expressed as a multiple of this base scenario. For
example, 200 percent PSA assumes annual prepayment rates will be twice as
fast in each of these periods; 0.4 percent in the first month, 0.8 percent in the
second month, reaching 12 percent in month 30 and remaining at 12 percent
after that.
Realized Prepayments Historical realized prepayment rates are obtained via eMBS.
The realized prepayment rate is computed based on the pool factors that are reported
by the agencies on the fourth business day of each month. The pool factor is the ratio
of the amount of remaining principal balance relative to the original principal balance of the pool. Using the pool factors and the scheduled balance of principal for a
pool, one can calculate the fraction of the pool balance that was prepaid, that is the
unscheduled fraction of the balance that was paid off by borrowers. The prepayment
rates reported on eMBS are a 1-month CPR measure. In other words, prepayments
are measured as the fraction of the pool at the beginning of the month that was prepaid during that month, yielding a single monthly mortality (SMM) rate. The SMM
is then annualized to get the constant prepayment rate (CPR).
Borrower Moneyness We define borrower moneyness or incentive to be the rolling
3-month average of the difference between the weighted-average coupon (WAC) of a
Fannie Mae 30-year coupon aggregate and the Freddie Mac Primary Mortgage Market
Survey (PMMS) rate for 30-year fixed-rate mortgages.
The Fannie Mae 30-year coupon aggregate is formed by grouping Fannie Mae
30-year MBS pools that have the same specified coupon. The WAC of a MBS pool
is defined to be the weighted-average of the gross interest rates of the underlying
9

See http://www.fanniemae.com/resources/file/mbs/pdf/basics-sf-mbs.pdf.

29

mortgages in the pool, weighted by the remaining principal balance of each mortgage.
Similarly, the WAC of the coupon aggregate is defined to be the weighted-average of
the WAC of the underlying MBS pools, weighted by the remaining principal balance
of each MBS pool. We obtain historical WAC data for Fannie Mae 30-year coupon
aggregates from eMBS. The data is available with monthly frequency and represents
an end-of-month snapshot.
The Freddie Mac Primary Mortgage Market Survey (PMMS) is used as an indicator of current mortgage rates. Since April 1971, Freddie Mac has surveyed lenders
across the nation weekly to determine the average rates for conventional mortgage
products. The survey obtains indicative lender quotes on first-lien prime conventional
conforming home purchase mortgages with a loan-to-value of 80 percent. The survey is collected from Monday through Wednesday and the national average rates for
each product are published on Thursday morning. Currently, about 125 lenders are
surveyed each week; lender types consist of thrifts, credit unions, commercial banks
and mortgage lending companies. The mix of lender types surveyed is approximately
proportional to the volume of mortgage loans that each lender type originates nationwide. In our study, we use the historical monthly average PMMS rate for 30-year
fixed-rate mortgages, available from Freddie Mac’s website.10
We use a 3-month average to measure the borrower incentive because we recognize
that there is a lag between a refinance application and the resulting closing and actual
mortgage prepayment. Refinancing a mortgage can take a considerable amount of
time due to the various steps involved, such as credit checks, income verification,
and title search.11 Borrowers can choose to lock in their rate during this time by
requesting a rate lock from their lender. The rate locks usually range from 30 to
90 days. In our regression in Equations (15) and (16), the borrower moneyness of a
security is determined at the beginning at the month and we only include securities
with at least USD 1bn outstanding in RPB as a liquidity filter.

Estimating Factor Loadings
We obtain monthly MBS returns from indices created by Bloomberg Barclays. The
indices are constructed by grouping individual TBA-deliverable MBS pools into aggregates or generics based on their characteristics. For our study, we use Treasuryhedged returns of coupon-level aggregates of Fannie Mae 30-year fixed-rate MBS
pools. Hedged returns are computed by Barclays using a term structure-matched
position in Treasuries based on a key-rate duration approach. As a liquidity filter, we
also exclude monthly returns from coupons that have less than USD 1bn outstanding
10
11

See http://www.freddiemac.com/pmms/pmms30.htm.
See Hayre and Young (2004).

30

in RPB at the beginning of the month. The following is a brief description of the
restriction that securities in the index are TBA-deliverable. More than 90 percent
of agency MBS trading occurs in the to-be-announced (TBA) forward market. In a
TBA trade, the buyer and seller agree upon a price for delivering a given volume of
agency MBS at a specified future date. The characteristic feature of a TBA trade is
that the actual identity of the securities to be delivered at settlement is not specified on the trade date. Instead, participants agree upon only six general parameters
of the securities to be delivered: issuer, maturity, coupon, price, par amount, and
settlement date. The exact pools to be delivered are “announced” to the buyer two
days before settlement. The pools delivered are at the discretion of the seller, but
must satisfy SIFMA good delivery guidelines, which specify the allowable variance
in the current face amount of the pools from the nominal agreed-upon amount, the
maximum number of pools per $1 million of face value, and so on. Because of these
eligibility requirements, “TBA-deliverable” pools can be considered fungible because
a significant degree of actual homogeneity is enforced among the securities deliverable
into any particular TBA contract.12
Absolute coupon return series are converted into a relative coupon return series
based on investor moneyness. We define investor moneyness to be the difference
between the TBA coupon and the par coupon at the beginning of the month. The
implied par coupon is determined from TBA prices by finding the TBA coupon that
corresponds to a price of 100, linearly interpolating when needed. For example, if the
4.0 coupon has a price of 95 and the 4.5 coupon has a price of 105, the implied par
coupon would be equal to 4.25. After computing the investor moneyness (x) for each
absolute coupon, we map it to a relative coupon in increments of 0.5 centered around
zero. For example:
• −0.75 <= x < −0.25 maps to relative coupon -0.5 %.
• −0.25 <= x < 0.25 maps to relative coupon 0.0% (par is centered around zero)
• 0.25 <= x < 0.75 maps to relative coupon 0.5%
It is important to note that in Step 1 of our Fama-MacBeth regression, we regress
returns against 1-month lagged prepayment risk factors. For example, if the LHS is
the 1-month return for the month of January, we regress that against the prepayment
shocks measured for the month of December. The reason for the lag is to account for
the fact that the Bloomberg Barclays MBS Index convention uses same day settlement
prices with paydowns estimated throughout the month, as opposed to the market’s
convention of PSA settlement. Because prepayment data for a given month is reported
12

See Hayre et al. (2010), or http://www.sifma.org/uploadedfiles/services/standard_
forms_and_documentation/ch08.pdf?n=42389.

31

after index results have been calculated, paydown returns in the MBS Index are
reported with a one-month delay. As an example, the paydown return for January
will reflect December prepayment data (which were made available by the agencies
during January) since complete factor (or prepayment) data for January will be not
available until the middle of February (due to PSA settlement). The MBS Index
reflects an estimate of paydowns in the universe on the first business day of the
month and the actual paydowns after the 16th business day of a month. See Phelps
(2015) for a detailed discussion of the index construction and timing conventions.

Determining Market Type
We define market type based on the market composition between discount and premium Fannie Mae 30-year MBS securities. At the beginning of each month, we measure the remaining principal balance (RPB) for each these two types of securities. If
the total RPB for discount securities is greater than the total RPB for premium securities, we classify that month as a discount market; otherwise the month is deemed
to be a premium market. By this measure of market type, the market has been in a
premium market state about 70% of the time during our sample period (Jan 1994 to
June 2016).
We note that, although there are several ways one could classify market type,
they are all highly correlated. We analyzed the following alternative measures of
market type: (1) RPB weighted WAC relative to current mortgage rates, or “borrower
moneyness”, (2) RPB weighted relative coupon, or “investor moneyness”, (3) RPB
weighted relative coupon minus the ten year US treasury yield, as in Gabaix et al.
(2007), and (4) innovations to the percentage of RPB that trades at a discount,
measured by errors in an AR(1) regression. The correlation of these measures with the
percentage of RPB that trades at a discount are 0.84, 0.89, 0.77 and 0.49, respectively.
Thus, the correlation of measure of market type defined by percentage of RPB that
trades at a discount with all other measures is very high.

Spread Assets
We scale all long short portfolios to have, in expectation, constant volatility and
equal leg volatility. We predict monthly volatility for each leg, for each month using
a six month equally weighted moving average of past realized monthly volatility. We
predict correlations using a twelve month equally weighted moving average of past
realized correlations. Correlations tend to be more stable than volatilities, hence we
use the longer window. If any volatility or correlation is missing for a leg/month
observation, we use the estimate of the closest coupon or coupon pair in that month

32

to replace the missing value. Each leg in the spread assets are scaled to target 1%
volatility, and each spread asset is scaled to target 1% volatility in each month.

33

Figures
WƉŵƚ

Ǉƚ сȴWƉŵƚͬȴ;ŵƉƌĞŵ ʹ ŵWDD^Ϳ

ǆƚ

ŽƌƌŽǁĞƌ
DŽŶĞǇŶĞƐƐ
ŝƐĐŽƵŶƚ D^
ŵĚŝƐĐ Ͳ ŵWDD^ фϬ

WĂƌ D^
ŵWDD^

KƵƚŽĨƚŚĞDŽŶĞǇ

WƌĞŵŝƵŵ D^
ŵƉƌĞŵ Ͳ ŵWDD^ хϬ
/ŶƚŚĞDŽŶĞǇ

Figure 1: This figure plots prepayment as a function of borrower moneyness and a
realization of the turnover (x), and rate-sensitivity (y) prepayment factors.

89:(;0<!
6%();@)!)4%E(0F!GH>!,I!G3>!,!!

D;=
D;=&2@/0!)4%E(0F!G
E(0 GH!+!,I!G
,I!G33!>!,
>!,!!!
JC(%4K(!!

./C(=02%!
"2/(3/(==!
(&)*+',-!"#$!
&5;=&!*!%!>!,!

!"#!"#$!!
%!

-?@0!2A!01(!"2/(3!4/5!6')0!B2257!

!#$%&'%!"#$!!
&'%()!*!%!+!,!
-./!01(!"2/(3!4/5!6')0!#457!

Figure 2: This figure summarizes the implications of Hypothesis 1 regarding the
signs of λx and λy in the two market types, discount and premium. Expected returns
are increasing in relative moneyness in premium markets. In discount markets, expected returns may be decreasing in relative moneyness, or U-shaped, depending on
the magnitudes of the x and y loadings and risk prices.

34

WƉŵƚ

ǇƚĨŽƌĞĐĂƐƚ

ǆƚĨŽƌĞĐĂƐƚ

ǇƚƌĞĂůŝǌĞĚ

ǆƚƌĞĂůŝǌĞĚ
ŝƐĐŽƵŶƚ D^
ŵĚŝƐĐ Ͳ ŵWDD^ фϬ
KƵƚŽĨƚŚĞDŽŶĞǇ

WĂƌ D^
ŵWDD^

ŽƌƌŽǁĞƌ
DŽŶĞǇŶĞƐƐ

WƌĞŵŝƵŵ D^
ŵƉƌĞŵ Ͳ ŵWDD^ хϬ
/ŶƚŚĞDŽŶĞǇ

Figure 3: This figure plots forecast and realized prepayment as a function of borrower
moneyness and a realization of the turnover (x), and rate-sensitivity (y) prepayment
factors. Prepayment shocks are measured as the difference between realized and forecasted factors, xshock
= xrealized
− xforecast
, and ytshock = ytrealized − ytforecast .
t
t
t

35

Figure 4: This figure plots four examples of the forecast and realized prepayment
data used to estimate the innovations to the level and rate-sensitivity prepayment
risk. The y-axis is prepayment rates in percent, and the x-axis is mi − mPMMS , or
borrower moneyness. Note that borrower moneyness is typically 50-100bps above
investor moneyness defined as ci − r.

36

*%

+%

"#'"%

"#("%

"#)"%

"#""%

!"#)"%

!"#("%

!"#'"%

!"#&"%

!"#$"%

Figure 5: This figure plots the innovations in the two prepayment risk factors,
turnover (x), and rate-sensitivity (y).

ȕx

ȕy

6.0%

6.0%

4.0%

4.0%

2.0%

2.0%

0.0%

0.0%

-2.0%

-2.0%

-4.0%

-4.0%

-6.0%

-6.0%

-8.0%

-8.0%

Figure 6: This figure plots the results for the loadings on the two prepayment risk
factors, turnover (x), and rate-sensitivity (y), by relative coupon.

37

100%

90%

80%

70%

60%

50%

40%

30%

20%

10%

0%

premium

discount

Figure 7: This figure plots the Fannie Mae 30 year MBS market composition between
discount and premium securities. We define market type by classifying any month in
which more than 50% of total remaining principal balance is discount as a discount
market. The remaining months are classified as premium markets.
full

discount

premium

2.0%

1.5%

1.0%

0.5%

0.0%
-2.0%

-1.5%

-1.0%

-0.5%

0.0%

0.5%

1.0%

1.5%

2.0%

2.5%

3.0%

3.5%

-0.5%

-1.0%

-1.5%

-2.0%

Figure 8: This figure plots annualized average monthly returns for the full sample,
and within discount months and premium months only. The pattern of average returns
is U-shaped overall, declining in discount markets, and increasing in premium markets.
We exclude coupons which would require averaging over less than five observations in
a particular market type.

38

ei ]
\
E[R
= ât + λ̂x,m∈{DM,PM} β̂xi + λ̂y,m∈{DM,PM} β̂yi
m∈{DM,PM}
*+,-./01&

2345+/5&

6/77&

"#(%&

"#$%&

'#(%&

'#$%&

$#(%&

$#$%&
!"#$%&

!'#(%&

!'#$%&

!$#(%&

$#$%&

$#(%&

'#$%&

'#(%&

"#$%&

"#(%&

)#$%&

)#(%&

"#(%&

)#$%&

)#(%&

!$#(%&

!'#$%&

!'#(%&

!"#$%&

ei ]
\
E[R
= â + λ̂c,m∈{DM,PM} (ci − cpar )
m∈{DM,PM}
*+,-./01&

2345+/5&

6/77&

"#(%&

"#$%&

'#(%&

'#$%&

$#(%&

$#$%&
!"#$%&

!'#(%&

!'#$%&

!$#(%&

$#$%&

$#(%&

'#$%&

'#(%&

"#$%&

!$#(%&

!'#$%&

!'#(%&

!"#$%&

Figure 9: This figure plots predicted monthly returns for our model using the Fama
MacBeth estimates for λ’s (top), the estimates for λ’s from a single relative moneyness
characteristic/factor model (middle), and empirical average monthly returns within
discount months and premium months only (bottom). In the bottom panel, we exclude
coupons which would require averaging over less than five observations in a particular
market type..

39

VWall
ei
\
E[R
RtVWall
t ] = ai + β̂

Max-Min
ei
\
E[R
RtMax-Min
t ] = ai + β̂

Premium Market

Premium Market
3.00%

3.00%

2.00%

2.00%

3.5

3.5

3.0
2.5
2.0

3.0
2.5

2.0

1.00%

1.00%

1.5

1.5

1.0

1.0

0.5

0.00%

actual

actual

0.5
-1.0-0.5
-1.5

0.00%

-1.0
-0.5
-1.5
0.0

0.0

-1.00%

-1.00%

-2.00%

-2.00%

-3.00%
-3.00%

-2.00%

-1.00%

0.00%

1.00%

2.00%

-3.00%
-3.00%

3.00%

-2.00%

-1.00%

3.00%

3.00%

2.00%

2.00%

-1.5

1.00%

1.00%

2.00%

3.00%

2.00%

3.00%

-1.0

actual

0.00%
0.0

-0.5

0.00%
0.0

0.5

0.5

-1.00%

-1.00%

1.5
1.0
2.0

1.0

-2.00%

1.5
2.0

-2.00%

-2.00%

-1.00%

0.00%

1.00%

2.00%

-3.00%
-3.00%

3.00%

-2.00%

-1.00%

predicted

0.00%
predicted

Full Period

Full Period

3.00%

3.00%

2.00%

2.00%
3.5

3.5

3.0

3.0
2.5

2.5
-1.5
2.0

1.00%
-2.0

2.0
-2.0

1.5

-1.0
1.0
0.5
-0.5

0.00%

-1.5

1.00%

actual

actual

3.00%

-2.0

-0.5

0.0

-1.00%

-1.00%

-2.00%

-2.00%

-2.00%

-1.00%

0.00%

1.5
-1.0
0.5 1.0
-0.5

0.00%

0.0

-3.00%
-3.00%

2.00%

-1.5

1.00%

-1.0
-2.0

-3.00%
-3.00%

1.00%

Discount Market

Discount Market

actual

0.00%
predicted

predicted

1.00%

2.00%

3.00%

predicted

-3.00%
-3.00%

-2.00%

-1.00%

0.00%

1.00%

predicted

Figure 10: This figure plots annualized realized returns vs. predicted returns for two
passive benchmark models, by market type, and for the full sample.

40

ei ]
\
E[R
= â + λ̂x,m∈{DM,PM} β̂xi + λ̂y,m∈{DM,PM} β̂yi
m∈{DM,PM}

ei ]
\
E[R
= â + λ̂c,m∈{DM,PM} (ci − cpar )
m∈{DM,PM}

Premium Market

Premium Market

3.00%

3.00%

2.00%

2.00%

3.5
2.5

2.0

3.5

3.0
2.0

1.00%

1.5

actual

actual

1.0
0.5

-1.0

0.00%

-0.5
-1.5

0.00%

-1.0

0.0

-1.00%

-1.00%

-2.00%

-2.00%

-2.00%

-1.00%

0.00%

1.00%

2.00%

-3.00%
-3.00%

3.00%

-2.00%

-1.00%

1.00%

2.00%

3.00%

2.00%

3.00%

Discount Market

Discount Market
3.00%

3.00%

2.00%

2.00%

-1.5

1.00%

0.00%
predicted

predicted

-1.5

1.00%
-1.0

-1.0

-2.0
actual

actual

-0.5

-1.5

0.0

-0.5
0.00%
0.0

-2.0

-0.5
0.00%
0.0
0.5

0.5

-1.00%

-1.00%
1.5 1.0

1.5
1.0
2.0

2.0

-2.00%

-2.00%

-3.00%
-3.00%

3.0

1.00%

1.5
1.0
0.5

-3.00%
-3.00%

2.5

-2.00%

-1.00%

0.00%

1.00%

2.00%

-3.00%
-3.00%

3.00%

-2.00%

-1.00%

0.00%

1.00%

predicted

predicted

Full Period

Full Period

3.00%

3.00%

2.00%

2.00%

3.5
2.5

3.5

3.0
2.5

-1.5

1.00%

-1.5
2.0

1.00%

-2.0

0.00%

1.5
actual

actual

2.0
1.5
-1.0
1.0
0.5
-0.5

0.00%

0.0

-1.00%

-1.00%

-2.00%

-2.00%

-2.00%

-1.00%

0.00%

-2.0

-1.0
1.0
0.5
-0.5

0.0

-3.00%
-3.00%

3.0

1.00%

2.00%

3.00%

-3.00%
-3.00%

-2.00%

-1.00%

0.00%

1.00%

predicted

predicted

Figure 11: This figure plots annualized realized returns vs. predicted returns for the
two and one factor models implied by our theory, by market type, and for the full
sample.

41

2.00%

3.00%

25%

21%
20%

15%

12%
12%
10%

9%
5%

0%

-5%

Figure 12: This figure plots cumulative returns for our model-implied optimally timed
portfolio (black) relative to three passive benchmarks. Max - Min (blue) is a passive
long maximum premium coupon short minimum discount coupon portfolio, Max - Par
(green) is a passive long maximum premium coupon short par portfolio, VWall (red)
is the RPB weighted MBS index.

42

Tables
Table 1: This figure summarizes the results in Lemmas 1 and 2 regarding the signs
and magnitudes of the prepayment risk factor loadings.

Discount Securities
Premium Securities

xt
βxdisc > 0
βxprem < 0

yt
βydisc = 0
βyprem < 0

Table 2: This figure summarizes the predictions in Hypothesis 1 regarding the signs
of the prices of turnover and rate-sensitivity risk across market types.

Discount Market
Premium Market

λx
+
−

λy
−
−

Table 3: Annualized returns, volatility, and Sharpe ratios, as well as number of
observations for MBS by Relative Moneyness, defined as own coupon relative to par
coupon.

ann. ret
ann. vol
SR
n

-2.0%
0.56%
1.70%
0.33
41

-1.5%
0.97%
1.82%
0.53
87

-1.0%
0.34%
1.87%
0.18
153

-0.5%
-0.02%
1.67%
-0.01
217

0.0%
-0.38%
1.78%
-0.21
248

0.5%
0.17%
1.71%
0.10
238

43

1.0%
0.21%
1.63%
0.13
217

1.5%
0.50%
1.59%
0.32
199

2.0%
0.86%
1.97%
0.44
172

2.5%
1.43%
2.45%
0.58
139

3.0%
1.55%
2.10%
0.74
112

3.5%
1.82%
2.21%
0.82
92

Table 4: Factor loadings by relative coupon. βydisc is restricted to equal zero. Standard
errors are reported using adjusted degrees of freedom to account for the estimated
regressors.

E[Rtei ] = ai + βxi xt + βyi max (0, ci − r) yt + ǫit
Relative Coupon
-2.0%
-1.5%
-1.0%
-0.5%
0.0%
0.5%
1.0%
1.5%
2.0%
2.5%
3.0%
3.5%

βx
4.90%
1.54%
2.60%
2.07%
0.86%
-0.04%
-0.32%
-0.74%
-0.83%
-0.96%
-1.99%
-3.60%

t-statx
1.10
0.94
3.20
3.83
1.52
-0.07
-0.67
-1.57
-1.41
-1.29
-2.76
-4.23

βy
0
0
0
0
-0.57%
-0.84%
-1.05%
-0.07%
-4.07%
-7.07%
-7.07%
-4.72%

tstaty
0
0
0
0
-0.54
-0.8
-0.98
-0.07
-2.65
-3.69
-4.27
-2.63

n
41
87
153
216
247
237
216
198
172
139
112
92

r2
3.00%
1.02%
6.34%
6.42%
1.00%
0.30%
0.70%
1.30%
5.20%
10.10%
18.00%
19.60%

Table 5: Factor loadings by relative coupon. βydisc is unrestricted. Standard errors are
reported using adjusted degrees of freedom to account for the estimated regressors.

E[Rtei ] = ai + βxi xt + βyi yt + ǫit
Relative Coupon
-2.0%
-1.5%
-1.0%
-0.5%
0.0%
0.5%
1.0%
1.5%
2.0%
2.5%
3.0%
3.5%

βx
2.73%
1.53%
2.42%
2.08%
0.86%
-0.04%
-0.32%
-0.74%
-0.83%
-0.96%
-1.99%
-3.60%

t-statx
0.49
0.86
2.89
3.79
1.52
-0.07
-0.67
-1.57
-1.41
-1.29
-2.76
-4.23

44

βy
2.52%
0.04%
1.22%
-0.01%
-0.57%
-0.84%
-1.05%
-0.07%
-4.07%
-7.07%
-7.07%
-4.72%

tstaty
0.66
0.02
0.95
-0.01
-0.54
-0.8
-0.98
-0.07
-2.65
-3.69
-4.27
-2.63

n
41
87
153
216
247
237
216
198
172
139
112
92

r2
4.10%
1.00%
6.90%
6.40%
1.00%
0.30%
0.70%
1.30%
5.20%
10.10%
18.00%
19.60%

Table 6: Annualized returns, volatility, and Sharpe ratios, as well as number of
observations for MBS by Relative Moneyness, defined as own coupon relative to par
coupon, conditional on the market type. The market is defined as Premium if > 50%
of RPB is premium, and discount otherwise.
premium
ann. ret
ann. vol
SR
n

-2.0%

-1.5%
-0.26%
0.84%
-0.31
5

-1.0%
-0.07%
2.20%
-0.03
68

-0.5%
-0.12%
1.87%
-0.06
134

0.0%
-0.50%
1.98%
-0.25
170

0.5%
0.33%
1.80%
0.18
182

1.0%
0.58%
1.63%
0.36
180

1.5%
0.88%
1.52%
0.58
168

2.0%
1.35%
1.94%
0.70
144

2.5%
1.44%
2.48%
0.58
136

3.0%
1.55%
2.10%
0.74
112

3.5%
1.82%
2.21%
0.82
92

discount
ann. ret
ann. vol
SR
n

-2.0%
0.56%
1.70%
0.33
41

-1.5%
1.05%
1.87%
0.56
82

-1.0%
0.66%
1.56%
0.42
85

-0.5%
0.13%
1.29%
0.10
83

0.0%
-0.11%
1.25%
-0.09
78

0.5%
-0.35%
1.36%
-0.25
56

1.0%
-1.61%
1.57%
-1.03
37

1.5%
-1.54%
1.85%
-0.83
31

2.0%
-1.67%
1.99%
-0.84 2
28

2.5%
1.14%
0.47%
0.42
3

3.0%

3.5%

Table 7: Prices of Risk, Fama MacBeth Estimation.

E[Rtei ] = at + λx β̂xi + λy β̂yi + ǫit
Market Type
Discount
Premium

λx
3.17%
-2.95%

t-statx
1.41
-2.19

λy
-1.22%
-1.26%

t-staty
-0.44
-1.57

n
62
168

Table 8: Prices of Risk, Relative Moneyness Characteristic.

E[Rtei ] = at + λc (ci − r) + ǫit
Market Type
Discount
Premium

λc
3.30%
-4.77%

45

t-stat
1.38
-2.66

Table 9: Prices of Risk, Pooled Time Series Cross Section Regression. Joint statistical
significance of δx and δy , computed using the Wald statistic, is reported under F-test.

E[Rtei ] = a + κx βxi + κy βyi + δx βxi (%RP B disc − 50%) + δy βyi (%RP B disc − 50%) + ǫit .

κx
κy
δx
δy
a
time f.e.
n
R2
F-stat δx and δy

Coefficient
-0.3%
0.3%
4.9%
3.3%
0.00%
no
1915
1%
87%

t-statistic clustering
none
time
-0.31
-0.27
0.27
0.20
2.11
1.49
1.45
0.92
0.68
0.45

Coefficient
-0.15%
0.73%
6.88%
3.81%

t-statistic clustering
none
time
-0.18
-0.14
0.79
0.65
3.18
2.40
1.79
1.45
yes
1915
60%
97%

Table 10: Sharpe Ratios for Spread Assets and Indices. Max - Min is a passive long
maximum premium coupon short minimum discount coupon portfolio, Max - Par is a
passive long maximum premium coupon short par portfolio, Min - Par is a passive long
minimum premium coupon short par portfolio, Optimally Timed is an active portfolio
which is long maximum premium coupon short minimum discount coupon when > 50%
of outstanding RPB is premium and long minimum discount coupon short maximum
premium coupon otherwise. VWall is the RPB weighted MBS index, VWex−par is the
RPB weighted MBS index excluding par coupon, VWdisc is the RPB weighted MBS
index of discount securities only, VWprem is the RPB weighted MBS index of premium
securities only. All long short portfolios are scaled to have constant volatility and equal
leg volatility.

Discount
Premium
Full Sample

Max - Min

Max - Par

Min - Par

-0.47
0.91
0.44

0.28
0.73
0.48

0.49
-0.42
-0.02

46

Optimally
Timed
0.47
0.91
0.76

VWall

VWex−par

VWdisc

VWprem

0.12
0.36
0.29

0.18
0.41
0.35

0.27
-0.08
0.03

-0.50
0.47
0.26

Table 11: Excess returns, tracking errors, and information ratios for our modelimplied optimally timed portfolio relative to three passive benchmarks. Max - Min is
a passive long maximum premium coupon short minimum discount coupon portfolio,
Max - Par is a passive long maximum premium coupon short par portfolio, VWall is
the RPB weighted MBS index.

Benchmark
Active excess return: Optimally Timed
Tracking Error
Information Ratio

Max - Min
0.36%
1.35%
0.27

Max - Par
0.41%
1.22%
0.33

VWall
0.48%
1.82%
0.26

Table 12: Loadings of the model implied, optimally timed portfolio returns on, and
α’s with respect to, four passive benchmarks, namely, the remaining principal balance weighted MBS index, VWall , the remaining principal balance weighted MBS
index amongst premium securities only, VWprem , an untimed long maximum premium
coupon short minimum discount premium portfolio with constant volatility and equalleg volatility, Max - Min, and an untimed long maximum premium coupon short par
portfolio with constant volatility and equal leg volatility, Max - Par.

Benchmark
Max - Min
Max - Par
VWall
VWprem

α
0.06%
0.06%
0.07%
0.08%

t-statα
3.11
3.12
3.75
3.90

β Benchmark
0.30
0.45
-0.08
-0.15

47

t-statβ
5.16
8.14
-1.48
-2.59

n
270
238
270
241

R2
9%
22%
1%
3%

