                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                       FIRMS AND LABOR MARKET INEQUALITY:
                           EVIDENCE AND SOME THEORY

                                         David Card
                                      Ana Rute Cardoso
                                        Jörg Heining
                                        Patrick Kline

                                     Working Paper 22850
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w22850


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                  November 2016




We are extremely grateful to Raffaele Saggio for assistance in preparing this paper, and to
Katherine Shaw and David Green for helpful suggestions on an earlier draft. Cardoso
acknowledges financial support from the Spanish Ministry of Economy and Competitiveness
(Severo Ochoa Programme for Centres of Excellence in R&D grant SEV-2015-0563) and the
Research Council of Norway (Europe in Transition funding scheme project 227072/F10 at
ESOP). The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2016 by David Card, Ana Rute Cardoso, Jörg Heining, and Patrick Kline. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Firms and Labor Market Inequality: Evidence and Some Theory
David Card, Ana Rute Cardoso, Jörg Heining, and Patrick Kline
NBER Working Paper No. 22850
November 2016
JEL No. D24,J31,J42

                                          ABSTRACT

We survey two growing bodies of research on firm-level drivers of labor market inequality. The
first examines how wages are affected by differences in employer productivity. Studies that focus
on firm-specific productivity shocks and control for the non-random sorting of workers to firms
typically find that a 10% increase in value-added per worker leads to somewhere between a 0.5%
and 1.5% increase in wages. Given the wide variation in firm-specific productivity, elasticities of
this size suggest that a significant fraction of wage inequality is tied to firm performance. A
second literature estimates two-way fixed effects models that rely on the wage changes of people
who move between firms to identify firm-specific wage premiums. This literature also concludes
that firm pay setting is important for wage inequality, with many studies finding that firm wage
effects contribute approximately 20% of the overall variance of wages. To interpret these
findings, we develop a model of firm wage setting in which workers have idiosyncratic tastes for
different workplaces. We show that simple versions of this model can rationalize the standard
two-way fixed effects specification proposed by Abowd, Kramarz and Margolis (1999), and can
also match the typical “rent-sharing” elasticities estimated in the literature. Extended versions of
the model can potentially explain differences in the wage premiums paid by a given employer to
different subgroups of workers.

David Card                                       Jörg Heining
Department of Economics                          Institute for Employment Research (IAB)
549 Evans Hall, #3880                            Joerg.Heining@iab.de
University of California, Berkeley
Berkeley, CA 94720-3880                          Patrick Kline
and NBER                                         Department of Economics
card@econ.berkeley.edu                           University of California, Berkeley
                                                 530 Evans Hall #3880
Ana Rute Cardoso                                 Berkeley, CA 94720
IAE (CSIC) and Barcelona GSE                     and NBER
08193 Bellaterra                                 pkline@econ.berkeley.edu
Barcelona
Spain
anarute.cardoso@iae.csic.es
    How much does where you work determine what you earn? In the standard competitive
labor market model firms take market wages as given and firm-specific heterogeneity influ-
ences who is hired, but not the level of pay of any particular worker. The pervasive influence
of this perspective is evident in major reviews of the wage inequality literature (Katz and
Autor, 1999; Goldin and Katz, 2009; Acemoglu and Autor, 2011), which focus almost exclu-
sively on the role of market-level skill prices in driving inequality trends.1 This view stands
in stark contrast to the Industrial Organization literature, which typically models markets
as imperfectly competitive (Tirole, 1988; Pakes, 2016). Though economists seem to agree
that part of the variation in the prices of cars and breakfast cereal is due to factors other
than marginal cost, the notion that wages differ substantially among equally skilled workers
remains highly controversial.
    A long tradition in labor economics posits that employers have significant latitude to
set wages (e.g., Robinson, 1933; Reynolds, 1946; Lester, 1946; Slichter, 1950), a view which
found early support in empirical studies of industry wage differentials (Katz, 1986; Krueger
and Summers, 1988; Katz and Summers, 1989). Yet it has proven difficult to convincingly
distinguish industry wage premia from subtle forms of dynamic sorting (Murphy and Topel,
1990; Gibbons and Katz, 1992; Gibbons et al., 2005). The growing availability of matched
employer-employee datasets offers opportunities to study these questions at the more gran-
ular level of the firm. Nevertheless, many of the fundamental identification problems that
plagued earlier studies carry over to these new datasets. This review summarizes what has
been learned so far from these new datasets about the importance of firms in wage setting,
and what challenges remain.
    Our starting point is the widely accepted finding that observably similar firms exhibit
massive heterogeneity in measured productivity (e.g., Syverson, 2011). A natural question is
whether some of these productivity differences spill over to wages. The prima facie case for
such a link seems quite strong: a number of recent studies find that trends in aggregate wage
dispersion closely track trends in the dispersion of productivity across workplaces (Dunne
et al., 2004; Faggio, Salvanes, and Van Reenen, 2010; Barth et al. 2016). However, these
aggregate relationships are potentially driven in part by changes in the degree to which
different groups of workers are assigned to different firms.
    Two distinct literatures attempt to circumvent the sorting issue using linked employer-
employee data. The first literature studies the impact of shocks to firm productivity on
the wages of workers. The resulting estimates are typically expressed as “rent-sharing” elas-
   1
    This market-wide perspective is also common in economic models of discrimination, which typically
have no role for firm-specific factors to affect the wages of female or minority workers (see e.g., Charles and
Guryan, 2008, 2011).



                                                      2
ticities. A review of this literature suggests that estimated rent sharing elasticities are
surprisingly robust to the choice of productivity measure and labor market environment:
most studies that control for worker heterogeneity find wage-productivity elasticities in the
range 0.05-0.15, though a few older studies find larger elasticities. We also provide some new
evidence on the relationship between wages and firm-specific productivity using matched
worker-firm data from Portugal. We investigate a number of specification issues that fre-
quently arise in this literature, including the impact of filtering out industry-wide shocks,
different approaches to measuring rents, and econometric techniques for dealing with unob-
served worker heterogeneity.
    A second literature which builds on the additive worker and firm effects wage model
proposed by Abowd, Kramarz, and Margolis (1999) (hereafter AKM), uses data on wage
outcomes as workers move between firms to estimate firm-specific pay premiums. This
literature also finds that firms play an important role in wage determination, with a typical
finding that about 20% of the variance of wages is attributable to stable firm wage effects. We
discuss some of the issues that arise in implementing AKM’s two-way fixed effects estimator,
which is the main tool used in this literature, and evidence on the validity of the assumptions
underlying the AKM specification.
    We then attempt to forge a more direct link between the rent sharing literature and
studies based on the AKM framework. Using data from Portugal we show that more pro-
ductive firms pay higher average wage premiums but also tend to hire more productive
workers. Indeed, we estimate that about 40% of the observed difference in average hourly
wages between more and less productive firms is attributable to the differential sorting of
higher-ability workers to more productive firms, underscoring the importance of controlling
for worker heterogeneity. Consistent with the additive specification underlying the AKM
model, we find that the wage premiums offered by more productive firms to more- and less-
educated workers are very similar, and that the relative wage of highly educated workers is
remarkably stable across firms.
    In the final section of the paper we develop a stylized model of imperfect competition
in the labor market that provides a tractable framework for studying the implications of
worker and firm heterogeneity for wage inequality. Our analysis builds on the static partial
equilibrium monopsony framework introduced by Joan Robinson (1933) which, as noted by
Manning (2011), captures many of the same economic forces as search models, albeit without
providing a theory of worker flows between jobs. We provide a microeconomic foundation for
imperfect labor market competition by allowing workers to have heterogeneous preferences
over the work environments of different potential employers.2 This “workplace differentiation”
  2
      In their review of monopsony models, Boal and Ransom (1997) refer to this as the case of “classic


                                                   3
can reflect heterogeneity in firm location, job characteristics (e.g., corporate culture, starting
times for work), or other factors that are valued differently by different workers. Regardless
of its source, such heterogeneity makes employers imperfect substitutes in the eyes of workers,
which in turn gives firms some wage-setting power.
    To capture this heterogeneity, we adopt a random utility model of worker preferences that
characterizes firm-specific labor supply functions. We presume, as in Robinson’s analysis and
much of the Industrial Organization literature, that the firm cannot price discriminate based
upon a worker’s idiosyncratic preference for the firm’s work environment. Hence, rather than
offer each worker her reservation wage (e.g., as in Postel-Vinay and Robin, 2002), firms post
a common wage for each skill group that is marked down from marginal product in inverse
proportion to their elasticity of labor supply to the firm. This condition provides a natural
analogue to the equilibrium markups of price over marginal cost found in workhorse models
of differentiated product demand and pricing (Berry, 1994; Berry, Levinsohn, and Pakes,
1995; Pakes, 2016).
    We show that many well-documented empirical regularities can be rationalized in this
framework. Firm heterogeneity in productivity affects not only the firm size distribution,
but also the distribution of firm-specific wage premiums and the degree of sorting of different
skill groups across firms. Calibrating a simple version of the model to observed rent sharing
estimates yields predicted wage dispersion in excess of what has been found in a wide class of
search models (Hornstein, Krussell, Violante, 2011). We also present conditions under which
log wages are additively separable into worker and firm components, as in the pioneering
econometric model of AKM. Specifically, we show that the firm-specific wage premium will
be constant across skill groups if they are perfect substitutes in production and if different
skill groups have a similar relative valuation for wages versus non-wage components in their
assessment of alternative jobs. Even under these conditions, however, the market-level wage
gap between skill groups will reflect differences in their employment distributions across more
and less productive firms. More generally, groups that put a higher relative value on wages
in comparing different jobs will receive a larger wage premium at more profitable firms.
    We conclude with some thoughts on unresolved empirical and theoretical issues in the
literature. An important challenge for empirical work on rent sharing is the identification of
firm-specific shocks to productivity, as correlated shocks can yield market level wage adjust-
ments. In the firm switching literature a key question is whether conventionally estimated
firm-specific pay premiums predict the wage changes associated with exogenously induced
job accessions and separations. On the theoretical side, important questions include how
to model strategic labor market interactions between firms and to what extent the insights
differentiation”.


                                                4
from simple static wage setting models of workplace differentiation carry over to dynamic
labor market settings with search or mobility frictions.


1    Productivity, wages, and rent sharing
A large empirical literature reviewed by Syverson (2011) documents that firms, like workers,
exhibit vast heterogeneity in productivity. For example, Syverson (2004) finds that the 90th
and 10th percentiles of total factor productivity (T F P ) among US manufacturing firms
differ by an average factor of approximately two within 4-digit industries. Hsieh and Klenow
(2009) find even larger productivity gaps in India and China, with 90-10 T F P ratios on
the order of five. While the variation in measured productivity probably overstates the true
heterogeneity in plant-level efficiency, there is also strong evidence in the literature that
measured productivity conveys real information. For example, measured T F P is a strong
predictor of firm survival (Foster, Haltiwanger, and Syverson, 2008).
    It is natural to wonder if these large productivity differences lead to differences in worker
pay. In fact, an extensive literature has documented the existence of substantial wage differ-
ences across plants and establishments (Lester, 1946; Slichter, 1950; Davis and Haltiwanger,
1991; Groshen, 1991; Bernard and Jensen, 1995; Cardoso, 1997; Cardoso, 1999; Skans, Edin,
and Holmlund, 2009; Song et al., 2015) that are strongly correlated with basic measures of
productivity. Nevertheless, economists have been reluctant to interpret these differences as
wage premiums or rents, since it has been difficult to know how unobserved worker quality
differs across plants.
    Recent studies, however, have documented some striking links between establishment
level productivity and wage dispersion (Dunne et al., 2004; Faggio, Salvanes, and Van
Reenen, 2010; Barth et al. 2016). Figure 1 plots results from Barth et al. (2016), showing
remarkably similar trends in the dispersion of wages and productivity across business estab-
lishments in the United States. Taken at face value, these parallel trends are consistent with
a roughly unit elasticity of establishment wages with respect to productivity (see Barth et al.,
2016, p. S71). Of course, Figure 1 does not tell us whether the composition of the workforce
employed at these establishments is changing over time. What appear to be more productive
establishments may simply be establishments that hire more skilled workers, which is fully
consistent with the competitive labor market model in which all firms pay the same wages
for any given worker.
    A more direct attack on the question of whether firm-specific productivity differentials
feed into differences in wages comes from the empirical literature on “rent-sharing.” Appendix
Table 1 describes 22 recent studies in this literature. The basic idea in these papers is to

                                               5
relate wages to some measure of employer profitability or rents. This is in many respects,
the analogue of a large literature in international economics and industrial organization on
the pass-through of cost shocks to prices. A typical finding in that literature is that shocks
to marginal cost (typically measured via exchange rate fluctuations) yield muted fluctua-
tions in product prices, signaling the presence of market power (Goldberg and Hellerstein,
2013; Gorodnichenko and Talavera, forthcoming). Most rent sharing studies find similarly
imperfect propagation of productivity shocks to wages. However, the elasticities reported in
this literature are often sensitive to measurement issues, which we now review.


Measuring rents
The empirical rent sharing literature is motivated by an assumed structural relationship
between wages and either profit per worker or a measure of “quasi-rent” per worker. To
facilitate discussion, suppose that there is a single type of labor at a firm j, and that the
wage (wj ) is determined by a structural relationship of the form:

                                           wj = b + γQj /N j                                           (1)

where b represents an alternative wage, Nj is employment at the firm, Qj represents quasi-
rents, and γ is a rent-sharing parameter.3 The firm combines labor inputs and capital (Kj )
and faces an exogenous rental rate r on capital, yielding the quasi-rent:

                                       Qj = V Aj − bNj − rKj

where V Aj is value added (revenue net of materials costs). Value added is related to labor
and capital inputs by:
                                 V Aj = Pj Tj f (N j , Kj )

where Pj is a potentially firm-specific selling price index, Tj is an index of technical efficiency,
and f is a standard production function. Here Pj Tj represents total factor productivity
(T F Pj ) which, in the terminology of Foster, Haltiwanger and Syverson (2008), is also referred
to as “revenue productivity” because it is the product of “physical productivity” Tj and
product price Pj .
   3
     This equation can be derived by assuming that workers as a group bargain with the firm to maximize
a weighted product of profits and the excess wage bill Nj (wj − b), where the weight on the wage bill is
γ. See e.g., de Menil (1971). Strictly speaking this derivation assumes that Q/N is exogenous to the level
of wages, as is the case when employment and capital are efficiently determined by joint bargaining. See
Svejnar (1986) and Card, Devicienti, and Maida (2014) for a related discussion of potential holdup problems
in the determination of capital.


                                                    6
    We assume that T F Pj is the driving source of variation that researchers are implicitly
trying to model in the rent sharing literature. Under this interpretation, firm-specific TFP
shocks lead to changes in quasi-rent per worker that cause wages to fall or rise relative to the
alternative wage. The elasticity of wages with respect to an exogenous change in quasi-rent
per worker is:
                                                   Q
                                                 γ Njj
                                       ξ Qj =          Q
                                                                                             (2)
                                              bj + γ Njj
which corresponds to the share of rents in wages. The elasticity of wages with respect to
profit per worker (πj /Nj ) should be of comparable magnitude. Indeed, under the usual
bargaining interpretation of equation (1) profits per worker are a constant share of quasi-
rents per worker:
                                     πj            Qj
                                         = (1 − γ) .
                                     Nj            Nj
Rather than measure quasi-rents, a majority of studies relate wages to value-added per
worker. The elasticity of wages with respect to value added per worker is

                                                          V Aj
                                            ξ j = ξQj ×
                                                           Qj

which will be bigger than ξQj , since Qj < V Aj .4 For example, data reported in Card,
Devicienti, and Maida (2014) suggests that the ratio of value added to quasi-rent for firms in
Northeastern Italy is typically around 2. Finally, some studies in the literature relate wages
to revenue per worker, rather than to value added per worker. Under the assumption that
intermediate input costs represent a constant share of revenues the elasticity of wages with
respect to revenue per worker will be equal to the elasticity with respect to value added per
worker. More generally if intermediate input costs vary – for example because of varying
energy costs – and these costs are passed through to the firm’s consumers, one would expect
a smaller elasticity of wages with respect to revenues per worker.
    An important confounding factor in the rent sharing literature is variation in worker
quality. Firms that employ more highly skilled workers would be expected to have higher
revenue per worker and value added per worker, and also pay higher wages, leading to a
potential upward bias in the measured rent sharing elasticity in cross-sectional studies that
compare different firms at a point in time. A similar bias can also arise in longitudinal studies
that compare changes in firm-specific wages and profitability over time if there are unobserved
   4
    Again, this is only true under the assumption that the levels of value-added and quasi-rents are exoge-
nously determined, as in an efficient bargaining model. More generally, the ratio of value-added per worker
to quasi-rent per worker can depend on the wage.



                                                    7
changes in the skill characteristics of workers. For this reason, when we summarize the studies
in the literature we classify studies based upon whether the research design includes controls
for unobserved worker skills.


A summary of the rent sharing literature
Table 1 synthesizes the estimated rent sharing elasticities from the 22 studies listed in Ap-
pendix Table 1, extracting one or two preferred specifications from each study and adjusting
all elasticities to an approximate value-added-per-worker basis.5 We divide the studies into
three broad generations based on the level of aggregation in the measures of rents and wages.
    The first group of studies, which includes two influential papers from the early 1990s,
uses industry-wide measures of productivity and either individual-level or firm-wide average
wages. The average rent sharing elasticity in this group is 0.16. A second generation of
studies includes five papers, mostly from the mid-1990s, that use firm- or establishment-
specific measures of rents but measure average wages of employees at the workplace level.
The average rent sharing elasticity in this group is 0.15, though there is a relatively wide
range of variation across the studies. Given the likely problems caused by variation in worker
quality, we suspect that most first generation and second generation studies yield upward-
biased estimates of the rent sharing elasticity.
    A third generation of studies consists of 18 relatively recent papers that study the link be-
tween firm- or establishment-specific measures of rents and individual-specific wages. Many
of these studies attempt to control for variation in worker quality, in some cases by studying
the effect of changes in measured rents on changes in wages. In this group the mean rent
sharing elasticity is 0.08, though a few studies report rent sharing elasticities that are 0.05 or
smaller. To quantify the potential role of rent-sharing in the overall dispersion of wages, note
that the standard deviation of average value added per worker across firms in the Portuguese
data we analyze in the next section is about 0.70, with a spead between the 90th and 10th
percentiles of around 1.6. An elasticity of 0.08 implies that the variation in productivity
across firms creates a “Lester range” of wage variability (Lester, 1952) of about 13 log points
between firms at the 90th and 10th percentiles.
    Although significant progress has been made in this literature, none of these studies is
entirely satisfactory. Very few studies have clear exogenous sources of variation in produc-
tivity. Most papers (e.g., Card, Cardoso, and Kline, 2016; Carlsson, Messina, and Skans,
2014; Guiso, Pistaferri, and Schivardi, 2005) rely on timing assumptions about the stochastic
process driving productivity to justify using lags as instruments. A notable exception is Van
   5
     We extract an IV estimate when one is available, and convert elasticities with respect to profit per worker
or quasi-rent per worker to a value added per worker basis by multiplying by 2.


                                                       8
Reenen (1996), who studies the effects of major firm innovations on employee wages. He
finds a very large rent sharing elasticity of 0.29 but this figure may be upward biased by
skill upgrading on the part of innovative firms – a concern he could not address with ag-
gregate data. Other studies (e.g., Abowd and Lemieux, 1993; Card, Devicienti, and Maida,
2014) use industry level shocks as instruments for productivity. However, these instruments
may violate the exclusion restriction if labor supply to the sector is inelastic since even
fully competitive models predict that industry level shocks can yield equilibrium wage re-
sponses. Moreover, industry level shocks might yield general equilibrium responses that
change worker’s outside options (Beaudry, Green, and Sand, 2012). Finally, with the move
to matched employer-employee microdata, economists have had to contend with serious mea-
surement error problems that emerge when constructing plant level productivity measures.
It remains to be seen whether instrumenting using lags fully resolves these issues.


Specification issues: a replication in Portuguese data
To supplement the estimates in the literature and probe the impact of different design choices
on the magnitude of the resulting elasticities we conducted our own analysis of rent sharing
effects using matched employer-employee data from Portugal. The wage data for this exercise
come from Quadros de Pessoal (QP), a census of private sector employees conducted each
October by the Portuguese Ministry of Employment. We merge these data to firm-specific
financial information from SABI (Sistema de Analisis de Balances Ibericos) database, dis-
tributed by Bureau van Dijk.6 We select all male employees observed between 2005 and 2009
who work in a given year at a firm in the SABI database with valid information on sales per
worker for each year from 2004 to 2010, and on value added per worker for each year from
2005 to 2009.
    Panel A of Table 2 presents a series of specifications in which we relate the log hourly
wage observed for a worker in a given year (between 2005 and 2009) to mean log value added
per worker or mean log sales per worker at his employer, averaged over the sample period.
These are simple cross-sectional rent sharing models in which we use an averaged measure
of rents at the employer to smooth out the transitory fluctuations and measurement errors
in the financial data. In row 1 we present models using mean log value added per worker as
the measure of rents; in row 2 we use mean log sales per worker; and in row 3 we use mean
   6
    Businesses in Portugal are required to file income statements and balance sheet information annually at
their local Commercial Registry (Conservatoria do Registro Comercial). These reports are publicly accessible
and are collected by financial service firms and assembled into the SABI database. We merge SABI and QP
using information on detailed location, industry, firm creation date, shareholder equity, and annual sales that
are available in both data sets. See Card, Cardoso and Kline (2016) for more information on the matching
process.


                                                      9
log value added per worker over the 2005-2009 period but instrument this with mean log
sales per worker over a slightly wider window (2004-2010). For each choice we show a basic
specification (with only basic human capital controls) in column 1, a richer specification with
controls for major industry and city in column 2, and a full specification with dummies for
202 detailed industries and 29 regions in column 3.
    Two main conclusions emerge from these simple models. First, the rent sharing elasticity
is systematically larger when rents are measured by value added per worker than by sales
per worker.7 Second, the rent sharing elasticities from this approach are relatively large.
Interestingly, the 0.20 to 0.30 range of estimates is comparable to the range of the studies in
the first two panels of Table 1.
    An obvious concern with the specifications used in Panel A is that they fail to fully control
for variation in worker quality. As discussed above, this is likely to lead to an upward bias
in the relationship between wages and value added per worker. The specifications in Panel
B of Table 2 partially address this by examining the effect of changes in firm specific rents
on changes in wages for workers who remain at the firm over the period from 2005 to 2009
– a within-job or “stayers” design. We present three sets of specifications of this design.
The models in row 4 measure the change in rents by the change in log value added per
worker. The models in row 5 use the change in log sales per worker. The models in row 6
use the change in value added per worker as the measure of rents, but instrument the change
using the change in sales per worker over a slightly wider interval to reduce the impact of
measurement errors in value added.8
    Relative to the cross-sectional models, the within-job models yield substantially smaller
rent sharing elasticities. This difference is likely due to some combination of unobserved
worker quality in the cross-sectional designs (which leads to an upward bias in these speci-
fications), measurement error (which causes a larger downward bias in the stayer designs),
and the fact that value added fluctuations may include a transitory component that firms
insure workers against (Guiso, Pistaferri, and Schivardi, 2005).9 The discrepancy is particu-
larly large for OLS models using sales per worker (compare row 2 and row 5 of Table 2): the
elasticity for stayers is only about one-tenth as large as the cross-sectional elasticity. We sus-
pect that measurement errors and transitory fluctuations in annual sales are relatively large,
   7
     A similar finding is reported by Card, Devicienti, and Maida (2014) using Italian data.
   8
     If measurement errors in value added per worker in year t are uncorrelated with errors or fluctuations in
sales per worker in years t + 1 and t − 1, then the use of a “bracketing” instrument will eliminate the effect of
measurement error in value added. We suspect that this is only partially true, so the IV approach reduces
but does not fully eliminate the effect of errors in value added.
   9
     A third potential explanation is selection bias in the stayer models, induced by selecting a sample of job
stayers. Results presented in Card, Cardoso and Kline (2016, Appendix Table B10) suggest this factor is
relatively small.



                                                       10
and the impact of these factors is substantially magnified in the within-job specifications
estimated by OLS. Given the presence of errors and idiosyncratic fluctuations, we prefer the
IV estimates in row 6, which point toward a rent sharing elasticity of approximately 0.06.
    An interesting feature of both the OLS and IV within-job estimates is that the addition
of detailed industry controls reduces the rent sharing elasticity by 10-20 percent. Since these
industry dummies absorb industry-wide productivity shocks that are shared by the firms
in the same sector, we conclude that the rent sharing elasticity with respect to firm-specific
productivity shocks (which is estimated by the models in column 3) is somewhat smaller than
the elasticity with respect to sector-wide shocks (which are incorporated in the elasticities in
the models in column 1). If true more generally, this suggests that the use of industry-wide
rent measures will lead to a somewhat larger rent sharing elasticities than would be obtained
using firm-specific productivity measures and controlling for industry-wide trends. A similar
conclusion is reported by Carlsson, Messina, and Skans (2014).
    Overall, we conclude that the estimated elasticities of wages with respect to value added
per worker in Portugal are comparable in magnitude to the estimates in the existing rent-
sharing literature summarized in Table 1. A typical estimate in our data and the literature
from specifications that control for worker quality is between 0.05 and 0.10, though there
are a few estimates on each side of this range.


2    Firm switching
While the rent-sharing literature documents a strong correlation between firm profitability
and pay, a parallel literature finds that workers who move between firms (or establishments)
experience wage gains or losses that are highly predictable. In this section we provide an
overview of recent findings from this approach and discuss some of the major issues in
this literature. In the following section we discuss how the firm-specific wage premiums
estimated by studies of firm switching are related to measures of firm profitability, providing
a link between the rent sharing and firm switching literatures.


AKM models
In their seminal study of the French labor market, AKM specified a model for log wages that
includes additive effects for workers and firms. Specifically, their model for the log wage of
person i in year t takes the form:

                               ln wit = αi + ψJ(i,t) + Xit0 β + εit


                                               11
where Xit is a vector of time varying controls (e.g., year effects and controls for experience),
αi is a “person effect” capturing the (time-invariant) portable component of earnings abil-
ity, the {ψj }Jj=1 are firm-specific relative pay premiums, J (i, t) is a function indicating the
employer of worker i in year t, and εit is an unobserved time-varying error capturing shocks
to human capital, person-specific job match effects, and other factors. The innovation in
AKM’s framework is the presence of the firm effects, which allow for the possibility that
some firms pay systematically higher or lower wages than other firms. Specifically, the AKM
model predicts that workers who move from firm k to firm j will experience an average wage
change of ψj − ψk , while those who move in the opposite direction will experience an average
change of ψk − ψj – a stark “symmetry” prediction that we discuss in more detail below.
    Estimates of AKM style models on population level administrative datasets from a variety
of different countries have found that the firm effects in these models typically explain 15-
25 percent of the variance of wages – less than the person effects, but enough to indicate
that firm-specific wage setting is important for wage inequality.10 One problem with this
assessment is that the person and firm effects are estimated with considerable imprecision,
which means the explanatory power of firms will typically be somewhat overstated – a
problem that was also recognized in the earlier literature on industry wage differentials
(Krueger and Summers, 1988). Andrews et al. (2008) provide an approach to dealing with
this problem that we discuss in more detail below.
    If different firms pay different wage premiums, the pattern of sorting of workers to firms
will also matter for overall wage inequality. In particular, the variance of log wages is:

         V ar (ln wit ) = V ar (αi ) + V ar ψJ(i,t) + V ar (Xit0 β) + V ar (εit )
                                                   
                                                                                                      (3)
                          +2Cov αi , ψJ(i,t) + 2Cov (αi , Xit0 β) + 2Cov ψJ(i,t) , Xit0 β
                                                                                         


which includes both the variance of the firm-specific wage premiums and a term reflecting
the covariance of the worker and firm effects. If workers with higher earning capacity are
more likely to work at higher-premium firms, then this covariance term will be positive, and
any inequality effects from the presence of the firm premiums will be amplified.
  10
     For example, Abowd, Lengermann, and McKinney (2003) find that firm effects comprise 17% of the
variance of US wages. Card, Heining, and Kline (2013) find that establishment effects explain between 18%
and 21% of the variance of the wages of German men depending on the time period studied. Card, Cardoso,
and Kline (2016) find that firm effects explain 20% of the variance of hourly wages for Portuguese men and
17% of the variance for women. Macis and Schivardi (2016) find that firm effects explain 15% of the wage
variance of Italian manufacturing workers. Finally, Lavetti and Schmutte (2016) find that establishment
effects explain 21% of the variance of wages of workers in the formal sector in Brazil.




                                                   12
   An alternative decomposition uses the fact that:

 V ar (ln wit ) = Cov (ln wit , αi )+Cov ln wit , ψJ(i,t) +Cov (ln wit , Xit0 β)+Cov (ln wit , εit ) . (4)
                                                         


This yields an “ensemble” assessment of the importance of each variance component to wage
dispersion that includes the contribution of the covariance between wage components. For
example, under this decomposition, the contribution of the firm component to total wage
variation would be Cov ln wit , ψJ(i,t) = V ar ψJ(i,t) + Cov αi , ψJ(i,t) + Cov Xit0 β, ψJ(i,t) .
                                                                                            

One way to think about this decomposition is that one half of the firm covariance terms in
(3) are attributed to the firm-specific wage premiums.


Identifying age and time effects
A technical issue that arises with the AKM model is appropriate specification of the effects
of age. Following Mincer (1974), it is conventional to include a polynomial in age or potential
experience (age minus education minus 6) in Xit . However, it is also standard to include a
set of year indicators in Xit to adjust for changing macroeconomic conditions. This raises an
identification problem because age (ait ) can be computed as calendar year (t) minus birth
year (bi ). Hence, we face the classic problem of distinguishing additive age, year, and cohort
effects, where cohort effects are understood to load into the person effects.
    In their original paper, AKM solved this problem by using “actual” labor market expe-
rience (i.e. the number of years the worker had positive earnings since entering the labor
market) which, if some employment histories have gaps, will not be perfectly collinear with
year and person dummies. While in some respects this provides a simple fix to the problem,
there are two important drawbacks. First, it is not always possible to reconstruct a worker’s
employment history, both because some datasets do not always go far enough back to cover
the cohorts of interest and because some datasets only report point in time measures of
employment (e.g. who was on the payroll in October) rather than a complete history of all
employment spells in all years. Second, it is not clear that employment gaps are exogenous,
even conditional on a person effect. For example, leaving employment for an entire year could
reflect severe health shocks that directly influence earnings ability and confound estimation
of relative firm pay.
    An alternative approach to dealing with this problem is to impose a linear restriction
on the effects of age or time. While the firm effects are invariant to how age and time
effects are normalized, different normalizations will yield different values of the person effects
and the covariate index Xit0 β. Card, Heining, and Kline (2013) allow for separate third
order polynomials in age by education group along with unrestricted year effects. To obtain

                                                   13
identification, they restrict the age profile to be flat at age 40. This is accomplished by
omitting the linear age term for each education group and using a cubic polynomial in (ait −
40). The same restriction is used in Card, Cardoso, and Kline (2016). While this restriction
is unlikely to hold exactly, there is reason to believe it provides a good approximation to the
shape of the age-earnings profile.11
     Table 3 examines the sensitivity of the results in Card, Cardoso, and Kline (2016) to
four alternate normalizations of the age effects. The first column shows the baseline normal-
ization, which attributes a relatively small fraction of the overall variance of wages to the
time-varying individual component of wages. Renormalizing the age profile to be flat at age
50 (column 2) has little effect on this conclusion, whereas re-normalizing the profile to be
flat at age 30 leads to a slightly larger variance share for the time-varying component, and
also implies a relatively strong negative correlation between the person effects and the index
Xit0 β. Normalizing the age profile to be flat at age 0 – which is what is being done by simply
omitting the linear term from an uncentered age polynomial – exacerbates this pattern and
leads to a decomposition that suggests that the variances of αi and Xit0 β are both very large
and that the two components are strongly negatively correlated.12 Figure 2 contrasts the
implied age profiles for four single year-of-birth cohorts of low-education men from this naive
specification with the implied profiles for the same groups under the baseline normalization.
Evidently, the strong negative correlation between the person effects and the covariate index
reported in column 4 of Table 3 is driven by implausibly large cohort effects, which trend in
a way to offset the imposed assumption that the cubic age profile is flat at age 0.
     Rather than restricting the age profile to be flat at a point, we can also achieve identifi-
cation by assuming the true profile is everywhere nonlinear. Column 5 shows the results of
using a linear combination of normal density functions in age (with five year bandwidths)
to approximate the age profile.13 Because each Gaussian component is nonlinear, we do not
need restrictions on the parameters to avoid collinearity with cohort and time effects. Nev-
ertheless, using Gaussian basis functions will only “solve” the identification problem if the
true age profile has no linear segments. As shown in column 5, the Gaussian approximation
yields results somewhere between our baseline normalization and the specification in column
3: although the estimated variability of the worker, firm, and time varying components is
very close to baseline, the correlation of the person effects and Xit0 β becomes slightly nega-
  11
     For example, as shown in Figures 3a-3c of Card and Cardoso (2012) the age profile of wages for Portuguese
men tends to be relatively flat after age 40.
  12
     Abowd, Lengermann and McKinney (2003) impose a normalization on the experience profiles in their
                                                                                              0
estimation of an AKM model for the LEHD data that leads to large variances of the αi and Xit    β components,
and a large negative covariance (ρ = −0.55), similar to the pattern in column 4.
     Letting n (.) denote the standard normal density, we use basis functions of the form n ait5−x where
  13
                                                                                                       

x ∈ {20, 25, ..., 65}.


                                                     14
tive. Fortunately, the covariance of the person and firm effects is essentially the same under
our baseline normalization and the Gaussian specification, leading us to conclude that most
of the statistics of interest in this literature found under an age 40 normalization are robust
to alternate identifying assumptions.
    To summarize: in comparing results from different applications of the AKM framework
researchers should pay close attention to the choice of normalization. The values of the person
effects (i.e., the αi ’s) and the time varying controls (i.e., Xit0 β) are not separately identified
when Xit includes both year effects and a linear age term. The choice of normalization has
no effect on estimates of V ar(ψJ(i,t) ), V ar(αi +Xit β), or the covariance term Cov(ψJ(i,t) , αi +
Xit β) but, as shown in Table 3, it will affect the estimated covariance of the person and firm
effects and the relative magnitudes of V ar(αi ) and V ar(ψJ(i,t) ).


Worker-firm sorting and limited mobility bias
In their original study, AKM reported a negative correlation between the estimated worker
and firm effects, suggesting that sorting of workers to different firms tended to reduce rather
than increase overall wage inequality. Subsequent research, however, has typically found
positive correlations. For example, Abowd, Lengermann, and McKinney (2003) report a
correlation of 0.08 for U.S. workers, while Card, Heining and Kline (2013) report a correlation
of 0.23 for male German workers in the 2000s. As discussed by Abowd et al. (2004) and
Andrews et al. (2008) these correlations are biased down in finite samples with the size
of the bias depending inversely on the degree of worker mobility among firms. Maré and
Hyslop (2006) and Andrews et al. (2012) show convincingly that this “limited-mobility” bias
can be substantial. In sampling experiments they find that the correlation of the estimated
effects becomes more negative when the AKM model is estimated on smaller subsets of
the available data. While Andrews et al. (2008) and Gaure (2014) provide approaches to
correcting for this downward bias in the correlation (and the upward biases in the estimated
variances of person and firm effects), their procedures require a complete specification of the
covariance structure of the time-varying errors, which makes such corrections highly model
dependent.14 The development of corrections that are robust to unmodeled dependence and
heteroscedasticity is an important priority for future research.
  14
    For example Andrews et al. (2008) compute bias corrections in a linked sample of German workers
and establishments under the assumption that the transitory errors in wages are homoscedastic and serially
uncorrelated. They find that the corrections have little effect on the estimated correlation between worker
and firm effects. However, subsequent results by Andrews et al. (2012) show large biases in the estimated
correlation when the AKM model is estimated on subsamples as large as 30% of the data.




                                                    15
Exogenous mobility
AKM’s additive worker and firm effect specification is simple and tractable. Nevertheless, it
has been widely criticized because OLS estimates of worker and firm effects will be biased
unless worker mobility is uncorrelated with the time-varying residual components of wages.
In an attempt to provide some transparent evidence on this issue, Card, Heining, and Kline
(2013) (hereafter, CHK) develop a simple event-study analysis of the wage changes experi-
enced by workers moving between different groups of firms. Rather than rely on a model-
based grouping, CHK define firm groups based on the average pay of coworkers. If the AKM
model is correct and firms offer proportional wage premiums for all their employees, then
workers who move to firms with more highly-paid coworkers will on average experience pay
raises, while those who move in the opposite direction will experience pay cuts. Moreover,
the gains and losses for movers in opposite directions between any two groups of firms will
be symmetric. In contrast, models of mobility linked to the worker-and-firm-specific match
component of wages (e.g., Eeckhout, and Kircher, 2011) imply that movers will tend to expe-
rience positive wage gains regardless of the direction of their move, violating the symmetry
prediction.
    Figures 3 and 4 present the results of this analysis using data for male and female workers
in Portugal, taken from Card, Cardoso, and Kline (2016). The samples are restricted to
workers who switch establishments and have at least two years of tenure at both the origin
and destination firm. Firms are grouped into coworker pay quartiles (using data on male
and female coworkers). For clarity, only the wage profiles of workers who move from jobs in
quartile 1 and quartile 4 are shown in the figures. The wage profiles exhibit clear step-like
patterns: when workers move to higher paying establishments their wages rise; when they
move to lower paying establishments their wages fall. For example, males who start at a firm
in the lowest quartile group and move to a firm in the top quartile have average wage gains
of 39 log points, while those who move in the opposite direction have average wage losses
of 43 log points. The gains and losses for other matched pairs of moves are also roughly
symmetric, while the wage changes for people who stay in the same coworker pay group are
close to zero.
    Another important feature of the wage profiles in Figures 3 and 4 is that wages of the
various groups are all relatively stable in the years before and after a job move. Workers
who are about to experience a major wage loss by moving to a firm in a lower coworker
pay group show no obvious trend in wages beforehand. Similarly, workers who are about to
experience a major wage gain by moving to a firm in a higher pay group show no evidence
of a pre-trend. By contrast, if worker mobility were driven by gradual employer learning,
we would expect wage changes to precede moves between firm quality groups over the time

                                              16
horizons examined (Lange, 2007).
   Card, Cardoso, and Kline (2016) also present simple tests of the symmetry restrictions
imposed by the AKM specification, using regression-adjusted wage changes of males and
females moving between firms in the 4 coworker pay groups. Comparisons of upward and
downward movers are displayed visually in Figures 5a and 5b, and show that the matched
pairs of adjusted wage changes are roughly scattered along a line with slope -1, consistent
with the symmetry restriction.
   Similar figures can be constructed using firm groupings based on the estimated pay effects
obtained from an AKM model. As shown in CHK (Figure VII), applying this approach to
data for German males yields the same conclusions as an analysis based on coworker pay
groups. Macis and Schivardi (2016) report such diagnostics using Social Security earnings
data for Italian workers, and confirm that wage profiles of movers exhibit the same step-like
patterns found in Germany and Portugal.


Additive separability
Another concern with the AKM model is that it presumes common proportional firm wage
effects for all workers. One way to evaluate the empirical plausibility of the additive AKM
specification is to examine the pattern of mean residuals for different groups of workers
and firms. Figure 6 and 7, taken from Card, Cardoso and Kline (2016) shows the mean
residuals for 100 cells based on deciles of the estimated worker effects and deciles of the
estimated firm effects. If the additive model is correct, the residuals should have mean zero
for matches composed of any grouping of worker and firm effects, while if the firm effects
vary systematically with worker skill we expect departures from zero. Reassuringly, the mean
residuals are all relatively close to zero. In particular, there is no evidence that the most
able workers (in the 10th decile of the distribution of estimated person effects) earn higher
premiums at the highest-paying firms (in the 10th decile of the distribution of estimated firm
effects). The largest mean residuals are for the lowest-ability workers in the lowest paying
firms – an effect which may reflect the impact of the minimum wage in Portugal. Residual
plots for workers and firms in Germany, reported by CHK, and in Italy, reported by Macis
and Schivardi (2016), also show no evidence of systematic departures from the predictions
of a simple AKM style model.
    A different approach to assessing the additive separability assumption comes from Bon-
homme, Lamadon, and Manresa (2015) who estimate a worker-firm model with discrete
heterogeneity where each pairing of worker and firm type is allowed a different wage effect.
Their results indicate that an additive model provides a very good approximation to Swedish


                                             17
employer-employee data – allowing interactions between worker and firm type yields a triv-
ial (0.8%) increase in explained wage variance. Lochner and Shulz (2016) reach a similar
conclusion using information on relative wage rankings inside the firm and firm value added
to infer worker and firm types. They find using German data that additive separability
provides a good approximation to the wage structure except for the lowest skilled workers.
    Though these results suggest that firm effects are, on average, similar for different types
of workers, there is of course scope for differences to emerge in selected subpopulations.
For example, Goldschmidt and Schmieder (2015) find in large German firms that food,
cleaning, security, and logistics (FCSL) workers exhibit different wage fixed effects than other
occupations. Specifically, the firm wage effects of FCSL workers are attenuated relative to
non-FCSL workers. Likewise, Card, Cardoso, and Kline (2016) find that Portuguese women
exhibit slightly attenuated firm effects relative to men, which they argue reflects gender
differences in bargaining behavior.


3    Reconciling rent-sharing estimates with results from
     studies of firm switching
In their original study AKM showed that the estimated firm-specific wage premiums were
positively correlated with measures of firm profitability including value added per worker
and sales per worker. A number of more recent studies have also confirmed that there is a
positive link between firm-specific pay policies and productivity (e.g., Cahuc, Postel-Vinay,
and Robin, 2006; Bagger, Christensen, and Mortensen, 2014).
    To further bridge the gap between the rent-sharing literature and the firm-wage effects
literatures we conducted a simple exercise using data on male workers in Portugal observed
in the QP between 2005 and 2009 (i.e., the same data used in Panel A of Table 2). The AKM
model posits that the log of the wage of a given worker in a given year can be decomposed
into the sum of a person effect, a firm or establishment effect, a time-varying index of person
characteristics, and a residual that is orthogonal to the firm and person effects. It follows
that the rent sharing elasticity obtained from a regression of wages on a time-invariant
measure of rents at the current employer (γw ) can be decomposed into the sum of three
components reflecting the regression on firm-specific rents of the estimated worker effects
(γα ), the estimated firm effects (γψ ), and the time-varying covariate index (γXβ ):

                                     γw = γα + γψ + γXβ .

The regression coefficients γα and γXβ represent sorting effects. To the extent that firms with

                                              18
larger measured rents hire older workers, or workers with greater permanent skills, γα and/or
γXβ will be positive. The coefficient γψ , on the other hand, is arguably a clean measure of
the rent sharing elasticity, since ψJ(i,t) represents a firm-specific wage premium that is paid
on top of any reward for individual-specific skills.
    To implement this idea we use the estimated AKM parameters from Card, Cardoso and
Kline (2016), which were estimated on a sample that includes virtually all the observations
used for the cross-sectional models in Panel A of Table 2.15 The results are presented in
Panel A of Table 4. Row 1 of the table reports estimated rent sharing elasticities using the
log hourly wage of each worker as a dependent variable. As in Table 2, we report three
specifications corresponding to models with only simple human capital controls (column
1), controls for major industry and city (column 2) and controls for detailed industry and
location (column 3). The estimated rent sharing elasticities in row 1 are qualitatively similar
to the estimates in row 1 of Table 2 but differ slightly because the AKM model estimates are
not available for all workers/firms. Rows 2-4 show how the overall rent sharing elasticities
in row 1 can be decomposed into a worker quality effect (row 2), a firm wage premium effect
(row 3), and an experience-related sorting effect (row 4) which is close to 0.
    A key conclusion from these estimates is that rent sharing elasticities estimated from
a cross-sectional specification incorporate a sizable worker quality bias. In each column
of Table 4, roughly 40% of the overall wage elasticity in row 1 is due to the correlation of
worker quality (measured by the person effect component of wages) with firm specific quality.
Adjusting for worker quality, the estimates in row 3 point to a rent sharing elasticity in the
range of 0.10 to 0.15 – large enough to create a Lester range of wage variation of 16 to 24
log points associated with the differences between firms at the 90th and 10th percentiles of
log value added per worker.
    While the AKM approach reduces the estimated rent sharing elasticities substantially,
the estimates in row 3 of Table 4 are still substantially larger than the within-job elasticities
reported in Panel B of Table 2. There are several possible explanations for this gap. One is
that the within-job estimates are biased downward by measurement errors which comprise a
potentially large share of the variance in relatively short-horizon changes in rents. A related
explanation, emphasized by Guiso, Pistaferri and Schivardi (2005) is that wages tend to
adjust less to purely transitory fluctuations than to persistent changes in productivity.16
To the extent that industry-wide productivity shifts are more persistent than firm-specific
  15
      The sample used by Card, Cardoso, and Kline (2016) is slightly different than the sample of firms with
financial data we use in this paper, so the adding up constraint does not have to hold exactly. However, in
all cases it holds approximately.
   16
      Cardoso and Portela (2009) find evidence for this pattern using Portuguese worker firm data derived
from the QP.



                                                    19
within-industry shifts, this explanation can also account for the pattern of smaller elasticities
when more detailed industry controls are added to a rent-sharing model.
    A third explanation is that some share of the firm-specific wage premium paid by more
productive firms is a compensating differential for extra work effort or less desirable working
conditions (Rosen, 1986; Hwang et al., 1998). How much of the gap between firm stayer
designs and worker switching designs such motives can explain remains an open question
(Bonhomme and Jolivet, 2008; Lavetti and Schmutte, 2016; Sorkin, 2015; Taber and Vejlin,
2016). In a recent field experiment, Mas and Pallais (2016) find that workers are not willing
to pay much for scheduling flexibility but are willing to pay to avoid working evenings and
weekends. In line with this evidence, Card, Cardoso, and Kline (2016, Appendix Table B6)
examine the relationship between average hours of work and the estimated pay premiums
offered by different firms in Portugal and find no evidence of compensating differentials for
long hours. Nevertheless, we cannot rule out some role for compensating differentials, which
would imply that the estimates in row 3 of Table 4 may overstate the true rent-sharing
elasticity. What is clear is that jobs with higher wage premiums last significantly longer
(Card, Heining and Kline 2012, Appendix Table 8) which we take as providing relatively
strong evidence that the AKM firm effect estimates capture a significant rent component.


Differential rent sharing
We can use the AKM framework to examine another interesting question: to what extent
do different groups of workers receive larger or smaller shares of the rents at different firms?
To do this, we fit separate AKM models for less-educated men (with less than a high school
education) and more-educated men (with high school or more) to our Portuguese wage
sample. We then re-estimated the same rent sharing specifications reported in Panel A of
Table 4, separately for the two groups. The results are reported in Panels B and C of Table
4.
    The estimates reveal several interesting patterns. Most importantly, although the cor-
relation between wages and value added per worker is a little higher for the more educated
men, virtually all of this gap is due to a stronger correlation between the worker quality
component of wages and value added. The correlations with the firm-specific pay premiums
are very similar for the two education groups. Thus, we see no evidence of differential rent
sharing.
    This finding is illustrated in Figure 8, which shows a binned scatterplot of mean log
value added per worker at different firms (on the horizontal axis) versus the relative wage
premium for high-educated versus low-educated men at these firms. We also super-impose a


                                               20
bin-scatter of the relative share of high educated workers at different firms (including both
men and women in the employment counts for the two education groups). The relative wage
premium is virtually flat, consistent with the regression coefficients in rows 7 and 11 of Table
4, which show nearly the same effect of value added per worker on the wage premiums for the
two education groups. In contrast, the relative share of highly educated workers is increasing
with value added per worker – a pattern we interpret as largely driven by the “labor quality”
component in value added per worker.17


4        Imperfectly competitive labor markets and inequality
With this background in mind we now turn to the task of developing a simple modeling
framework that is useful for organizing and interpreting the empirical literature on firm-
specific productivity and wage dispersion. In contrast to much of the rent sharing literature,
we assume that wages are set by employers to maximize profits, subject to constraints on
the relationship between wages and the supply of labor. Rather than build a model of the
supply side based on search frictions, we follow the Industrial Organization literature by
working with a static “differentiated products” model that focuses on heterogeneity across
workers in their valuation of jobs at different employers. This differentiation endows firms
with some power to set wages as in classic monopsony models.18
    While empirical work on monopsony has experienced something of a renaissance (see
Manning, 2011 for a review) there has, to our knowledge, been little attempt to use these
models to reconcile facts in the literature on matched employer-employee data. We show
that static monopsony models can generate empirically plausible connections between firm
productivity and wages - observationally equivalent to simple rent-sharing models such as
equation (1). They also, under reasonable assumptions, generate the prediction that wages
are additively separable in worker and firm heterogeneity, at least within broad skill groups.
    A limitation of our framework relative to modern wage posting models is that we assume
    17
      As discussed in Section 1, value added per worker will in general depend on the “quality” of the workforce.
For example, if V Aj = Pj Tj [(1 − θ)Lj + θHj ] where Lj and Hj are the numbers of low and high skilled
workers employed at the firm, and Nj = Lj + HJ , then ln(T F Pj /Nj ) = ln(T F Pj ) + ln(q j ) where qj =
((1 − θ)Lj + θHj )/Nj is a measure of the quality of the workforce at firm j. The expected slope of a
regression of the log of the relative share of highly educated workers on the log of value added per worker is
therefore positive, even if there is no correlation between T F P and the share of highly educated workers.
   18
      In this respect, our approach is akin to the classic Albrecht-Axell (1984) model of wage posting with
leisure heterogeneity. However, because we allow for continuous heterogeneity in worker preferences, firms
are not indifferent between wage strategies and will mark wages down below marginal product according
to the usual monopsonistic pricing rule. Our assumption that firms are ignorant about worker reservation
values lies in contrast to the model of Postel-Vinay and Robin (2002) who assume that firms observe a
worker’s outside option and offer wages that make them indifferent about accepting jobs.



                                                       21
all between-firm heterogeneity arises from heterogeneity in T F P or differences in the elastic-
ity of labor supply to the firm. While this allows us to focus on the links between dispersion
in productivity and wages it is important to remember that firms may also exhibit dispersion
in wage policies for reasons having nothing to do with their production technology. Indeed,
in the simplest version of Burdett and Mortensen’s (1998) model, firms are homogenous and
the identity of high wage and low wage firms is arbitrary.19


Market structure
There are J firms and two types of workers: lower-skilled (L) and higher-skilled (H). Each
firm j ∈ {1, ..., J} posts a pair (wLj , wHj ) of skill-specific wages that all workers costlessly
observe. Hence, in contrast to search models, workers are fully informed about job oppor-
tunities. As in many search models, however, we assume that firms will hire any worker (of
appropriate quality) who is willing to accept a job at the posted wage.
    Firms exhibit differentiated work environments over which workers have heterogeneous
preferences. For worker i in skill group S ∈ {L, H}, the indirect utility of working at firm j
is:
                              uiSj = βS ln(wSj − bS ) + aSj + iSj ,

where bS is a skill-group specific reference wage level (arising for example from wages paid in
an outside competitive sector) aSj is a firm-specific amenity common to all workers in group
S and iSj captures idiosyncratic preferences for working at firm j, arising for example from
non-pecuniary match factors such as distance to work or interactions with coworkers and
supervisors. We assume that the {iSj } are independent draws from a type I Extreme Value
distribution.20 Given posted wages, workers are free to work at any firm they wish. Hence,
by standard arguments (McFadden, 1973), workers have “logit” choice probabilities of the
form:
                                                   exp(βS (ln(wSj − bS ) + aSj )
              pSj ≡ P (arg max {uiSk } = j) = PJ                                        .
                        k∈{1,..,J}                k=1 exp(β  S ln(w Sk − b S ) + a Sk )
   To simplify the analysis and abstract from strategic interactions in wage-setting, we
assume that the number of firms J is very large, in which case the logit probabilities are
  19
     We have also ignored “efficiency wage” explanations for firm wage premia which can emerge, for example,
due to monitoring problems. See Akerlof and Yellen (1986) and Katz (1986) for reviews and Piyapromdee
(2013) for an attempt to combine efficiency wage mechanisms with wage posting models.
  20
     A potentially important distinction across worker subgroups is the relative magnitude of their variation
in idiosyncratic preferences. Assume for example that uiSj = βS0 ln(wSj −bS )+aSj +τS iSj , where τS is larger
for groups with a wider variation in idiosyncratic preferences, and iSj is again Extreme Value distributed.
This gives rise to the same choice probabilities as preferences uiSj = (βS0 /τS ) ln(wSj − bS ) + (1/τS )aSj + iSj .




                                                         22
closely approximated by exponential probabilities:

                                  pSj ≈ λS exp(βS ln(wSj − bS ) + aSj ),

where (λH , λL ) are constants common to all firms in the market. Thus, for large J, the
approximate firm-specific supply functions are:

                          ln Lj (wLj ) = ln(LλL ) + βL ln(wLj − bL ) + aLj                                     (5)
                         ln Hj (wHj ) = ln(HλH ) + βH ln(wHj − bH ) + aHj ,                                    (6)

where L and H give the total numbers of lower-skilled and higher-skilled workers in the
market.21 Note that as βL , βH → ∞ these supply functions become perfectly elastic and we
approach a competitive labor market with exogenous wages bL and bH .


Firm optimization
Firms have production functions of the form:

                                              Yj = Tj f (Lj , Hj ),                                            (7)

where Tj is a firm-specific productivity shifter. We assume that f (., .) is twice differentiable
and exhibits constant returns to scale with respect to Lj and Hj . For simplicity we also
ignore capital and intermediate inputs.22
    The firm’s problem is to post a pair of skill-specific wages that minimize the cost of labor
services given knowledge of the supply functions (5) and (6). Firms cannot observe workers’
preference shocks {iSj }, which prevents them from perfectly price discriminating against
workers according to their idiosyncratic reservation values. The firm’s optimal wage choices
  21
      Berry and Pakes (2007) contrast demand models where consumers have idiosyncratic preferences for
specific products with what they term the “pure characteristics” model where consumers only care about a
finite set of product characteristics. In the latter case, as the number of products grows large the demand
elasticity tends to infinity – a phenomenon discussed in the labor market setting by Boal and Ransom (1997).
We suspect the pure characteristics model is less applicable to the worker’s choice of employer because of the
many non-pecuniary aspects of work that can give rise to match effects. For example, no two employers have
exactly the same location and workplace culture. However, it is clearly an important question for future
research which model works better empirically.
   22
      This specification is appropriate if the user cost of capital and the prices of intermediate inputs are fixed
and the firm’s output is a Cobb-Douglas function of these factors and the labor aggregate Tj f (Lj , Hj ). In
this case capital and intermediate inputs will adjust proportionally to Tj f (Lj , Hj ).




                                                        23
solve the cost-minimization problem:

              min wLj Lj (wLj ) + wHj Hj (wHj ) s.t. Tj f (Lj (wLj ), Hj (wHj )) ≥ Y.
             wLj ,wHj


The associated first order conditions can be written:

                                       1 + eLj
                                    wLj             = Tj f L µ j                             (8)
                                         eLj
                                       1 + eHj
                                   wHj              = Tj f H µ j                             (9)
                                         eHj

where eLj and eHj represent the elasticities of supply of L and H workers at the optimal
choice of wages, and µj represents the marginal cost of production, which the firm will equate
to marginal revenue at an optimal choice for Y . Thus the terms Tj fL µj and Tj fH µj on the
right hand sides of equations (8) and (9) represent the marginal revenue products of the two
types of labor, while the terms on the left hand sides represent their marginal factor costs.
Using equations (5) and (6), the elasticities of supply are:

                                               βL wLj
                                      eLj =
                                              wLj − bL
                                               βH wHj
                                      eHj   =          .
                                              wHj − bH

Note that, for both groups, labor supply to the firm becomes infinitely elastic as wages
approach the reference wage level bS . Using these expressions, the firm’s first order conditions
can be re-written:

                                       1          βL
                             wLj =         bL +        Tj f L µ j                           (10)
                                    1 + βL      1 + βL
                                       1           βH
                            wHj   =        bH +         Tj f H µ j .                        (11)
                                    1 + βH       1 + βH

The firm’s optimal wage choice for skill group S is a weighted average of the reference wage
bS and the group’s marginal revenue product. As βS → ∞, eSj → ∞ and the firm pays the
reference wage bS . In the case where the reference wage is 0, the labor supply function for
group S has a constant elasticity βS and the first order condition sets the wage equal to a
constant fraction βS /(1 + βS ) of the marginal revenue product.
    Note that firms post wages with knowledge of the shape of the skill-specific supply sched-
ules but not the identities of the workers who comprise them. The last worker hired is
indifferent about taking the job but the other employees strictly prefer their job to outside


                                               24
alternatives. These inframarginal workers capture rents by means of an information asym-
metry: they hide from their employer the fact that they would be willing to work for a lower
wage.
    We now derive results under various specifications of the production function and the
firm’s marginal revenue function. On the technology side, we start with a simple baseline
case where f (., .) is linear in Lj and Hj . This corresponds to a standard efficiency units
model of the labor market in which lower and higher-skilled workers are perfect substitutes.
We then consider the more general case where f (., .) is a CES production function. On the
revenue side, we initially assume that the firm faces a fixed output price. We then consider
the more general case where the faces a constant elasticity product demand function.


Baseline case: linear production function and fixed output price
To develop intuition, we begin with the simplest possible example where the firm faces a
fixed output price Pj0 and has a linear production function:

                             Yj = Tj Nj = Tj ((1 − θ)Lj + θHj ).

Here Nj represents the efficiency units of labor at the firm and the parameter θ ∈ (0.5, 1),
which we assume is common to all firms, governs the relative productivity of the two types of
labor. Under this specification of technology and market structure, the first order conditions
(10) and (11) evaluate to:

                                     1          βL
                          wLj =          bL +        Tj Pj0 (1 − θ)
                                  1 + βL      1 + βL
                                     1           βH
                          wHj   =        bH +         Tj Pj0 θ.
                                  1 + βH       1 + βH

The determination of the optimal wage in the simplified situation where there is only one
skill group is illustrated in Figure 9. The firm faces an upward sloping inverse labor supply
function of the form w = b + N 1/β . The associated marginal factor cost is M F C = b +
1+β
  β
    N 1/β . The firm equates M F C with marginal revenue product (M RP ) leading to an
                            1      β
equilibrium wage w = 1+β      b + 1+β M RP . As shown in the Figure, if the firm’s marginal
revenue product increases, both employment and wages will increase at the firm. In contrast
to traditional rent-sharing models, however, this positive relationship between wages and
productivity does not stem from wage bargaining. Firms unilaterally post profit-maximizing
wages that leave the marginal worker with no surplus on the job. The firm shares rents with
inframarginal workers only because it lacks the information necessary to price discriminate


                                             25
based upon reservation wages.
    To understand the implications of this model for the relative wage structure, suppose that
the reference wages of the two skill groups are proportional to their relative productivities,
so that
                                  bL = (1 − θ)b, bH = θb.

This restriction is natural if one views bS as an outside wage that can be earned in a fully
competitive sector where wages equal marginal products. Now the first order conditions can
be re-written:

                                              (1 − θ)b
                                ln wLj = ln            + ln(1 + βL Rj )                                  (12)
                                               1 + βL
                                                 θb
                                ln wHj   = ln         + ln(1 + βH Rj )                                   (13)
                                              1 + βH

               Tj P 0
where Rj ≡ b j gives the proportional gap in marginal labor productivity at firm j relative
to the competitive sector. Wages of both skill groups contain a rent-sharing component that
depends on Rj and the skill group-specific supply parameter βS .
    Note that under the linear technology assumption, value added per standardized unit of
labor is vj ≡ Pj0 Yj /N j = Pj0 Tj , so Rj = vj /b is the ratio of value added per standardized
unit of labor to the outside wage for a worker with 1 efficiency unit of labor. Equations (12)
and (13) therefore imply that the elasticity of wages of skill group S with respect to value
added per worker is:
                                          ∂ ln wSj      βS Rj
                                    ξSj ≡          =            .
                                           ∂ ln vj    1 + βS Rj
Interestingly, this is the same as the expression for the rent-sharing elasticity (equation 2) in
a bargaining model where workers are assumed to capture a fixed share of the quasi-rents.
    The estimated rent sharing elasticities in Table 1 (and in our reanalysis of Portuguese
data) indicate that a typical value of this elasticity is around 0.10, which suggests that the
average value of βS Rj is also around 0.10.23 Hence, an average worker earns about 10%
higher wages than he or she would earn at the lowest-wage firms in the economy that have
vj = b. This estimate of average rents earned per worker is remarkably consistent with the
estimates of Card, Cardoso and Kline (2016, Table III) obtained by benchmarking wage
premiums at firms in the Portuguese economy relative to the premiums paid by the least
profitable firms in the country. By contrast Hornstein, Krussell, and Violante (2011) show
  23
     This is an approximation, as the model implies rent sharing elasticities vary systematically across firms
in relationship to productivity. Supposing P for simplicity P
                                                            that an average elasticity is being reported in
empirical studies, the approximation that J1 j βS Rj ≈ J1 j ξSj will be accurate when the distribution of
ξSj is bounded from above by a number far below one.


                                                     26
that a wide class of search models have difficulty generating mean wages more than 5% above
the lowest offered wage.
   The elasticity of labor supply for skill group S when wages are determined by the first
order conditions (12) and (13) is:

                                               βL wSj    1 + βS R j
                                      eSj =            =            .
                                              wSj − bS    Rj − 1

Assuming that βS Rj = 0.1, a value of the firm-specific elasticity of supply of around 4 implies
that Rj ≈ 1.3 and βS ≈ 0.08. While many empirical estimates of the elasticity of supply to
the firm are lower than 4 (Manning, 2011), we consider this a reasonable “near competitive”
benchmark as it implies an equilibrium markdown of wages relative to marginal products of
only 20%.
   A key implication of equations (12) and (13) is that when βL = βH , the relative wages of
the two skill groups are independent of firm-specific productivity. To simplify the discussion,
assume that βL Rj and βH Rj are both relatively small (i.e., on the order of 0.10). In such a
case the Taylor approximation:

                                                    (1 − θ)b
                                     ln wLj ≈ ln             + βL Rj
                                                     1 + βL
                                                       θb
                                     ln wHj    ≈ ln         + βH R j
                                                    1 + βH

will be highly accurate. This implies the log wage gap between high and low skilled workers
at firm j is:
                          wHj         θ        1 + βL
                       ln      = ln       + ln        + (βH − βL )Rj .                 (14)
                          wLj       1−θ        1 + βH
    When βL = βH = β, wages can be written in the form:

                                              ln wSj = αS + ψj ,                                           (15)

                 b
where αS ≡ ln 1+β   + 1[S = L] × ln(1 − θ) + 1[S = H] × ln θ is a skill-group-specific constant,
                   β
and ψj = βRj = b vj is the firm-specific wage premium paid by firm j. This simple model
therefore yields a reduced form specification for individual wages that is consistent with the
additively separable formulation proposed by AKM. Moreover, the firm effects should be
strongly related to value added per worker, something we saw evidence for in Table 4.24
    When one group has a higher value of the supply parameter β, the log wage gap between
   24
      While Table 4 regresses the firm effects on ln vj , the above analysis suggests ψj should be nearly linear
in vj with a coefficient of approximately β/b. In practice, Card, Cardoso, and Kline (2016) find that AKM
firm effects are instead approximately linear in ln vj above a minimal threshold level.


                                                      27
workers in different skill groups will be higher at more profitable firms. In this case, the data
will be described by an AKM-style model with skill-group-specific firm effects. The wage
premium for skill group S at firm j will be:

                                          ψjS = βS Rj .

The value of the ratio βH /βL can be identified from a projection of the firm effects for
workers in group H on the associated firm effects for workers in group L (since ψjH = ββHL ψjL ).
Card, Cardoso and Kline (2016, Figure V) relate gender-specific firm effect estimates to one
another and find results consistent with a value of β about 10% larger for males than females.

Between-Firm Sorting

Even when βL = βH and the wage gap between workers in the two skill groups is constant at
any given firm, the market-wide average wage for each skill group will depend on their relative
distribution across firms. In particular, (15) implies the expected log wage for workers in
skill group S is:
                                                      X
                                E[ln wSi ] = αS +             ψj πSj
                                                          j


where πSj is the share of workers in skill group S employed at firm j. Thus the market-wide
wage differential between high and low skilled workers depends on their relative productivity,
their relative supply elasticities, and the relative shares of the two groups employed at firms
with higher or lower wage premiums:
                                                              X
                    E[ln wHi ] − E[ln wLi ] = αH − αL +           ψj (πHj − πLj ).          (16)
                                                              j


The third term in this expression represents a between-firm sorting component of the average
wage gap. Card, Cardoso, and Kline (2016) show that 15-20% of the wage differential
between men and women in Portugal is explained by the fact that males are more likely
to work at firms that pay higher wage premiums to both gender groups. Similarly, Card,
Heining and Kline (2012) show that an important share of the rising return to education in
Germany is explained by the increasing likelihood that higher-educated workers are sorted
to establishments with higher pay premiums.
    Some simple evidence on the importance of the sorting component for the structure of
wages for Portuguese male workers is presented in Figure 10. Here, we plot the mean firm
effects by age for Portuguese men in 5 different education groups. We normalize the estimated

                                               28
firm effects using the procedure described in Card, Cardoso and Kline (2016), which sets
the average firm effect to zero for firms in (roughly) the bottom 15% of the distribution of
log value added per worker. The figure shows two important features. First, within each
education group, the mean firm effect associated with the jobs held by workers at different
ages is increasing until about age 50, then slightly decreasing.25 Thus, the lifecycle pattern
of between-firm sorting contributes to the well-known shape of the lifecycle wage profile.
Second, at all ages, more highly educated workers are more likely to work at firms that pay
higher wage premiums to all their workers. A significant share of the wage gap between men
with different education levels is therefore attributable to differential sorting.
    When the supply parameter β varies across groups the wage decomposition will contain
an additional term, reflecting a weighted average across firms of the rent sharing components
of the two skill groups:
                                                    X                         X
        E[ln wHi ] − E[ln wLi ] = αH − αL +              ψjL (πHj − πLj ) +       (ψjH − ψjL )πHj
                                                     j                        j
                                                    X                         X
                                  = αH − αL +            ψjH (πHj − πLj ) +       (ψjH − ψjL )πLj .
                                                     j                        j


As in a traditional Oaxaca (1973)-style decomposition these expressions give alternative ways
to evaluate the contributions of differences in the distributions of the two skill groups across
firms, and differences in the return to working at a given firm between the two groups.


Downward-sloping firm-specific product demand
So far we have assumed that the firm is a price taker in its output market. Suppose now that
the firm faces an inverse demand function Pj = Pj0 Yj −1/ε with ε > 1 giving the elasticity of
product demand. This yields the marginal revenue function:
                                                        
                                                   ε−1            −1/ε
                                      M Rj =                 Pj0 Yj
                                                    ε
  25
     Topel and Ward (1992) showed that job-to-job mobility was an important component of wage growth
for young men in the U.S. labor market. They interpreted their finding as mainly arising from gains in the
job-match component of wages, rather than as systematic mobility to firms that pay higher wages to all
workers.




                                                   29
In this case, assuming as above that bL = (1 − θ)b and bH = θb, the first order conditions
(10) and (11) evaluate to:
                                                      
                                b(1 − θ)           ε−1             −1/ε
                       wLj    =          (1 + βL          Tj Pj0 Yj     )                 (17)
                                 1 + βL              ε
                                                      
                                   bθ             ε−1             −1/ε
                       wHj    =        (1 + βH           Tj Pj0 Yj     ).                 (18)
                                1 + βH              ε

These equations can be simplified by noting that value-added per efficiency unit of labor is:

                                           Pj Y j
                                                  = Pj0 Tj Yj − /ε .
                                                               1
                                  vj ≡
                                            Nj

Thus, the optimal choices for wages can be written:

                                           (1 − θ)b
                             ln wLj = ln            + ln(1 + βL Rj0 )
                                            1 + βL
                                              θb
                             ln wHj   = ln         + ln(1 + βH Rj0 ).
                                           1 + βH

where Rj0 = ( ε−1ε
                   )vj /b. Note that as ε → ∞, these reduce to equations (12) and (13).
Morever, regardless of the value of ε, if βL ≈ βH , then relative wages are constant across
firms and the AKM model of the wage structure remains valid with the firm effects being
monotone functions of value added per worker.
    The implied elasticity of wages of skill group S with respect to value added per standard-
ized unit of labor is:
                                        ∂ ln wSj      βS Rj0
                                 ξSj =            =            .
                                         ∂ ln vj    1 + βS Rj0
Assuming this elasticity is approximately 0.10 suggests that βS Rj0 ≈ 0.10. Moreover, the
elasticity of labor supply of skill group S to the firm is:

                                          βL wSj    1 + βS Rj0
                                 eSj =            =            ,
                                         wSj − bS    Rj0 − 1

so calibrating this elasticity to a value of 4 would suggest that Rj0 = 1.28, again pointing to
a value of βS ≈ 0.08. Finally, note that the elasticity of employment of skill group S with
respect to a change in vj is
                                                  βS Rj0
                                        eSj ξSj = 0
                                                  Rj − 1
which has a value of approximately 4 under the preceding assumptions.
   When the firm faces a downward-sloping product demand, value added per efficiency unit

                                                30
of labor (vj ) depends on the endogenous choice of output. In the Appendix, we show that
the elasticities of vj with respect to an exogenous shift in output demand (indexed by Pj0 )
or an exogenous increase in productivity (indexed by Tj ) are:

                                       ∂ ln vj       ε
                                              0
                                                =
                                       ∂ ln Pj    ε + mj
                                        ∂ ln vj    ε−1
                                                =
                                       ∂ ln Tj    ε + mj

             ∂ ln N     R0             L          H
where mj ≡ ∂ ln vjj = R0 −1
                          j
                            [βL (1−θ)( Njj )+βH θ Njj ] measures the rate at which overall efficiency
                        j
units of labor expand when there is an exogenously driven increase in value added. From
these expressions it follows that the elasticities of the wages of skill group S with respect to
demand shocks and productivity shocks are:

                                   ∂ ln wSj        ε
                                              =        × ξSj
                                   ∂ ln Pj0     ε + mj
                                   ∂ ln wSj      ε−1
                                              =        × ξSj
                                    ∂ ln Tj     ε + mj

Under the calibrations above, mj is approximately 4. Assuming the firm-specific product
demand elasticity is between 3 and 10 the elasticity of wages with respect to a shift in the
firm’s demand curve will be between 0.04 and 0.07, and the elasticity with respect to a shift
in technological efficiency will be between 0.035 and 0.065.


Imperfect substitution between skill groups
A limitation of our baseline model is that it assumes perfect substitutability between the
two skill groups. We now extend the model by assuming that the firm’s output is a CES
aggregate of high and low skilled labor:

                              Yj = Tj Nj = Tj f (Lj , Hj )
                               f (Lj , Hj ) = [(1 − θ)Lρj + θHjρ ]1/ρ                           (19)

where ρ ∈ (−∞, 1] and σ = (1 − ρ)−1 is the elasticity of substitution between the types of
labor. The marginal productivities of the two groups take the form:

                                  Tj fL = Tj (1 − θ)Lρ−1
                                                     j   Nj 1−ρ
                                 Tj fH = Tj θHj ρ−1 Nj 1−ρ .



                                                  31
Assuming that the firm faces a constant price Pj0 for its output, and that bL = (1 − θ)b and
bH = θb, the first order conditions (10) and (11) evaluate to:

                                        b(1 − θ)                       1
                                wLj =            (1 + βL Rj (Lj /Nj )− σ )                                 (20)
                                         1 + βL
                                           bθ                         1
                               wHj    =        (1 + βH Rj (Hj /Nj )− σ )                                   (21)
                                        1 + βH

where Rj = Tj Pj0 /b = Yj Pj0 /bNj = vj /b is value added per standardized unit of labor relative
to the reference wage. These differ from the corresponding equations with a linear technology
                                                    1               1
(equations (12) and (13)) by the terms (Lj /Nj )− σ and (Hj /Nj )− σ which adjust the marginal
productivities of L and H workers based upon their relative employment shares. These terms
disappear when Lj = Hj , or when σ is large.26
    Note that even when βL = βH , log wages in this model are non-separable in worker
and firm heterogeneity. This is because firm heterogeneity in factor proportions leads to
firm specific wage-skill gaps of the sort usually analyzed at the market level (e.g., Katz and
Murphy, 1992). If skill types were observable, it would be natural to estimate such a model
via nonlinear least squares using data on firm value added. With unobserved skill types, an
interactive fixed effects specification would be required that allows the firm effects to depend
on the unobserved skill ratio at the firm.
    To derive the rent sharing elasticities in this model, define:
                                                                     1
                                                   βL Rj (Lj /Nj )− σ
                                     τLj =                                   1
                                                1 + βL Rj (Lj /Nj )− σ
                                                                         1
                                                   βH Rj (H j /Nj )− σ
                                     τHj =                                       1
                                                1 + βH Rj (Hj /Nj )− σ

These are the elasticities of wages with respect to vj , ignoring any adjustment to the relative
input of L and H labor. They also represent the proportional wage premiums for L and H
workers associated with working at a firm with R = Rj relative to a marginal firm with R
close to 1. With this notation, we show in the Appendix that the elasticities of wages with
respect to value added per labor input can be expressed as:
                                                                     τ       e
                               ∂ ln wLj                 τLj (1 + Hjσ Hj )
                       ξLj   ≡             =
                                ∂ ln vj      1 + σ1 ((1 − κj )τLj eLj + κj τHj eHj )
                                                                  τ e
                               ∂ ln wHj                 τHj (1 + Ljσ Lj )
                      ξHj ≡                =                                         ,
                                ∂ ln vj      1 + σ1 ((1 − κj )τLj eLj + κj τHj eHj )
   Defining hj = Hj /Lj , note that Lj /Nj = (1 − θ(1 − hρj ))−1/ρ and Hj /Nj = hj (1 − θ(1 − hρj ))−1/ρ . Thus,
  26

when hj = 1, Lj /Nj = Hj /Nj = 1.


                                                      32
where (as above) eLj and eHj are the elasticities of labor supply of L and H workers to the
                  (1−θ)Lρj      ∂ ln f
firm, and κj ≡ (1−θ)Lρ +θH ρ =
                               ∂ ln Lj
                                       = 1 − ∂∂lnlnHfj . Notice that:
                     j    j



                                                   βS Rj
                                     lim ξSj =
                                     σ→∞         1 + βS R j

which is the expression derived above for our baseline case with a linear technology. With
imperfect substitution between groups the value-added elasticities of the two skill groups,
ξLj and ξHj , will depend on τLj and τHj and on the labor supply elasticities of the two
groups.
    The general effect of allowing imperfect substitution between L and H labor is to generate
value added elasticities that are smaller than the “rent shares” τLj and τHj , but of similar
magnitudes. For example, consider a calibration with θ = 0.6, σ = 1.4, and an average
workforce comprised of 60% L workers and 40% H workers. In this setup, a value of Rj = 1.45
combined with βL = 0.09 and βH = 0.15 yields τL = 0.10 and τH = 0.20, implying that lower-
skilled workers earn a 10% wage premium relative to their outside wage, while higher-skilled
workers earn a 20% premium. The implied firm-specific labor supply elasticities of the two
groups are 5 and 2, respectively, while the implied elasticities of their wages with respect to
value added per worker are 0.05 and 0.11, respectively.
    To summarize: a CES technology will give rise to generalized AKM models in which
the wage differentials between different skill groups vary across firms, and the elasticity of
wages with respect to value added per worker will also vary across groups and across firms,
depending on the firm-specific skill employment shares at the firm. Nevertheless, the basic
intuition of our benchmark model remains. In particular, a simple model of monopsonistic
wage setting can explain the existence and quantitative magnitude of systematic firm wage
premiums that are highly correlated across skill groups and highly correlated with measures
of firm-specific productivity.


Relationship to other models and open questions
Although we have worked with a static model of employer differentiation, there are obvious
benefits to considering more realistic dynamic models, not least of which is that they provide
a rationale for the worker mobility typically used to estimate firm wage effects. Appendix B
considers a simple dynamic extension of our framework that yields random mobility between
firms and has essentially identical steady state implications for wages and employment.
However, it would be interesting to consider richer models where workers systematically
climb a productivity job ladder and can spend some time unemployed. Another interesting


                                              33
extension would be to allow incumbent workers to face switching costs that lead firms to price
discriminate against them. This could lead to offer matching behavior as in Postel-Vinay
and Robin (2002) and to new predictions about recruitment and retention policies.
    By assuming the number of employers is very large, we have adopted a partial equilibrium
framework with no strategic interactions between employers. With a finite number of firms,
a shock to one firm’s productivity will affect the equilibrium employment and wages of
competitor firms. Staiger, Spetz, and Phibbs (2010) provide compelling evidence of such
responses in the market for nurses. As in the oligopoly literature, analysis of a finite employer
model with strong strategic dependence may be complicated by the presence of multiple
equilibria, which requires different methods for estimation (e.g., Ciliberto and Tamer, 2009)
but may also yield interesting policy implications.
    Finally, it is worth noting some links between our modeling of workplace differentia-
tion with the literature on compensating differentials for non-wage amenities (Rosen, 1986;
Hwang, Mortensen and Reed, 1998). In our model, non-wage amenities that are valued
equally by all workers simply shift the intercept of the labor supply curve to the firm. But
a monopsonist firm sets wages based upon the elasticity of labor supply to the firm, which
is governed entirely by the distribution of taste heterogeneity. For this reason, our model
exhibits no compensating differentials of the standard sort. Amenities affect firm effects
only through their influence on TFP – a firm with attractive non-wage amenities will grow
large which should depress its revenue productivity and therefore lower its firm wage effect.
Empirically distinguishing this effect, which is mediated through product prices, from the
standard compensation mechanism is policy relevant since the monopsony model will tend
to imply a different incidence of (say) employer provided health benefits on workers than a
compensating differentials model.


5    Conclusion
There is no doubt that a large share of wage inequality is driven by differences in worker skills.
But economists have long had evidence (e.g., Lester, 1946; Slichter, 1950) that employer
characteristics exert an independent effect on wages. While the ability of firms to set wages
is disciplined by market competition, there are clearly limits to those competitive forces,
which also fail to eliminate productivity and output price differences across firms (Hsieh and
Klenow, 2009).
    Modern search theory provides one rationale for the existence of wage setting power
(Mortensen, 2005). But even without search frictions, firms will be able to set wages if (as
seems likely) workers differ in their valuation of firms’ non-wage characteristics. While the

                                               34
mechanisms giving rise to market power under these two approaches are different, both imply
that labor is supplied inelastically to firms, providing some scope to set wages. As noted by
Manning (2011) such market power can generate a positive relationship between firm-specific
productivity and wages that mimics models in which workers bargain with employers over
wages. But in our setting firms set wages unilaterally and rents are shared only because of
information asymmetries. We believe that this alternative explanation for what the literature
has called “rent sharing” is more plausible than one based on worker bargaining power,
particularly in economies that lack strong unions and in settings (like Portugal) where most
firms pay wages above those required by sectoral bargaining agreements. Indeed, structural
estimates of worker bargaining strength are often quite low (e.g., Cahuc, Postel-Vinay, and
Robin, 2006). One interesting implication of a monopsony-based explanation for the link
between productivity and wages is that there is no “hold-up” problem in the firm’s investment
decision – a prediction consistent with the empirical findings of Card, Devicienti, and Maida
(2014).
    The empirical literature on firm wage inequality has progressed dramatically with the
introduction of huge matched employer employee datasets. Yet significant challenges remain.
The field continues to rely almost exclusively on observational studies predicated on plausible,
but ultimately debatable, identifying assumptions. More research is needed using research
designs that can credibly identify the causal link from firm-specific shocks to workers’ wages.
Another outstanding goal is the development of studies that directly manipulate incentives
for workers to leave and join particular firms, as in the innovative experimental design of
Dal Bó, Finan, and Rossi (2013). Such designs can be used to rigorously assess the degree
of bias in observational firm switching designs.
    While research on labor market inequality typically strives for general explanations of
national trends, the way forward in this literature may not involve a “theory of everything”
but rather more attention to the institutional details of particular labor markets. This is the
tradition in the Industrial Organization literature, where studies generally focus on particular
industries, rather than the economy as a whole. It is plausible that firms have more wage
setting power in some labor markets than others and that the nature of firm wage vs. nonwage
competition differs as well. A key empirical problem is how to define the labor market of
interest, both geographically and with respect to skills. In the immigration literature, for
example, there is debate over whether labor markets are effectively national or local, and
over how to classify different age, education, and national origin groups.27 Manning and
  27
     For example, Borjas (2003) argues for national labor markets categorized into 5 education classes, with
no distinction between immigrants and natives, whereas Ottaviano and Peri (2013) and Card (2009) argue
for city-level markets categoried into 2 education classes but stratified by immigrant origin.



                                                    35
Petrolongo (2011) develop a spatial job search model where markets can be geographically
overlapping. Fitting their model to spatially detailed data on job applications and vacancies,
they find that workers are discouraged from searching in areas with strong competition from
other job seekers and that shocks to local neighborhoods can yield important “ripple effects”
on labor market activity in nearby areas.28 New case studies of settings where the market
structure of labor demand can be carefully documented would be particularly useful.29
    Finally, the idea that even highly advanced labor markets like that of the United States
might be better characterized as imperfectly competitive opens a host of questions about
the welfare implications of industrial policies and labor market institutions such as the
minimum wage, unemployment insurance, and employment protection (Katz and Summers,
1989; Acemoglu, 2001; Coles and Mortensen, 2016). Empirical work lags particularly far
behind the theory in this domain. Additional evidence on how actual labor market policies
affect firm and worker behavior is needed to assess the plausibility of these theoretical policy
arguments.


References
Abowd, J., Kramarz, F., Lengermann, P., & Perez-Duarte, S. 2004. Are good workers
employed by good firms? A test of a simple assortative matching model for France and the
United States. Mimeo, CREST.
    Abowd, J. M., Kramarz, F., & Margolis, D. N. 1999. High wage workers and high wage
firms. Econometrica 67(2): 251-333.
    Abowd, J. A., & Lemieux, T. 1993. The effects of product market competition on
collective bargaining agreements: The case of foreign competition in Canada. Quarterly
Journal of Economics 108(4): 983-1014.
    Abowd, J. M., Lengermann, P. A., & McKinney, K. L. 2003. The measurement of human
capital in the U.S. economy. Technical Paper no. TP-2002-09, Center for Economic Studies,
US Census Bureau.
    Acemoglu, D. 2001. Good jobs versus bad jobs. Journal of Labor Economics 19(1): 1-21.
  28
     Recent research on trade shocks (e.g., Autor Dorn and Hansen, 2013) and the effects of the great recession
(e.g., Yagan, 2013) shows surprising large and persistent effects of localized shocks, consistent with the idea
that the elasticity of supply to local labor markets is relatively inelastic.
  29
     For example, the empirical literature on monopsony has focused on the market for nurses (e.g., Staiger,
Spetz, and Phibbs, 2010) and teachers (e.g., Ransom and Sims, 2010; Falch, 2011) based on a presumption
that firms have more wage setting power in these occupational labor markets. By contrast, Ashenfelter
and Hannan (1986) and Black and Strahan (2001) use the product market to define their labor market of
interest – they study the effects of banking deregulation on the gender composition and relative wages of
bank employees.



                                                      36
    Acemoglu, D., & Autor, D. 2011. Skills, tasks and technologies: Implications for em-
ployment and earnings. In David Card and Orley Ashenfelter, editors, Handbook of Labor
Economics, vol. 4. . Amsterdam: Elsevier, 1043-1171.
    Akerlof, G. A., & Yellen, J. L. 1986. Efficiency wage models of the labor market. Cam-
bridge: Cambridge University Press.
    Albrecht, J. W., & Axell, B. 1984. An equilibrium model of search unemployment.
Journal of Political Economy 92(5): 824-840.
    Andrews, M. J., Gill, L., Schank, T., & Upward, R. 2008. High wage workers and low
wage firms: Negative assortative matching or limited mobility bias?. Journal of the Royal
Statistical Society: Series A 171(3): 673-697.
    Andrews, M. J., Gill, L., Schank, T., & Upward, R. 2012. High wage workers match with
high wage firms: Clear evidence of the effects of limited mobility bias. Economics Letters
117(3): 824-827.
    Arai, M. 2003. Wages, profits, and capital intensity: Evidence from matched worker-firm
data. Journal of Labor Economics 21(3): 593-618.
    Arai, M., & Heyman, F. 2009. Microdata evidence on rent-sharing. Applied Economics
41(23): 2965-2976.
    Ashenfelter, O., & Hannan, T. 1986. Sex discrimination and product market competition:
The case of the banking industry. Quarterly Journal of Economics 101(1): 149-173.
    Autor, D. H., Dorn, D, & Hanson, G. H. 2013. The China Syndrome: Local Labor
Market Effects of Import Competition in the United States. American Economic Review
103(6): 2121-2168.
    Bagger, J., Christensen, B. J., & Mortensen, D. T. 2014. Wage and labor productivity
dispersion: The roles of total factor productivity, labor quality, capital intensity, and rent
sharing. Mimeo, Royal Holloway.
    Barth, E., Bryson, A., Davis, J. C., & Freeman, R. 2016. It’s where you work: Increases
in the dispersion of earnings across establishments and individuals in the United States.
Journal of Labor Economics 34(S2): S67-S97.
    Beaudry, P., Green, D. A., & Sand, B. 2012. Does industrial composition matter for
wages? A test of search and bargaining theory. Econometrica 80(3): 1063-1104.
    Bernard, A. B. & Jensen, J. B. 1995. Exporters, jobs, and wages in US manufacturing:
1976-1987. Brookings Papers on Economic Activity. Microeconomics 1995: 67-119.
    Berry, S. 1994. Estimating discrete-choice models of product differentiation. RAND
Journal of Economics 25(2): 242-262.
    Berry, S., Levinsohn, J., & Pakes, A. 1995. Automobile prices in market equilibrium.
Econometrica 63(4): 841-890.


                                             37
    Berry, S., & Pakes, A. 2007. The pure characteristics demand model. International
Economic Review 48(4): 1193-1225.
    Black, S. E., & Strahan, P. E. 2001. The division of spoils: rent-sharing and discrimina-
tion in a regulated industry. American Economic Review 91(4): 814-831.
    Blanchflower, D. G., Oswald, A. J., & Sanfey, P. 1996. Wages, profits and rent-sharing.
Quarterly Journal of Economics 111(1): 227-251.
    Boal, W. M. & Ransom, M. R. 1997. Monopsony in the the labor market. Journal of
Economic Literature 35(1): 86-112.
    Bonhomme, S., & Jolivet, G. 2009. The pervasive absence of compensating differentials.
Journal of Applied Econometrics, 24(5): 763-795.
    Bonhomme, S., Lamadon, T., & Manresa, E. 2015. A distributional framework for
matched employer employee data. Mimeo, University of Chicago.
    Borjas, G. B. 2003. The labor demand curve is downward sloping: reexamining the
impact of immigration on the labor market. Quarterly Journal of Economics 118(4): 1335-
1374.
    Burdett, K., & Mortensen, D. T. 1998. Wage differentials, employer size, and unemploy-
ment. International Economic Review 39(2): 257-273.
    Cahuc, P., Postel-Vinay, F., & Robin, J. M. 2006. Wage bargaining with on-the-job
search: Theory and evidence. Econometrica 74(2): 323-364.
    Card, D. 2009. Immigration and Inequality. American Economic Review 90(2): 1-21.
    Card, D. & Cardoso, A. R. 2012. Can compulsory military service raise civilian wages?
Evidence from the peacetime draft in Portugal. American Economic Journal: Applied Eco-
nomics 4(4): 57-93.
    Card, D., Cardoso, A. R., & Kline, P. 2016. Bargaining, sorting, and the gender wage
gap: Quantifying the impact of firms on the relative pay of women. Quarterly Journal of
Economics, forthcoming.
    Card, D., Devicienti, F., & Maida, A. 2014. Rent-sharing, holdup, and wages: Evidence
from matched panel data. Review of Economic Studies 81(1): 84-111.
    Card, D., Heining, J., & Kline, P. 2012. Workplace heterogeneity and the rise of West
German wage inequality. Working Paper no. 18522, National Bureau of Economic Research.
    Card, D., Heining, J., & Kline, P. 2013. Workplace heterogeneity and the rise of West
German wage inequality. Quarterly Journal of Economics 128(3): 967-1015.
    Cardoso, A. R. 1997. Workers or employers: who is shaping wage inequality?. Oxford
Bulletin of Economics and Statistics 59(4): 523-547.
    Cardoso, A. R. 1999. Firms’ wage policies and the rise in labor market inequality: The
case of Portugal. Industrial & Labor Relations Review 53(1): 87-102.


                                             38
    Cardoso, A. R., & Portela, M. 2009. Micro foundations for wage flexibility: Wage insur-
ance at the firm level. Scandinavian Journal of Economics 111(1): 29-50.
    Carlsson, M., Messina, J., & Skans, O. N. 2014. Wage adjustment and productivity
shocks. Economic Journal, doi: 10.1111/ecoj.12214.
    Charles, K. K., & Guryan, J. 2008. Prejudice and wages: an empirical assessment of
Becker’s The Economics of Discrimination. Journal of Political Economy 116(5): 773-809.
    Charles, K. K., & Guryan, J. 2011. Studying discrimination: Fundamental challenges
and recent progress. Annual Review of Economics 3(1): 479-511.
    Christofides, L. N., & Oswald, A. J. 1992. Real wage determination and rent-sharing in
collective bargaining agreements. Quarterly Journal of Economics 107(3): 985-1002.
    Ciliberto, F., & Tamer, E. 2009. Market structure and multiple equilibria in airline
markets. Econometrica 77(6): 1791-1828.
    Coles, M. G., & Mortensen, D. T. 2016. Equilibrium labor turnover, firm growth and
unemployment. Econometrica 84(1): 347-363.
    Dal Bó, E., Finan, F., & Rossi, M. A. 2013. Strengthening state capabilities: The role
of financial incentives in the call to public service. Quarterly Journal of Economics 128(3):
1169-1218.
    Davis, S. J. & Haltiwanger, J. 1991. Wage dispersion between and within US Manu-
facturing plants, 1963-86. Brookings Papers on Economic Activity. Microeconomics 1991:
115-200.
    De Menil, G. 1971. Bargaining: Monopoly power versus union power. Cambridge, MA:
MIT Press.
    Du Caju, P., Rycx, F., & Tojerow, I. 2011. Inter-industry wage differentials: How much
does rent sharing matter? The Manchester School 79(4): 691-717.
    Dunne, T., Foster, L., Haltiwanger, J., & Troske, K. R. 2004. Wage and productivity
dispersion in United States manufacturing: The role of computer investment. Journal of
Labor Economics 22(2): 397-429.
    Eeckhout, J., & Kircher, P. 2011. Identifying sorting—in theory. Review of Economic
Studies 78(3): 872-906.
    Estevão, M., & Tevlin, S. 2003. Do firms share their success with workers? The response
of wages to product market conditions. Economica 70(280): 597-617.
    Faggio, G., Salvanes, K. G., & Van Reenen, J. 2010. The evolution of inequality in
productivity and wages: panel data evidence. Industrial and Corporate Change 19(6): 1919-
1951.
    Fakhfakh, F., & FitzRoy, F. 2004. Basic wages and firm characteristics: Rent sharing in
French manufacturing. Labour 18(4): 615-631.


                                             39
     Falch, Torberg. 2011. Teacher mobility responses to wage changes: Evidence from a
quasi-natural experiment. American Economic Review 101(3): 460-465.
     Foster, L., Haltiwanger, J., & Syverson, C. 2008. Reallocation, firm turnover, and ef-
ficiency: Selection on productivity or profitability?. American Economic Review 98(1):
394-425.
     Gaure, S. 2014. Correlation bias correction in two-way fixed-effects linear regression.
Stat 3(1): 379-390.
     Gibbons, R., & Katz, L. F. 1992. Does unmeasured ability explain inter-industry wage
differentials?. Review of Economic Studies 59(3): 515-535.
     Gibbons, R., Katz, L. F., Lemieux, T., & Parent, D. 2005. Comparative Advantage,
Learning, and Sectoral Wage Determination. Journal of Labor Economics, 23(4): 681-724.
     Goldberg, P. K., & Hellerstein, R. 2013. A structural approach to identifying the sources
of local currency price stability. The Review of Economic Studies, 80(1): 175-210.
     Goldin, C. D., & Katz, L. F. 2009. The race between education and technology. Cam-
bridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
     Goldschmidt, D., & Schmieder, J. F. 2015. The rise of domestic outsourcing and the
evolution of the German wage structure. Working Paper no. 21366, National Bureau of
Economic Research.
     Gorodnichenko, Y., & Talavera, O. Forthcoming. Price setting in online markets: Basic
facts, international comparisons, and cross-border integration. American Economic Review.
     Groshen, E. L. 1991. Sources of intra-industry wage dispersion: How much do employers
matter?. Quarterly Journal of Economics 106(3): 869-884.
     Grout, P. A. 1984. Investment and wages in the absence of binding contracts: A Nash
bargaining approach. Econometrica 52(2): 449-460.
     Guiso, L., Pistaferri, L., & Schivardi, F. 2005. Insurance within the firm. Journal of
Political Economy 113(5): 1054-1087.
     Gürtzgen, N. 2009. Rent-sharing and collective bargaining coverage: Evidence from
linked employer–employee data. Scandinavian Journal of Economics 111(2): 323-349.
     Hildreth, A. K. 1998. Rent-sharing and wages: Product demand or technology driven
premia? Economics of Innovation and New Technology 5(2-4): 199-226.
     Hildreth, A. K., & Oswald, A. J. 1997. Rent-sharing and wages: evidence from company
and establishment panels. Journal of Labor Economics 15(2): 318-337.
     Hornstein, A., Krusell, P., & Violante, G. L. 2011. Frictional wage dispersion in search
models: A quantitative assessment. The American Economic Review, 101(7): 2873-2898.
     Hsieh, C. T., & Klenow, P. J. 2009. Misallocation and manufacturing TFP in China and
India. Quarterly Journal of Economics 124(4): 1403-1448.


                                             40
    Hwang, H. S., Mortensen, D. T., & Reed, W. R. 1998. Hedonic wages and labor market
search. Journal of Labor Economics 16(4): 815-847.
    Juhn, Chinuue, Kristin McCue, Holly Monti and Brooks Pierce. Firm Performance and
the Volatility of Earnings. Unpublished Working Paper, March 2016.
    Katz, L. F. 1986. Efficiency wage theories: A partial evaluation. NBER Macroeconomics
Annual 1986: 235-290.
    Katz, L. F. & Autor, D.H. 1999. Changes in the wage structure and earnings inequal-
ity. In Orley Ashenfelter and David Card, editors, Handbook of Labor Economics, vol. 3,
Amsterdam: Elsevier, 1463-1555.
    Katz, L. F., & Murphy, K. M. (1992). Changes in Relative Wages, 1963-1987: Supply
and Demand Factors. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 107(1): 35-78.
    Katz, L. F. & Summers, L. H. 1989. Industry rents: Evidence and implications. Brook-
ings Papers on Economic Activity. Microeconomics 1989: 209-290.
    Krueger, A. B., & Summers, L. H. 1988. Efficiency wages and the inter-industry wage
structure. Econometrica 56(2): 259-293.
    Lange, F. 2007. The speed of employer learning. Journal of Labor Economics, 25(1):
1-35. Chicago
    Lavetti K. & Schmutte, I. M. 2016. Estimating compensating wage differentials with
endogenous job mobility. Mimeo, Ohio State University.
    Lester, R. A. 1946. Wage diversity and its theoretical implications. The Review of
Economics and Statistics, 28(3): 152-159.
    Lester, Richard B. 1952. A range theory of wage differentials. Industrial and Labor
Relations Review 5(4): 483-500.
    Lochner, B., & Schulz, B. 2016. Labor Market Sorting in Germany. Working paper.
    Macis, M. & Schivardi, F. 2016. Exports and wages: Rent sharing, workforce composi-
tion, or returns to skills? Journal of Labor Economics 34(4): 945-978.
    Manning, A. 2011. Imperfect competition in the labor market. In Orley Ashenfelter and
David Card, editors, Handbook of Labor Economics, vol. 4, Amsterdam: Elsevier, 973-1041.
    Manning, A., & Petrongolo, B. 2011. How local are labor markets? Evidence from
a spatial job search model. Discussion Paper no. DP8686, Centre for Economic Policy
Research.
    Maré, D. C., & Hyslop, D. 2006. Worker-firm heterogeneity and matching: An analysis
using worker and firm fixed effects estimated from LEED. Statistics New Zealand LEED
Research Paper.
    Margolis, D. N., & Salvanes, K. G. 2001. Do firms really share rents with their workers?.
Discussion Paper no. 330, Institute for the Study of Labor.


                                             41
    Martins, P. S. 2009. Rent sharing before and after the wage bill. Applied Economics
41(17): 2133-2151.
    Mas, A., & Pallais, M. 2016. Valuing Alternative Work Arrangements. Working paper.
    McFadden, D. 1973. Conditional Logit Analysis of Qualitative Choice Behavior. P.
Zarembka (Ed.), Frontiers in Econometrics, Academic Press, New York.
    Mincer, J. 1974. Schooling, experience, and earnings. New York: National Bureau of
Economic Research.
    Mortensen, D. 2005. Wage dispersion: Why are similar workers paid differently?. Cam-
bridge, MA: MIT Press.
    Murphy, K. M., & Topel, R. H. 1990. Efficiency wages reconsidered: Theory and evidence.
In Yoram Weiss and Gideon Fishelson, editors, Advances in the theory and measurement of
unemployment. . Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan UK, 204-240.
    Oaxaca, R. 1973. Male-female wage differentials in urban labor markets. International
Economic Review, 693-709.
    Ottaviano, G.I. P. & Peri, G. 2012. Rethinking the effect of immigration on wages.
Journal of the European Economic Association 10(1): 152–197.
    Pakes, A. 2016. Empirical Tools and Competition Analysis: Past Progress and Current
Problems. Working Paper no. 22086, National Bureau of Economic Research.
    Postel–Vinay, F., & Robin, J. M. 2002. Equilibrium wage dispersion with worker and
employer heterogeneity. Econometrica 70(6): 2295-2350.
    Pyapromdee, S. 2013. Residual wage dispersion with efficiency wages. Mimeo, University
of Wisconsin-Madison.
    Ransom, Michael R. & Sims, David P. 2010. Estimating the firm’s labor supply curve
in a "new monopsony" framework: Schoolteachers in Missouri, Journal of Labor Economics
28(2): 331-355.
    Reynolds, L. G. 1946. Wage differences in local labor markets. The American Economic
Review, 36(3), 366-375.
    Robinson, J. 1933. The economics of imperfect competition. London: Macmillan.
    Rosen, S. 1986. The theory of equalizing differences. In Orley Ashenfelter and Richard
Layard, editors Handbook of Labor Economics, vol. 1, . Amsterdam: Elsevier, 641-692.
    Skans, O. N., Edin, P. A., & Holmlund, B. 2009. Wage dispersion between and within
plants: Sweden 1985-2000. In Edward P. Lazear and Kathryn L. Shaw, editors, The structure
of wages: an international comparison, Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 217-260.
    Slichter, S. H. 1950. Notes on the structure of wages. Review of Economics and Statistics
32(1): 80-91.
    Song, J., Price, D. J., Guvenen, F., Bloom, N. & von Wachter, T. 2015. Firming up


                                             42
inequality. Working Paper no. 21199, National Bureau of Economic Research.
   Sorkin, I. 2015. Ranking firms using revealed preference. Mimeo, University of Michigan.
   Staiger, D. O., Spetz, J., & Phibbs, C. S. 2010. Is there monopsony in the labor market?
Evidence from a natural experiment. Journal of Labor Economics 28(2): 211-236.
   Svejnar, J. 1986. Bargaining power, fear of disagreement, and wage settlements: Theory
and evidence from US industry. Econometrica 54(5): 1055-1078.
   Syverson, C. 2004. Market structure and productivity: A concrete example. Journal of
Political Economy 112(6): 1181-1222.
   Syverson, C. 2011. What determines productivity?. Journal of Economic Literature
113(3): 326-365.
   Tirole, J. 1988. The theory of industrial organization. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
   Topel, R. H., & Ward, M. P. 1992. Job mobility and the careers of young men. Quarterly
Journal of Economics 107(2): 439-479.
   Van Reenen, J. 1996. The creation and capture of rents: Wages and innovation in a
panel of UK companies. Quarterly Journal of Economics 111(1): 195-226.
   Yagan, D. 2016. Is the Great Recession really over? Evidence of enduring employment
impacts. Unpublished working paper, University of California Berkeley Department of Eco-
nomics.




                                            43
Appendix
A. Derivations
                                                                  ∂ ln N
A.1 Downward-Sloping Product Demand Let κj = ∂ ln Ljj = (1 − θ)Lj /Nj represent
the elasticity of total labor efficiency units with respect to low skilled labor, and notice that
                                                                      ∂ ln N
the elasticity of labor inputs with respect to high skilled labor is ∂ ln Hjj = θHj /Nj = 1 − κj .
Suppose that the elasticities of wages of the two groups with respect to value added per
worker are ξLj and ξHj , respectively, and that eL and eH are the elasticities of labor supply
of the two groups to the firm. Since the firm’s labor input choices are constrained by the
labor supply functions of L and H labor, the elasticity of total labor input with respect a
shift in value-added per worker is:

            ∂ ln N j     ∂ ln N j     ∂ ln Lj    ∂ ln wLj ∂ ln N j     ∂ ln H j   ∂ ln wHj
     mj ≡              =           ×           ×           +         ×          ×
            ∂ ln vj      ∂ ln Lj     ∂ ln wLj      ∂ ln vj   ∂ ln Hj   ∂ ln wHj    ∂ ln vj
                       = κj eLj ξLj + (1 − κj )eHj ξHj .

                                                                   1−1/ε
Now, using the fact that value added per worker is vj = Pj0 Tj             N j −1/ε , it follows that:

                                  ∂ ln vj        1 ∂ ln vj
                                        0
                                          = 1 − mj
                                  ∂ ln Pj        ε ∂ ln Pj0
                                  ∂ ln vj      ε
                                ⇒       0
                                          =
                                  ∂ ln Pj   ε + mj

and similarly:
                                        ∂ ln vj    ε−1
                                                =        .
                                        ∂ ln Tj   ε + mj

A.2 CES Technology


We now extend the model by assuming that the firm’s production f is in the CES class, so
the labor input at firm j is:

                             Nj = f (Lj , Hj ) = [(1 − θ)Lρj + θHjρ ]1/ρ

As noted in the text, the marginal products of the two skill groups are:

                                fL = (1 − θ)Lρ−1
                                             j   f (Lj , Hj )1−ρ
                                fH = θHj ρ−1 f (Lj , Hj )1−ρ



                                                 44
Finally, define

                                               ∂ ln Nj       (1 − θ)Lρj
                                        κj   ≡         =
                                               ∂ ln Lj   (1 − θ)Lρj + θHjρ

                  ∂ ln N
and note that ∂ ln Hjj = 1-κj .
   The first order conditions (20) and (21) can be written as:

                                              b(1 − θ)                           1
                              ln wLj = ln              + ln(1 + βL Rj (Lj /Nj )− σ )
                                               1 + βL
                                                 bθ                             1
                             ln wHj      = ln         + ln(1 + βH Rj (Hj /Nj )− σ )
                                              1 + βH

Differentiating these equations and simplifying notation we obtain:
              "                                                     #"              #       "        #
                   1 + σ1 τ L (1 − κj )eL − σ1 τL (1 − κj )eH            d ln wLj               τL
                                                                                        =                dv j
                           − σ1 τ H κj eL        1 + σ1 τ H κj eH        d ln wHj               τH

Some manipulation establishes that:
                                                                     τ    e
                               ∂ ln wLj                   τLj (1 + Hjσ Hj )
                                             =
                                ∂ ln vj        1 + σ1 ((1 − κj )τLj eLj + κj τHj eHj )
                                                                    τ e
                              ∂ ln wHj                    τHj (1 + Ljσ Lj )
                                             =                                         .
                               ∂ ln vj         1 + σ1 ((1 − κj )τLj eLj + κj τHj eHj )




B. Two Period Model of Supply

Here we consider a two-period extension of our static framework. A worker i of type S faces
indirect utility over firms j ∈ {1, ..., J} of:

                                        uiSj = βS ln (wSj − bS ) + aSj + iSj ,

where iSj is drawn from a type I Extreme Value distribution. Hence the period 1 choice
probabilities are:

                                                            1
                                                                   
                                                 exp(βS ln wSj − bS + a1Sj )
                                 p1Sj    = PJ                  1             1
                                                                                        .
                                               k=1 exp(βS ln (wSk − bS ) + aSk )
                                         ≈ λ1S exp(βS ln wSj1
                                                               − bS + a1Sj )
                                                                   


   In the second period, a fraction π̃ of the workers get a new draw 0i of idiosyncratic

                                                           45
Extreme Value preferences. Because each firm’s market share is very low, workers will only
choose employers for which they have a very strong idiosyncratic taste. Hence, the chances
of preferring to stay at the same firm with a new taste draw are essentially zero. With this
in mind, we write second period market shares as:

                                             2
                                                    
                                exp(βS ln wSj   − bS + a2Sj )
                  p2Sj   = π̃ PJ                2            2
                                                                  + (1 − π̃) p1Sj
                                l=1 exp(βS ln (wSl − bS ) + aSl )
                              2               2
                                                − bS + a2Sj ) + (1 − π̃) p1Sj
                                                    
                         ≈ π̃λS exp(βS ln wSj

    Clearly as π̃ → 1, the labor supply function becomes static. Otherwise, we have a partial
adjustment process that yields heterogeneity in the labor supply elasticity depending upon
how far p1Sj is from λ2S exp(βS ln (wSk
                                     2
                                        − bS ) + a2Sk ). In a steady state these two objects will
be the same and the elasticity of supply to each firm simplifies to π̃ times the usual static
elasticity eSj .
    Therefore, we can think about the steady state of a dynamic model with taste shocks as
one where firms face a supply curve eSj π̃ and set wages accordingly. As before, firms cannot
observe workers’ preferences. Hence, employee threats to leave in response to taste shocks
will not be viewed as credible by the firm despite the firm’s knowledge that a fraction π̃ of
workers did in fact draw new tastes. Because the firm cannot budge in its wage policy, each
period will yield a fraction π̃ of workers switching between firms.




                                                 46
                                            Figure 1: Trends in Between‐Establishment Dispersion in
                                                            Wages and Productivity
                               1.20                                                                               0.80




                                                                                                                         Standard Deviation Log Rev/Worker
                               1.15                      Std Dev. of Weekly Wage (left axis)                      0.75
Standard Deviation Log Wages




                                                         Std. Dev. of Revenue/Worker (right axis)
                               1.10                                                                               0.70


                               1.05                                                                               0.65


                               1.00                                                                               0.60


                               0.95                                                                               0.55


                               0.90                                                                               0.50
                                          1977           1982       1987       1992       1997      2002   2007
                                  Source: Barth et al (2016)
                                  Figure 2: Implied Age Profiles from AKM Models with Alternative Normalizations
                                                of the Age Profile (Men with Primary Education Only)
                      0.5


                      0.0

                                                                                      Blue squares = Baseline cubic
                      ‐0.5                                                            (age normalized around 40)
Implied Age Profile




                                                                                      Yellow diamonds = Alternative cubic
                      ‐1.0
                                                                                      (unnormalized age)

                      ‐1.5


                      ‐2.0


                      ‐2.5
                                   1980 birth cohort        1970 birth cohort        1960 birth cohort        1950 birth cohort
                      ‐3.0
                             20           25           30        35             40         45            50         55            60
                                                                            Age
                                Figure 3: Mean Log Wages of Portuguese Male Job Changers, Classified
                                      by Quartile of Co‐Worker Wages at Origin and Destination
                          2.6

                          2.4                4 to 4
                          2.2                4 to 3
Mean Log Wage of Movers




                                             4 to 2
                          2.0
                                             4 to 1
                          1.8
                                             1 to 4
                          1.6
                                             1 to 3
                          1.4                1 to 2
                          1.2                1 to 1

                          1.0
                                                                ‐2                 ‐1               0                                1
                                                                     Time (0=first year on new job)
                          Notes: Figure shows mean wages of male workers at mixed‐gender firms who changed jobs in 2004‐2007 and held the
                          preceding job for 2 or more years, and the new job for 2 or more years. Job is classified into quartiles based on mean
                          log wage of co‐workers of both genders. Source: Card, Cardoso and Kline (2016, Figure I).
                                Figure 4: Mean Wages of Portuguese Female Job Changers, Classified by
                                         Quartile of Co‐Worker Wages at Origin and Destination
                          2.4

                          2.2
                                                4 to 4
                          2.0                   4 to 3
Mean Log Wage of Movers




                          1.8                   4 to 2

                          1.6                   4 to 1
                                                1 to 4
                          1.4
                                                1 to 3
                          1.2
                                                1 to 2
                          1.0                   1 to 1
                          0.8
                                                               ‐2                 ‐1               0                                1
                                                                    Time (0=first year on new job)
                           Notes: Figure shows mean wages of female workers at mixed gender firms who changed jobs in 2004‐2007 and held the
                           preceding job for 2 or more years, and the new job for 2 or more years. Jobs are classified into quartiles based on mean
                           log wage of co‐workers of both genders. Source: Card, Cardoso and Kline (2016, Figure II).
                                                   Figure 5a: Test for Symmetry of Regression‐Adjusted Wage Changes of
                                                         Portuguese Male Movers Across Coworker Wage Quartiles
                                          0
Mean Log Wage Change, Downward Movers




                                                                           Q1 to Q2,
                                                                           Q2 to Q1
                                        ‐0.1                                               Q3 to Q4,
                                                     Q2 to Q3,                             Q4 to Q3
                                                     Q3 to Q2
                                        ‐0.2                                                                         Q2 to Q4,
                                                                                                                     Q4 to Q2
                                                                                         Q1 to Q3,
                                        ‐0.3                                             Q3 to Q1


                                        ‐0.4                                                                                 Q1 to Q4,
                                                                                                                             Q4 to Q1

                                        ‐0.5
                                               0                     0.1                0.2             0.3                                     0.4                       0.5
                                                                              Mean Log Wage Change For Upward Movers
                                          Note: Figure plots regression adjusted mean wage changes over 4 year interval for job changers who move across coworker wage
                                          quartile groups indicated. Dashed line represents symmetric changes for upward and downward movers. Source: Card, Cardoso and
                                          Kline (2016, Appendix Figure B3).
                                                   Figure 5b: Test for Symmetry of Regression‐Adjusted Wage Changes of
                                                        Portuguese Female Movers Across Coworker Wage Quartiles
Mean Log Wage Change, Downward Movers



                                          0
                                                                         Q1 to Q2,
                                                                         Q2 to Q1
                                                                                       Q3 to Q4,
                                        ‐0.1
                                                                                       Q4 to Q3
                                                    Q2 to Q3,
                                                    Q3 to Q2                                               Q2 to Q4,
                                        ‐0.2                                                               Q4 to Q2
                                                                                 Q1 to Q3,
                                                                                 Q3 to Q1
                                        ‐0.3
                                                                                                                 Q1 to Q4,
                                                                                                                 Q4 to Q1

                                        ‐0.4
                                               0                        0.1               0.2                 0.3                                            0.4
                                                                         Mean Log Wage Change For Upward Movers
                                         Note: Figure plots regression adjusted mean wage changes over 4 year interval for job changers who move across
                                         coworker wage quartile groups indicated. Dashed line represents symmetric changes for upward and downward movers.
                                         Source: Card, Cardoso and Kline (2016, Appendix Figure B4).
                               Figure 6: Mean Residuals by Person/Firm Deciles,
                                          Portuguese Male Workers


                  0.02




                  0.01


                                                                                                          9
                                                                                                      7
                                                                                                                Person
                      0                                                                           5
                                                                                              3                 Effect
                           1     2    3     4                                            1                      Decile
                                                  5     6    7      8     9    10
                   ‐0.01


                                           Firm Effect Decile
                   ‐0.02




Note: Figure shows mean residuals from estimated AKM model with cells defined by decile of estimated firm effects interacted
with decile of estimated person effect. Source: Card, Cardoso and Kline (2016, Appendix Figure B5).
                              Figure 7: Mean Residuals by Person/Firm Deciles,
                                         Portuguese Female Workers



                 0.02



                  0.01

                                                                                                         9
                                                                                                                Person
                                                                                                     7          Effect
                     0                                                                           5              Decile
                          1                                                                  3
                                2    3     4     5                                       1
                                                       6    7      8     9
                  ‐0.01                                                       10

                                         Firm Effect Decile
                  ‐0.02




Note: Figure shows mean residuals from estimated AKM model with cells defined by decile of estimated firm effects interacted
with decile of estimated person effect. Source: Card, Cardoso and Kline (2016, Appendix Figure B6).
                                                              Figure 8: Relative Wage Premium and Relative Employment of High vs. Low Education
                                                                                                  Workers
                                                 1.0
Relative Wage Premium, Log Relative Employment




                                                                                Relative Wage Premium (High vs. Low Education Men)
                                                 0.5
                                                                                Log Relative Employment (High vs. Low Education Males and Females)


                                                 0.0



                                                 ‐0.5



                                                 ‐1.0



                                                 ‐1.5



                                                 ‐2.0
                                                        1.8     2.0    2.2     2.4     2.6     2.8     3.0     3.2     3.4     3.6     3.8     4.0     4.2    4.4   4.6
                                                                                               Mean Log Value Added per Worker
                                                                 Note: Firms are divided into 100 cells based on mean log value added per worker, 2005‐2009, with
                                                                 equal numbers of person‐year observations per cell.
              Figure 9: Determination of Wages


Wage,                                    marginal
MRP,                                     factor cost
MFC     MRP varies
        with VA/worker




  w0                                                   inverse
  b                                                    supply



                         Employment     L0
                                                        Figure 10: Mean Firm Effects by Age and Education Group, Portuguese Males

                                    0.4
                                                         University
                                                         Completed High School
                                                         Intermediate Schooling (9 yrs)
                                                         Upper Primary (6 yrs)
Mean Firm Effect (Log Wage Scale)




                                    0.3                  Lower Primary (<5 yrs)




                                    0.2




                                    0.1




                                    0.0
                                          19       23         27        31       35       39     43     47       51      55         59   63
                                                                                               Age
                                          Note: Firm effects are normalized using the method in Card, Cardoso and Kline (2016).
Table 1: Summary of Estimated Rent Sharing Elasticities from the Recent Literature
(Preferred specification, adjusted to TFP basis)
                                                                   Estimated         Std.
Study and country/industry                                         Elasticity        Error
Group 1: Industry-level profit measure
1. Christofides and Oswald (1992), Canadian manufacturing            0.140       (0.035)
2. Blanchflower, Oswald, Sanfey (1996), US manufacturing             0.060       (0.024)
3. Estevao and Tevlin (2003), US manufacturing                       0.290       (0.100)
Group 2: Firm-level profit measure, mean firm wage
4. Abowd and Lemieux (1993), Canadian manufacturing                  0.220       (0.081)
5. Van Reenen (1996), UK manufacturing                               0.290       (0.089)
6. Hildreth and Oswald (1997), UK                                    0.040       (0.010)
7. Hildreth (1998), UK Manufacturing                                 0.030       (0.010)
8. Barth et al (2016), US                                            0.160       (0.002)
Group 3: Firm-level profit measure, individual-specific wage
9. Margolis and Salvanes (2001), French manufacturing                0.062       (0.041)
9. Margolis and Salvanes (2001), Norwegian manufacturing             0.024       (0.006)
10. Arai (2003), Sweden                                              0.020       (0.004)
11. Guiso, Pistaferri, Schivardi (2005), Italy                       0.069       (0.025)
12. Fakhfakh and FitzRoy (2004), French manufacturing                0.120       (0.045)
13. Du Caju, Rycx, Tojerow (2011), Belgium                           0.080       (0.010)
14. Martins (2009), Portuguese manufacturing                         0.039       (0.021)
15. Guertzgen (2009), Germany                                        0.048       (0.002)
16. Cardoso and Portela (2009), Portugal                             0.092       (0.045)
17. Arai and Hayman (2009), Sweden                                   0.068       (0.002)
18. Card, Devicienti, Maida (2014), Italy (Veneto region)            0.073       (0.031)
19. Carlsson, Messina, and Skans (2014), Swedish mfg.                0.149       (0.057)
20. Card, Cardoso, Kline (2016), Portugal, between firm              0.156       (0.006)
20. Card, Cardoso, Kline (2016), Portugal, within-job                0.049       (0.007)
21. Bagger et al. (2014), Danish manufacturing                       0.090       (0.020)
22. Juhn et al. (2014), US manufacturing                             0.020       (0.004)
22. Juhn et al. (2014), US retail                                    0.037       (0.008)
Note: see Appendix Table 1 for more complete description of each study.
Table 2: Cross‐Sectional and Within‐Job Models of Rent Sharing for Portuguese Male Workers

                                                                               Basic + major      Basic + detailed
                                                       Basic Specification     industry/city       industry/city
                                                               (1)                  (2)                  (3)
A. Cross Sectional Models (Worker‐year observations 2005‐2009)
1. OLS: rent measure = mean log value added                   0.270                0.241               0.207
        per worker 2005‐2009                                 (0.017)              (0.015)             (0.011)

2. OLS: rent measure = mean log sales per worker              0.153                0.171               0.159
       2005‐2009                                             (0.009)              (0.007)             (0.004)
3. IV: rent measure = mean log value added                    0.327                0.324               0.292
      per worker 2005‐2009. Instrument =                     (0.014)              (0.011)             (0.008)
      mean log sales per worker, 2004‐2010
      First stage coefficient                                 0.475                0.541               0.562
                                                            [t=26.19]            [t=40.72]           [t=64.38]

B. Within‐Job Models (Change in Wages from 2005 to 2009 for stayers)
4. OLS: rent measure = change in log value added              0.041                0.039               0.034
        per worker from 2005 to 2009                         (0.006)              (0.005)             (0.003)

5. OLS: rent measure = change in log sales per                0.015                0.014               0.013
       worker from 2005 to 2009                              (0.005)              (0.004)             (0.003)

6. IV: rent measure = change in log value added               0.061                0.059               0.056
      per worker from 2005 to 2009. Instrument =             (0.018)              (0.017)             (0.016)
      change in log sales per worker, 2004 to 2010
      First stage coefficient                                 0.221                0.217                0.209
                                                            [t=11.82]            [t=13.98]            [t=18.63

Notes: Sample in panel A is 2,503,336 person‐year observations from QP for males working in 2005‐2009 between
the ages of 19 and 65 with at least 2 years of potential experience employed at a firm with complete value added
data (from SABI) for 2005 to 2009, and sales data (from QP) for 2004 and 2010. Sample in panel B is 284,071
males age 19‐61 in 2005 who worked every year from 2005‐2009 at a firm with complete value added data (from
SABI) for 2005 to 2009, and sales data (from QP) for 2004 and 2010. Standard errors clustered by firm ‐ 62,845
firms in panel A, 44,661 firms in panel B. Models in panel A control for a cubic in experience and unrestricted
education × year dummies. Models in panel B control for a quadratic in experience and education. Models in
column 2 also control for 20 major industries and 2 major cities (Lisbon and Porto). Models in column 3 also control
for 202 detailed industry dummies and 29 NUTS‐3 location dummies.
Table 3: Summary of Estimated AKM Models for Portuguese Men, Alternative Normalizations of Age Function

                                                             Baseline: Cubic       Cubic Age         Cubic Age         Cubic Age
                                                              Age Function        Function Flat     Function Flat     Function Flat Gaussian Basis
                                                              Flat at Age 40       at Age 50         at Age 30          at Age 0      Function
                                                                    (1)                (2)               (3)               (4)           (5)

 Std. dev. of person effects (across person‐yr obs.)               0.42                0.41              0.46              0.93              0.44
 Std. dev. of firm effects (across person‐yr obs.)                 0.25                0.25              0.25              0.25              0.25
 Std. dev. of Xb (across person‐yr obs.)                           0.07                0.10              0.12              0.74              0.08
 Correlation of person/firm effects                                0.17                0.16              0.17              0.14              0.17
 Correlation of person effects and Xb                              0.19                0.19              ‐0.32             ‐0.89             ‐0.06
 Correlation of firm effects and Xb                                0.11                0.14              ‐0.03             ‐0.08             0.04

 Inequality decomposition (Percent of variance of log wage explained):
   Person effects + Xb                                               63                 63                 63               63                63
      Person effects                                                 58                 54                 70              282                62
      Xb                                                             2                  3                  4               180                2
      Cov. of person effects and Xb                                  3                  5                 ‐11              ‐399               ‐1

   Firm effects                                                      20                 20                20                20                20

   Cov. of firm effects with (person effect+Xb)                      12                 12                12                12                12
      Cov. of firm effects with person effects                       11                 10                13                21                12
      Cov. of firm effects with Xb                                   1                  2                 ‐1                ‐9                0

    Residual                                                         5                   5                 5                 5                 5
Notes: Sample includes 8,225,752 person‐year observations for male workers in largest connected set of QP in 2005‐2009 period. Sample and baseline
specification are the same as in Card, Cardoso and Kline (2016). Models include 1,889,366 dummies for individual workers and 216,459 dummies for
individual firms, year dummies interacted with education dummies, and function of age interacted with education dummies. Age function in models in
columns 1‐4 includes quadratic and cubic terms, with age deviated from 40, 50, 30, and 0 for models in columns 1‐4, respectively. Age function in model
in column 5 is a Gaussian basis function with 5 equally spaced spline points. All models have the same fit: RMSE of the model is 0.143, the adjusted R‐
squared is 0.934.
Table 4: Relationship Between Components of Wages and Mean Log Value Added per Worker

                                                                  Basic + major        Basic + detailed
                                         Basic Specification      industry/city         industry/city
                                                 (1)                   (2)                    (3)
A. Combined Sample (n=2,252,436 person year observations at 41,120 firms)
1. Log Hourly Wage                          0.250                 0.222                      0.187
                                           (0.018)               (0.016)                    (0.012)
2. Estimated Person Effect                      0.107                  0.093                 0.074
                                               (0.010)                (0.009)               (0.006)
3. Estimated Firm Effect                        0.137                  0.123                 0.107
                                               (0.011)                (0.009)               (0.008)
4. Estimated Covariate Index                    0.001                  0.001                 0.001
                                               (0.000)                (0.000)               (0.000)
B. Less‐Educated Workers (n=1,674,676 person year observations at 36,179 firms)
5. Log Hourly Wage                              0.239                  0.211                 0.181
                                               (0.017)                (0.016)               (0.011)
6. Estimated Person Effect                      0.089                  0.072                 0.069
                                               (0.009)                (0.009)               (0.005)
7. Estimated Firm Effect                        0.144                  0.133                 0.107
                                               (0.015)                (0.013)               (0.008)
8. Estimated Covariate Index                    0.000                  0.000                 0.000
                                               (0.000)                (0.000)               (0.000)

C. More‐Educated Workers (n=577,760 person year observations at 17,615 firms)
9. Log Hourly Wage                              0.275                  0.247                 0.196
                                               (0.024)                (0.020)               (0.017)
10. Estimated Person Effect                     0.137                  0.130                 0.094
                                               (0.016)                (0.013)               (0.009)
11. Estimated Firm Effect                       0.131                  0.113                 0.099
                                               (0.012)                (0.009)               (0.010)
12. Estimated Covariate Index                   ‐0.001                 ‐0.001                ‐0.001
                                               (0.000)                (0.000)               (0.000)
Notes: Table entries are coefficients of mean log value added per worker (at current firm) in regression
models with dependent variables listed in the row headings. Standard errors clustered by firm in
parentheses. Sample in Panel B includes males with less than completed secondary education at firms
in the connected set for less educated workers. Sample in Panel C includes males with high school
education or more at firms in the connected set for more educated workers. Sample in Panel A includes
males in either the Panel B or Panel C sample. All models control for a cubic in experience and
unrestricted education × year dummies. Models in column 2 also control for 20 major industries and 2
major cities (Lisbon and Porto). Models in column 3 also control for 202 detailed industry dummies and
29 NUTS‐3 location dummies.
Appendix Table 1: Summary of Estimated Rent-Sharing Elasticities

                        Study                       Design Features                                     Measure of Profitability        Elasticity

A. Industry-Level Profit Measures
1. Christofides and Oswald (1992)                Canadian union contracts; 120 narrowly                Industry profits/worker            0.07
                                                 defined manufacturing industries                      (wage changes)

2. Blanchflower, Oswald, and Sanfey (1996)       US individual wage data (CPS), grouped to             Industry profits/worker          0.01-0.06
                                                 industry×year cells; manufacturing only               (within-industry changes)

3. Estevao and Tevlin (2003)                     US manufacturing industry data; adjusted for          Value added per worker             0.29
                                                 labor quality; instrument for value-added =           (first differences)
                                                 demand shocks in downstream sectors
                                                                                                       Profit per worker                  0.14
                                                                                                       (first differences)
B. Firm-Level Profit Measures, Average Firm-level Wages

4. Abowd and Lemieux (1993)                      Canadian union contracts merged to corporate          Quasi-rent/worker                  0.22
                                                 accounts; instruments for revenues = industry         (wage change model)
                                                 selling prices, import and export prices

5. Van Reenen (1996)                             Large British manufacturing firms merged with         Quasi-rent/worker                  0.29
                                                 corporate accounts; instruments for rents =           (wage change model)
                                                 innovations, imports, R&D, industry concentration

6. Hildreth and Oswald (1997)                    British firms (EXSTAT); firm-specific profits (from   Profit per worker                  0.02
                                                 financial statements); instruments = lagged values
                                                 of wages and profits

7. Hildreth (1998)                               British manufacturing establishments;                 Quasi-rent/worker                  0.03
                                                 establishment-specific value added;
                                                 instruments for rents = innovation measure

8. Barth et al (2016)                            US establishments in LBD. Establishment-              Sales/worker                     OLS = 0.32
                                                 specific revenues; instrument for revenues/worker     (within-establishment changes)    IV = 0.16
                                                 = revenues/worker in same industry, other regions
Note: Table continues.
Appendix Table 1 (continued): Summary of Estimated Rent-Sharing Elasticities

                       Study                         Design Features                                 Measure of Profitability        Elasticity

C. Individual Wages and Firm-Level Profit Measures
9. Margolis and Salvanes (2001)                  Worker and firm data for France and Norway;        Profit per worker              France: 0.03
                                                 full time male workers in manufacturing;                                          Norway: 0.01
                                                 profit from financial filings; instruments
                                                 = sales/worker and subsidies/worker

10. Arai (2003)                                  Swedish worker panel matched to employer           Change in 5-year average        0.01-0.02
                                                 (10-year stayers design); profits from financial   profit per worker
                                                 statements

11. Guiso, Pistaferri, and Schivardi (2005)      Italian worker panel matched to larger firms;      Permanent shock to log             0.07
                                                 value added from financial statements; model-      value added per worker
                                                 based decomposition of value added shocks          Transitory shock to log            0.00
                                                                                                    value added per worker

12. Fakhfakh and FitzRoy (2004)                  Larger French manufacturing establishments;        Mean log value-added/worker        0.12
                                                 value added from establishment survey              over past 3 years

13. Du Caju, Rycx, and Tojerow (2011)            Belgian establishment panel; value added and       Value added minus labor         0.03-0.04
                                                 labor cost from financial statements               costs per worker


14. Martins (2009)                               Larger Portuguese manufacturing firms;             Revenue-capital costs/worker    0.03-0.05
                                                 revenue and capital costs from financial           (differenced)
                                                 statements; instruments=export share of
                                                 sales × exchange rate changes

15. Guertzgen (2009)                             German establishment/worker panel (LIAB)           Quasi-rent/worker               0.03-0.04
                                                 value added from establishment survey.             (no adjustment for capital)
                                                 instruments for change in quasi-rent = lags of
                                                 value added and wages                              Change in quasi-rent/worker     0.01-0.06
                                                                                                    (stayers design)
Note: Table continues.
Appendix Table 1 (continued): Summary of Estimated Rent-Sharing Elasticities


                     Study                             Design Features                                  Measure of Profitability              Elasticity

C. Individual Wages and Firm-Level Profit Measures (continued)

16. Cardoso and Portela (2009)                     Portuguese worker panel; sales from firm reports;   Permanent shock to log sales             0.09
                                                   model-based decomposition of sales shocks
                                                                                                       Transitory shock to log sales            0.00


17. Arai and Hayman (2009)                         Swedish worker/firm panel; profits from             Change in profit per worker              0.07
                                                   financial statements; stayers design;
                                                   instrument=change in foreign sales

18. Card, Devicienti, and Maida (2014)             Italian worker panel matched to firms;              Value added per worker                 0.06-0.08
                                                   value added and capital from financial              (within job match)
                                                   statements; instrument for value added =
                                                   sales/worker at firms in other regions

19. Carlsson, Messina, and Skans (2014)            Swedish worker panel matched to firms; mining       Firm-specfic output/worker               0.05
                                                   and manufacturing only; firm-specific output        (within-job-match)
                                                   and selling price indexes; instruments for
                                                   productivity = indexes of firm-specific and         Sectoral average output/worker           0.15
                                                   sectoral TFPQ                                       (within-job-match)

20. Card, Cardoso, and Kline (2016)                Portuguese worker panel matched to firms;           Mean value added per worker           Males: 0.16
                                                   value added and capital from financial                                                   Females: 0.14
                                                   statements; wage measure=estimated firm
                                                   effect from AKM model                               Mean value added per worker           Males: 0.05
                                                                                                       (changes for stayers)                Females: 0.04

21. Bagger, Christensen, and Mortensen (2014)      Danish worker panel matched to firms;               Output per worker                     Manuf: 0.09
                                                   output from firm survey; non-parametric                                                   Trade: 0.13
                                                   regressions within sector of wages on labor                                           Transp/Comm: 0.05
                                                   productivity                                                                         Finance/Real Est: 0.07

22. Juhn, McCue, Monti, and Pierce (2016)          US worker panel (LEHD) matched to firms;            Changes in revenues per worker        Manuf: 0.02
                                                   output from firm surveys; stayers design            for stayers over 3 years              Retail: 0.04
                                                                                                                                         Prof. Services: 0.04
                                                                                                                                            Finance: 0.01
Notes: estimates extracted by authors from studies listed.
