                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




   IS IT THE "HOW" OR THE "WHEN" THAT MATTERS IN FISCAL ADJUSTMENTS?

                                         Alberto Alesina
                                       Gualtiero Azzalini
                                          Carlo Favero
                                       Francesco Giavazzi
                                        Armando Miano

                                      Working Paper 22863
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w22863


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                         November 2016, Revised November 2017




First presented at the 2016 IMF-ARC conference. We thank two anonymous referees, the editor
Linda Tesar, and especially our discussant, Chris Erceg, for his very useful comments. We thank
Giorgio Saponaro for his excellent research assistantship. The views expressed herein are those of
the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2016 by Alberto Alesina, Gualtiero Azzalini, Carlo Favero, Francesco Giavazzi, and Armando
Miano. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted
without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Is it the "How" or the "When" that Matters in Fiscal Adjustments?
Alberto Alesina, Gualtiero Azzalini, Carlo Favero, Francesco Giavazzi, and Armando Miano
NBER Working Paper No. 22863
November 2016, Revised November 2017
JEL No. H60,H62

                                          ABSTRACT

Using data from 16 OECD countries from 1981 to 2014 we study the effects on output of fiscal
adjustments as a function of the composition of the adjustment – that is, whether the adjustment is
mostly based on spending cuts or on tax hikes – and of the state of the business cycle when the
adjustment is implemented. We find that both the “how” and the “when” matter, but the
heterogeneity related to the composition is more robust across different specifications.
Adjustments based upon permanent spending cuts are consistently much less costly than those
based upon permanent tax increases. Our results are generally not explained by different reactions
of monetary policy. However, when the domestic central bank can set interest rates – that is
outside of a currency union – it appears to be able to dampen the recessionary effects of
consolidations implemented during a recession.

Alberto Alesina                                  Francesco Giavazzi
Department of Economics                          Universita' Bocconi and IGIER
Harvard University                               Via Guglielmo Röntgen, 1
Littauer Center 210                              Milan 20136
Cambridge, MA 02138                              ITALY
and IGIER                                        and NBER
and also NBER                                    francesco.giavazzi@unibocconi.it
aalesina@harvard.edu
                                                 Armando Miano
Gualtiero Azzalini                               Department of Economics
New York University                              Harvard University
Stern School of Business                         Littauer Center
44 West 4th Street                               Cambridge, MA 02138
New York, NY 10012                               amiano@g.harvard.edu
gazzalin@stern.nyu.edu

Carlo Favero
Department of Finance
Bocconi University and IGIER
Via Röntgen, 1
20136 Milano, ITALY
carlo.favero@unibocconi.it


A data and program files is available at
http://www.igier.unibocconi.it/folder.php?vedi=6231&tbn=albero&id_folder=4878
1    Introduction
The empirical literature on the macroeconomic effects of fiscal policy finds that multi-
pliers depend on the state of the economy and on the type of the adjustment: whether
a shift in fiscal policy happens during an economic expansion or during a contraction
makes a difference, but there is also evidence that adjustments based on increasing taxes
have different effects compared to those based on cutting expenditures. So far the lit-
erature has studied the two aspects separately, thus running the risk of attributing to
one source of non-linearity effects that are in fact generated by the other. In this paper
we study the macroeconomic effects of fiscal consolidations allowing both sources of
non-linearity — we refer to them as the “when” and the “how” — to operate simulta-
neously, thus avoiding the risk mentioned above. We analyze the effects of multi-year
fiscal consolidation plans rather than isolated fiscal “shocks”. The reason is that in the
real world governments typically adopt, and legislatures vote, multi-year budget laws
which have little resemblance to the isolated fiscal “shocks” often studied in the liter-
ature. Our analysis focuses only on fiscal contractions: we have nothing to say about
expansionary fiscal policies.
    We find that regardless of whether they start in a recession or not, adjustments based
upon permanent spending cuts are much less costly in terms of short run output losses
than those based upon permanent tax increases. The cumulative drop in output follow-
ing a tax-based adjustment plan of one percent of GDP is three times more severe than
the one associated with a spending-based adjustment plan of the same size. While we
reject the null hypothesis that the effects of consolidations started during an economic
downturn or an expansion are identical, we find that the difference between the two is
small and less relevant than that between tax-based and spending-based consolidations.
In our baseline model we allow the state of the economy to change endogenously af-
ter the start of a fiscal stabilization program. If, as sometimes done in the literature,
we assume that the state of the economy does not change following the start of a fis-
cal adjustment — an assumption that misses the fact that the economy can start off in
one state and then, during the stabilization program, transition to another — the initial
state of the business cycle makes more of a difference: fiscal adjustments are costly
when started during a downturn and they are not during an expansion. The evidence
on the heterogeneity between expenditure-based and tax-based adjustments however is
confirmed. We discuss below the pros and cons of these two different approaches.
    Our results appear not to be systematically explained by a different reaction of mon-
etary policy and, therefore, they should survive at the zero lower bound (ZLB) when
monetary policy is constrained, or within monetary unions where monetary policy can-


                                            2
not respond to the fiscal policy of a specific member country. We find, however, that
in one case the response of monetary policy appears to make a difference. When the
domestic central bank can set interest rates – that is outside of a currency union – it
appears to be able to dampen the recessionary effects of consolidations implemented
during a recession.
     It is important to remark that we are analyzing permanent shifts in fiscal variables:
transitory and permanent fiscal measures may have different effects. For example, in
standard New Keynesian models permanent tax hikes are much more contractionary
than temporary ones, and permanent spending cuts are much less contractionary than
transient ones (see Erceg and Lindé 2013, Alesina et al. 2017). This may explain why
our estimates of fiscal multipliers, which are determined by persistent fiscal plans and
not by temporary shocks, have different magnitudes than those usually found in the
literature and that typically refer to temporary shocks.
     The extent to which fiscal multipliers depend on the state of the economy is a ques-
tion that has received much attention in recent years, echoing earlier Keynesian argu-
ments that government spending is likely to have larger expansionary effects in reces-
sions than in expansions. The intuition is that, when the economy has slack, an increase
in government spending is less likely to crowd out private consumption or investment
and therefore has a stronger expansionary effect on output. In addition to slack in the
labour market, larger frictions in financial markets and an increase in the number of
liquidity constrained agents might also contribute to generate higher multipliers during
recessions. In two important papers, Auerbach and Gorodnichenko (2012a, 2012b, AG
in what follows), starting from the model of taxes, government spending and output es-
timated and simulated by Blanchard and Perotti 2002, allow the effects of shifts in fiscal
policy to differ depending on whether they are introduced during an expansion or a re-
cession. Compared with Blanchard and Perotti 2002 AG adopt a more refined measure
of unanticipated shifts in fiscal variables, in particular they purge fiscal variables of the
“innovations” that were predicted by professional forecasters.1 They find large differ-
ences in the size of spending multipliers between recessions and expansions with fiscal
policy being considerably more effective in recessions. The expenditure multipliers in
recession and in expansion are very different and very far from the “average” multiplier
delivered by a model where multipliers are constrained to be identical, independently of
the state of the economy. This heterogeneity extends also to tax multipliers: an increase
in taxation has a small non-Keynesian expansionary effect in recession, while the effect
   1 They do so using information from quarterly forecasts of fiscal and aggregate variables from the

University of Michigan’s RSQE macroeconometric model, the Survey of Professional Forecasters and
the forecasts prepared by the staff of the Federal Reserve Board for the meetings of the Federal Open
Market Committee.


                                                 3
is small but contractionary in expansion. The findings in AG — originally obtained
using U.S. data and found to be robust when an international panel is used — refer both
to fiscal expansions and fiscal contractions: they are thus different from those presented
in this paper that only studies fiscal consolidations.
     The results obtained by Auerbach and Gorodnichenko 2012a hinge on the assump-
tion that the state of the economy remains constant for at least the 20 quarters over
which multipliers are computed. Ramey and Zubairy 2017 have observed that this may
be a reasonable approximation for expansions, which typically last for several years, but
it is not a good approximation for recessions, which, in their sample, have a mean du-
ration of only 3.3 quarters. To address this problem Ramey and Zubairy 2017 compute
multipliers using the linear projection method proposed by Jordà 2005 which imposes
no restrictions, including those implied by the non linear model adopted by AG, on the
evolution of the cyle in response to fiscal shocks.2 Using quarterly U.S. data, covering
multiple large wars and deep recessions, they find no evidence that government spend-
ing multipliers are particularly high during high unemployment periods. Most estimates
of the spending multiplier are between 0.3 and 0.8. These authors apply two different
identification schemes: the one adopted by Blanchard and Perotti 2002 and an updated
version of Ramey’s 2011 “military news” variable. They find a statistically significant
difference in multipliers across states only when spending shocks are identified by the
Blanchard and Perotti 2002 approach. The difference is due not to high multipliers
in the high unemployment state, but to very low multipliers in the low unemployment
state.3 Caggiano et al. 2015 also allow a feedback from shifts in fiscal policy to the
probability of the economy being in an expansion or a recession in a STVAR finding
that fiscal multipliers are higher in recessions than in booms. Their results, however,
depend upon “extreme” events, that is deep recessions and strong expansionary periods.
     Another important dimension along which fiscal multipliers are found to differ is
related to the composition of a fiscal adjustment, whether it is mostly based on tax in-
creases or on spending cuts. Alesina, Favero and Giavazzi 2015a find that the output
effect of tax-based adjustments is much more recessionary than that of expenditure-
based adjustments. Their results, however, do not allow multipliers to differ depending
on the state of the economy. As mentioned above, the contribution of this paper is to
allow both sources of non-linearity — the “when” and the “how” — to operate simul-
   2 They  also consider a different measure of slack, related to unemployment rather than to output
growth as in AG.
    3 Two related papers which use Canadian data (Owyang et al. 2013 and Ramey and Zubairy 2015) had

found higher multipliers in high unemployment states. Revisiting those findings the authors (in work in
progress) find that the difference between the US and Canadian results were probably due to the special
circumstances of Canada’s entry into WWII, when output responded to the news long before government
spending actually rose.


                                                  4
taneously.
     Ramey and Zubairy 2017 consider a further potentially important source of non-
linearity: whether interest rates are near the zero-lower bound.4 These results are more
mixed than those comparing multipliers in expansions and contractions away from the
ZLB. Multipliers at the ZLB are still generally low, but in a few specifications they are
as high as 1.5. Miyamoto et al. 2016 using data for Japan also investigate the effect on
fiscal multipliers of the interaction between the slack in the economy and how close it
is to the ZLB. However, the size of their sample does not allow them to address the two
channels (slack and proximity to the ZLB) simultaneously: when they limit the analysis
to periods close to the ZLB they find only weak evidence of asymmetry.
     This paper is organized as follows. We start in Section 2 studying non-linearities
related to the “how”. In Section 3 we study non-linearities related to the “when”. In
Section 4 we first provide a descriptive analysis of the data to show the interaction
between the “how” and the “when”; we then illustrate our empirical approach. Section
5 presents our main results and our robustness analyses. Section 6 concludes.


2      Fiscal multipliers and the composition of fiscal adjust-
       ments
A first source of non-linearity in the output effect of a fiscal consolidation is related
to its composition. In this section we first explain why we study fiscal plans rather
    4 Ina simple real business cycle model, such as Baxter and King 1993, the output multiplier of a
positive shift in government spending is below one. In New Keynesian models the magnitude of the
output multiplier depends on the nature of the shock that takes the economy to the ZLB. Woodford 2011,
Eggertsson 2011 and Christiano, Eichenbaum and Rebelo 2011 consider the case in which the economy
reaches the ZLB as a result of a “fundamental” shock. In this case the multiplier can be substantially
larger than one as temporary government spending is inflationary and stimulates private consumption
and investment by decreasing the real interest rate. Mertens and Ravn 2014 consider instead a situation
in which the ZLB is reached following a “non-fundamental” confidence shock: they find that the output
multiplier during the ZLB period is quite small. The reason is that, in this situation, government spending
shocks are deflationary, raising the real interest rate and reducing private consumption and investment.
Exploiting regional variation in military buildups Nakamura and Steinsson 2014 estimate an “open econ-
omy relative multiplier” of approximately 1.5. They claim their results are in line with New Keynesian
models where government spending has a large effect on output, particularly when the economy is in a
liquidity trap. Erceg and Lindé 2013 investigate the effects of a spending-based vs labor tax-based fiscal
consolidation in a two-country DSGE model. They find that the effects depend on the degree of monetary
accommodation. Under an independent monetary policy (no currency union) cuts in government spend-
ing are much less costly than tax hikes. Under a currency union the effect is partially reversed. Indeed,
their model predicts that when monetary policy provides too little accommodation – given its focus on
union wide aggregates — spending-based fiscal consolidations are more costly in terms of output losses
in the short run. In the long run, however, spending cuts are still less harmful than tax hikes, because of
real exchange rates and price levels adjustments. The adverse impact of spending based consolidations
(in the short run) is exacerbated when monetary policy is constrained at the ZLB.



                                                    5
than isolated shifts in individual fiscal variables, then we describe how such multi-year
plans are constructed and how we distinguish between tax-based and expenditure-based
adjustments. Finally, we discuss their exogeneity with respect to output growth.


2.1     Our narrative data
Our data contain detailed information on the fiscal consolidations implemented by 16
OECD countries (Australia, Austria, Belgium, Canada, Denmark, Finland, France, Ger-
many, Ireland, Italy, Japan, Portugal, Spain, Sweden, United Kingdom, United States)
between 1981 and 2014. We address the potential endogeneity of shifts in fiscal vari-
ables using the “narrative” approach first introduced by Romer and Romer 2010, later
applied to a number of OECD countries by Devries et al. 2011 and extended by Alesina,
Favero and Giavazzi 2015a. The fiscal consolidation measures in the Devries et al.
dataset are selected reading the records available in official documents to identify the
size, timing and principal motivation for each fiscal action. They are “exogenous” be-
cause their adoption is not correlated with the economic cycle but rather (i) they are
geared towards reducing an inherited budget deficit or are meant to correct its long run
trend, e.g. an increase in pension outlays induced by population aging, or (ii) are moti-
vated by reasons which are independent of the state of the business cycle, thus exclud-
ing adjustments motivated by short-run counter-cyclical concerns. These consolidation
measures are either tax increases or spending cuts and cover the period 1978-2009.
Starting from the Devries et al. dataset we have extended the sample of consolidation
measures identifying those implemented between 2010 and 2014 — a period charac-
terized by frequent consolidation episodes especially in Europe — and we have col-
lected additional information on every fiscal measure, including those selected before
2009. This was necessary, as we shall see, in order to use these measures to recon-
struct fiscal plans. Overall we have analyzed and identified the legislative source of
about 3500 different fiscal measures adopted in the 16 countries in our sample between
1981 and 2014.5 Our database contains the details of each policy measure, e.g. “rise in
VAT rate by 2 percent to be implemented in year t”, “reduction in tax relief”, “reduc-
   5 Note   that our sample of 16 OECD countries differs from the sample of 17 OECD countries con-
sidered by Devries et al. We have dropped the Netherlands, which is the only country for which the
narrative identified fiscal adjustments are significantly correlated with past output growth. This is not
surprising given that the budget rules in the Netherlands include the following provision “...The budget
can respond to changes in the economy and measures need not be taken immediately if there is a wind-
fall or setback...” (https://www.government.nl/topics/budget-day/contents/budget-rules). That is, the rule
prescribes that the government sets fiscal targets at the beginning of its election term and in the following
years deviations from these targets are only allowed for cyclical reasons.




                                                     6
tion of childbirth grants”, “cut in public employees salaries”.6 These fiscal actions are
then measured in terms of their impact (as estimated in the documents that accompany
their introduction) on total revenues and expenditures relative to a baseline of no policy
change, scaled by the level of the GDP the year before they are announced.7
    In our dataset we distinguish between several categories of fiscal measures. For
the analysis in this paper, however, we group measures in just two broad categories:
spending, g, and taxes, τ. We classify as spending all measures related to government
spending and investments. These include, for instance, current expenditure for goods
and services, public sector salaries, managing cost of state provided services (such as
education and healthcare), and government gross fixed capital formation expenditures.
We also include in the spending category government transfers, that is payments made
by the government to private entities, including subsidies, grants and other social ben-
efits such as Social Security payments in the United States. We do not include interest
payments. We classify as taxes all the changes in direct taxes – e.g. income, profits,
capital gains and property taxes – and indirect taxes – e.g. VAT, sales tax, excise du-
ties on goods, and stamp duties. We consider all the measures affecting the amount of
revenues collected by the government, both changes in tax rates and measures designed
to broaden the tax base. We include transfers in g because, theoretically, we expect a
cut in transfers to be less distortionary than an increase in taxes. Indeed, a particular
feature of transfers is that they do not affect the marginal rate of substitution between
consumption and leisure. Our choice is also supported by the results in Alesina et al.
2017 who distinguish between consolidations mostly based on cuts to government con-
sumption and investments (CB), consolidations mostly based on cuts to transfers (TRB)
and consolidations mostly based on tax hikes (TB). They find that TRB consolidations
are much less recessionary than TB ones, and their effects on output are very similar to
those of CB consolidations.


2.2     Fiscal plans
As mentioned in the Introduction we do not study the effects of isolated fiscal “shocks”.
Rather, we study the effects of fiscal “plans”, that is of shifts in fiscal variables to be
implemented over an horizon of several years. This approach was introduced in the
literature by Alesina, Favero and Giavazzi 2015a for two reasons. First, because in
   6 The data used in this paper, as well as the codes we wrote, are available on a dedicated space in the
IGIER webpage: www.igier.unibocconi.it/fiscalplans
   7 As a convention, we use the GDP of the previous period because this was the latest estimate for GDP

known by policymakers at the time these fiscal measures were announced. Moreover, current GDP may
be affected by contemporaneous fiscal shocks. Results (available upon request) are virtually identical
when scaling with current GDP.


                                                    7
the real world governments typically adopt, and legislatures vote, multi-year budget
laws which have little resemblance to the isolated fiscal “shocks” often studied in the
literature. Second, because, to the extent that expectations matter, the multi-year nature
of these laws cannot be ignored.
     Fiscal plans consist of a sequence of actions, some to be implemented at the time
the legislation is adopted, some to be implemented in following periods. Plans are also
a mix of measures, some affecting government expenditures, others affecting revenues.
Typically legislatures start debating the overall size of an adjustment and then discuss
its composition: by how much to cut spending (and which programs) and by how much
to raise taxes (and which ones). The design of plans thus generates inter-temporal and
intra-temporal correlations among fiscal variables. The inter-temporal correlation is
the one between the announced (future) and the unanticipated (current) components
of a plan. The intra-temporal correlation is the one between the changes in revenues
and in spending that determines the composition of a plan, given its size. We assume
that if a new plan is announced in period t the policies implemented in that period
are unexpected. While a plan is debated in parliament, economic agents could form
expectations of what it might look like. In practice, however – beyond the fact that
measuring these expectations is virtually impossible — the composition of a plan is
almost always the result of political deals which often are only resolved shortly before
the plan is announced.
     In order to construct fiscal plans, we re-classify the exogenous fiscal measures se-
lected in our narrative analysis in three categories: measures that were immediately
implemented (“unexpected” measures), measures that were written in the legislation
but whose implementation was deferred to subsequent years (future “announced” mea-
sures) and measures that were implemented in a given year but had previously been
announced, that is were part of legislation adopted in previous years.
     Consider a fiscal plan coming into effect at the beginning of year t : it typically
contains three components: (i) unexpected shifts in fiscal variables (announced and
implemented at time t): we call them eui,t , where i refers to the particular country im-
plementing the fiscal correction; (ii) shifts implemented at time t but which had been
announced in previous years: eai,t− j,t , where j denotes the horizon of a fiscal plan; (iii)
shifts announced at time t, to be implemented in future years eai,t,t+ j . Considering, for
simplicity, the case in which the horizon of the plan is only two years, the current year,
t, and the following one, t + 1 ( j = 1), and with reference to a specific country i, an




                                             8
overall correction fi,t to the primary budget surplus can thus be described as follows

                                 fi,t = eui,t + eai,t−1,t + eai,t,t+1
                                 eui,t = τi,t
                                          u
                                              + gui,t
                             eai,t,t+1 = φ1 eui,t + v1,i,t

    The first equation breaks up the overall correction — a shift in the primary bud-
get surplus — into its three components. The second equation explains that a fiscal
correction consists of changes in taxes and in expenditures net of interest payments,
thus eui,t = τi,t
              u + gu : the same holds for ea
                    i,t
                                                             a
                                                i,t−1,t and ei,t,t+1 . The third equation cap-
tures the correlation between the immediately implemented and the announced parts
of a plan. This is a crucial feature of fiscal plans: overlooking it would mean assum-
ing that announcements are uncorrelated with unexpected policy shifts: as we shall
see this assumption is violated in the data. Interestingly, different plans feature differ-
ent correlations between announced measures and measures immediately implemented:
expenditure-based plans tend to be frontloaded, while in tax-based plans typically take
the form of sequences of tax changes distributed over time. In order to correctly simu-
late the effect of a fiscal plan it is thus necessary to estimate this inter-temporal corre-
lation: simulating an unexpected policy shift overlooking the accompanying announce-
ments would not reflect the data we have used to estimate fiscal multipliers.
    Sometimes it happens that fiscal plans are revised along the way: in that case, we
classify a change in an announced measure as an unexpected shift in fiscal policy and
we record the start of a new plan.
    The above description highlights that fiscal plans generate “fiscal foresight”: eco-
nomic agents learn in advance (through announcements) measures that will be imple-
mented in the future. As observed by Leeper et al. 2008, fiscal foresight makes the
moving average (MA) representation of a VAR non-invertible and thus prevents the
identification of exogenous shifts in fiscal variables from VAR innovations: this is why
narrative identification (which does not require extracting innovations from VAR resid-
uals because innovations are identified reading official documents) becomes crucial.
    To illustrate our approach with a specific example, and to allow a comparison be-
tween fiscal “plans” and the fiscal “shocks” used in the literature, Table 1 shows — with
reference to the fiscal correction implemented in Belgium between 1992 and 1994 —
the exogenous fiscal “shocks” identified by Devries et al. 2011 and then used in Gua-
jardo et al. 2014 and the plans we reconstructed. We also report the tax and spending
decomposition of Devries et al. and our fiscal shifts. Devries et al. overlook fiscal
announcements and construct “fiscal shocks” (which we shall call ef         i,t adding up shifts



                                                9
in fiscal variables that are unanticipated, eui,t , with those that are implemented at time t
but had been announced in previous periods, eai,t−1,t . That is — keeping the simplifying
                                                                    u      a
assumption of a two-year horizon — they assume ef            i,t = ei,t + ei,t−1,t . This variable and
its components, gf    i,t and τfi,t , are shown in the first three columns of Table 1. Compo-
nents entering our fiscal plans appear on the right-hand-side columns of Table 1. Notice
that, differently from the Devries et al. “shocks”, our plans also include announcements
of future shifts in fiscal variables, eai,t,t+1 . The first set of columns reports the aggre-
gate fiscal shifts and the remaining columns report their composition. Considering the
                                        u
row for 1992, ef  i,t = 1.79 and ei,t = 1.85. The two corrections are not identical because
our shifts in fiscal variables are measured in billions of the domestic currency and then
scaled using the GDP of the previous period: we used the latest available GDP series
which sometimes may have been revised since the time Devries et al. accessed the data.
The same holds for the following years and for the two sub-components: for instance,
                                               u
remaining on row one, τf     i,t = 0.99 and τi,t = 1.03.
     In the last column of Table 1 we classify the plan considered in each row as tax-
based (TB) or expenditure-based (EB): this classification is done summing all fiscal
measures, unanticipated, implemented but previously announced and future announce-
ments. A plan is labelled TB if the largest component of the fiscal correction (measured
as a fraction of GDP the year before the budget law is introduced) is an increase in taxes;
similarly, EB plans are those where expenditure cuts are the largest component of the
fiscal correction. Formally, for each year t, plans are labelled following this convention
                                                     !                                            !
                                       horiz                                       horiz
                    u      a              a
             if    τi,t + τi,t−1,t +   ∑ τi,t,t+ j       >   gui,t + gai,t−1,t +   ∑ gai,t,t+ j
                                       j=1                                         j=1

          then T Bi,t = 1 and EBi,t = 0, otherwise T Bi,t = 0 and EBi,t = 1

Note that the labelling of a plan depends on the full inter-temporal path of the correction
and not only on the measures adopted in a specific year. For example, 1992 is classi-
fied as an EB plan despite the fact that the fiscal correction implemented in 1992 relies
more heavily on taxation. The labelling of a plan can change if during its implemen-
tation changes are introduced with respect to the measures planned when it was first
announced. This, indeed, happened in Belgium in 1993 and then again in 1994.




                                                     10
                            Table 1: The multi-year plan introduced in Belgium in 1992 (% of GDP)

           Devries et. al                                                    Our plans

Year    ef
         i,t     τf
                  i,t    gf
                          i,t        eui,t   eai,t−1,t   eai,t,t+1     u
                                                                      τi,t    a
                                                                             τi,t−1,t    a
                                                                                        τi,t,t+1    gui,t   gai,t−1,t   gai,t,t+1   Label
1992   1.79     0.99    0.80        1.85          0       0.47       1.03        0       0.05      0.82          0       0.42        EB
1993   0.92     0.43    0.49        0.52      0.47        0.83       0.40     0.05       0.55      0.12      0.42        0.28        TB
1994   1.15     0.55    0.60        0.38      0.83            0        0      0.55          0      0.38      0.28            0       EB




              Descriptive statistics on the main characteristics of the fiscal plans we analyze are
          in Section 4.


          2.3      Estimating and simulating the effect of fiscal plans
          After having identified, via the narrative approach, consolidation measures that are ex-
          ogenous with respect to output growth, and having used them to build consolidation
          plans, we derive impulse responses that describe the output effect of a given plan. To
          do this we need a model for simulating plans. We specify, for our panel of countries,
          a VAR in three variables: the growth rate of per capita output, the change in revenues
          as a fraction of GDP and change in primary government spending, also as a fraction of
          GDP. We also include in the VAR the three narratively identified components of a fiscal
          plan – which, if we limit the horizon to two years, are eui,t , eai,t−1,t , eai,t,t+1 – and we allow
          TB and EB plans to have a different effects. Beyond the equations in the VAR, the
          model also includes a set of auxiliary equations that track the correlation between the
          announced and the unanticipated components of plans, and between shifts in taxes and
          in spending. These equations are crucial to be able to simulate plans because, as already
          mentioned, in the data unexpected shifts in fiscal variables do not happen in isolation,
          but are typically accompanied by announcements of future shifts. These auxiliary re-
          gressions allow to simulate the average plan estimated in the data in the sense that when
          the effects of an unanticipated shift in some fiscal variable is simulated, announcements
          move consistently with what has been observed in the sample. Similarly, when we sim-
          ulate an EB or a TB plan, we do not move taxes (spending) keeping spending (taxes)
          constant because this almost never happens in the plans we use to estimate fiscal mul-
          tipliers. Instead we move taxes and spending according to what we have observed, on
          average, in the EB or TB consolidations present in our sample. We compute impulse
          responses to fiscal plans whose size is one percent of GDP: we do this calibrating the
          shifts in individual fiscal variables so that the size of the adjustment plan is one percent
          of GDP. Finally, impulse responses are constructed by simulating the model in presence


                                                                     11
and in absence of a plan and by taking the difference between the two sets of simulated
output paths.
     This empirical strategy requires a few comments. First, our VAR is parsimonious in
terms of included variables, which are only three. This does not affect the identification
of the exogenous fiscal measures because these are not derived from VAR innovations
but are directly observed. Our estimates of the output response to a fiscal plan, however,
might also depend on the effect that plans have on variables not included in the VAR:
this omission will not affect the measurement of the final effect but prevents the iden-
tification of different transmission channels. This is the reason why we shall devote a
section of the paper to investigate the role of monetary policy in determining the fiscal
multiplier that we obtain from our empirical analysis.
     Second, specifying the VAR in first differences, our simulations measure the re-
sponse to permanent fiscal adjustments. In principle a plan could be temporary even
if the VAR is specified in differences. This would happen if announcements exactly
cancelled unanticipated shifts in fiscal variables. In our data this does not happen be-
cause announcements are mildly positively correlated with unanticipated shifts in fiscal
variables, meaning not only that on average fiscal plans are permanent, but also that
fiscal consolidation measures get reinforced over time. Transient changes in taxes or
spending would instead have quite different effects.8
     Third, our model deals with fiscal foresight by simulating plans that explicitly in-
clude announcements. Our strategy is thus different from the one adopted to deal with
fiscal foresight when shocks are identified within the VAR, which consists in augment-
ing the VAR with real-time predictions of fiscal variables to clean the VAR innovations
from the effect of the “news shocks”. Last, but indeed not least, exogeneity of our
narratively identified adjustment plans is critical. We address it in the next section.


2.4     The exogeneity of fiscal plans
Discussing the Devries at al data, De Cos and Moral-Benito 2016 and Jordà and Taylor
2016 have observed that some of their narratively identified fiscal adjustments are pre-
dictable, either by their own past or by past economic variables. This, they argue, is a
threat to their exogeneity.
    Consider first predictability by past fiscal adjustments: the approach followed here
overcomes this problem analyzing plans rather than collapsing them into shocks. To un-
   8 Standard  New Keynesian models imply that the effects of permanent changes are quite different
from those of temporary changes; permanent tax hikes have stronger contractionary effects than transient
ones, and permanent spending cuts are much less contractionary than transient ones (see Erceg and Lindé
2013, Alesina et al. 2017).



                                                  12
derstand why, assume one overlooked announcements and plans and instead considered
        u      a
 i,t = ei,t + ei,t−1,t , the fiscal “shocks” analyzed by Devries et al. 2011 shown in Table
ef
1 and found to be predictable by their own past. As we have illustrated in the previous
section, within a plan, policy announcements are correlated with unanticipated policy
shifts, that is eai,t−1,t = φ1 eui,t−1 + v1,i,t−1 . Under the null that the eui,t are not correlated
over time

                                      eui,t + eai,t−1,t , eui,t−1 + eai,t−2,t−1
                                                                              
            i,t , e]
       Cov ef      i,t−1       = Cov
                               = Cov eui,t + φ1 eui,t−1 + v1,i,t−1 , eui,t−1 + eai,t−2,t−1
                                                                                          

                               = φ1Var eui,t−1
                                               

                                   
    Finding Cov ef   i,t , e] i,t−1 6= 0 is therefore not surprising. In other words, predictabil-
ity of ef
        i,t from their own past is a feature of multi-year fiscal plans and is properly dealt
with analyzing plans rather than “shocks” such as ef          i,t . One could still be worried about
predictability on the basis of past components of the primary deficit as a byproduct of
the narrative identification procedure that selects adjustments driven by the need to re-
duce the debt. This is not a problem at the estimation stage because consistent estimates
of fiscal multipliers only require that innovations in output growth and shifts in fiscal
variables are not correlated, an assumption which is not ruled out by predictability from
past deficits . Simulation instead could be a problem, as it would be impossible to sim-
ulate unpredictable shift in fiscal policy. To address this potential problem we analyze
fiscal plans within a panel VAR that includes three variables: output growth and the
change in revenues e spending in percentage of GDP. The estimated coefficients of the
narrative adjustments in this VAR measure the effect on output growth of the compo-
nent of such adjustments that is orthogonal to lagged included variables (see Appendix
1). The estimated multipliers are thus not affected by the observed predictability.
    Predictability of ef    i,t by past economic variables raises a different issue. De Cos and
Moral-Benito 2016 show that if the ef          i,t are described by a dummy variable that takes
the value of 1 when ef     i,t 6= 0, they are predictable based on information available at time
(t − 1). This observation, however, does not take into account the fact that there are
two sources of identification of narrative adjustments: the timing of a fiscal correction
and its size. Transforming fiscal adjustments into a 0/1 dummy completely neglects
the importance of size as a source of identification. To illustrate the practical relevance
of this point we have run two simple regressions. Let Ita be an indicator variable that
takes the value of 1 when an adjustment is implemented and 0 otherwise, and run on
this indicator both unanticipated adjustments and announcements, that is run these two



                                                  13
                                          Table 2: Time vs Size

                                   Coefficient           R2     Observations

                            β1     1.0245∗∗∗         0.4236          534
                                     (0.0437)


                            β2      0.6945∗∗∗        0.2719          534
                                     (0.0413)

Note. The table reports the coefficients estimated from the two regressions in (1). Standard errors in
parentheses. *** indicates statistical significance at the 1 percent level.


regressions

                                                 etu = β1 Ita + εt                                      (1)
                                            a            a
                                         ∑ et,t+ j = β2 It + ηt
                                          j


     If the only source of variation were the timing of the adjustment these regressions
would produce an R2 of 1. Table 2 reports the results: both R2 are low, supporting
the conjecture that the main source of identification is the size of the adjustment, not its
timing. Summing up: evidence that the timing of narrative adjustments can be predicted
does not imply that the fiscal correction itself is predictable because, as we have seen,
its size cannot be predicted. It is useful to remember that fiscal policy is different from
a medical treatment in which a group of patients are given the same dose of a medicine:
if it was not, the above regression would produce an R2 of 1.9


2.5     The credibility of fiscal plans
Our results are derived under the assumption that plans are fully credible. The plans in
our sample are often amended on the fly: when this happens we treat the amendment as
a surprise and we count it as a new plan. The assumption that plans are fully credible
is a strong one and one that cannot be easily tested.10 Alesina et al. 2017 investigate
the importance of this assumption distinguishing between two categories of spending:
transfers and government consumption and investment. Transfer-based plans, that often
imply changes in social security legislation, should be more difficult to reverse, and thus
more credible. They find that consolidations mostly based on transfers cuts are slightly
    9 The non predictability of fiscal corrections on the basis of output growth is documented by Alesina

et al. 2017 who verify that GDP does not Granger-cause the narrative fiscal consolidations shocks, ac-
cording to the procedure by Toda and Yamamoto 1995 which shows no Granger causality on a panel
VAR with one lag, and 10 percent Granger causality on a panel with two lags.
   10 Credibility of fiscal consolidations is discussed in Lemoine and Lindé 2016 and Corsetti et al. 2012.




                                                    14
less recessionary that those mostly based on cuts to government consumption, but the
difference is not statistically significant. Future research should investigate this issue
further.


3    Fiscal multipliers and the state of the cycle
We now address the second source of non-linearity: the possible dependence of multi-
pliers on the state of the economic cycle.
    This effects of this non-linearity could be identified by simply separating fiscal con-
solidations initiated during an economic expansion from those that started during an
economic downturn. This procedure, however, would miss the fact that the economy
can start off in one state (for instance in a recession) and then, over time, transition to
another (an expansion). For example, Belgium launched a large consolidation plan in
1982 following a year of recession, but while it was implemented the economy turned
around and resumed positive growth. Ten years later, Belgium’s 1992 multi-year con-
solidation plan began after a period of expansion, but in 1993 the Belgian economy
entered a recession from which it recovered in 1994. For this reason we use an indica-
tor of the state of the economy that can change over time.
    To describe the state of the economy Auerbach and Gorodnichenko 2012a, 2012b
have suggested using a logistic function F(si,t ) — where the index i refers to the coun-
try — which transforms the distribution of output growth, ∆yi,t (more precisely of its
standardized moving average), into a variable ranging between 0 and 1. This specifica-
tion makes the transition between states of the economy smooth, with F(si,t ) being the
weight given to recessions and 1 − F(si,t ) the weight given to expansions. Formally, we
define F(si,t ) as follows


                                        exp(−γi si,t )
                         F(si,t ) =                      ,   γi > 0
                                      1 + exp(−γi si,t )
                                      µi,t − E(µi,t )
                             si,t   =
                                          σ (µi,t )
                                      ∆yi,t−1 + ∆yi,t−2
                            µi,t    =
                                               2

    where µi,t is the moving average — and si,t its standardized version — of output
growth during the previous two years and γi are the country-specific parameters of the
logistic function. For comparison with AG we define an economy to be in recession if
F(si,t ) > 0.8. The parameters γi are then calibrated to match actual recession probabili-
ties in the countries in our sample, defined as the percentage of years in which growth is

                                              15
negative over the sample, which consists of yearly data from 1979 to 2014. This calibra-
tion method allows us to use the same criterion for all countries in the sample, as most
of them do not have Dating Committees.11 In other words, we calibrate γi so that coun-
try i spends xi percent of time in a recessionary regime — that is, P[F(si,t ) > 0.8] = xi ,
where xi is the ratio of the number of years of negative GDP growth for country i to the
total number of years in the sample.
     For example, since for the US this number is 17 percent, in order to have P[F(sUS,t ) >
0.8] = 0.17, we need to set γUS = 1.56. This frequency of recession years for the US is
also consistent with the number obtained using the NBER Business Cycle Dating Com-
mittee recession indicator over the sample 1979-2014, which is 19 percent.12 In the
case of Italy, to give another example, γi = 2.24 so that the country spends 22% of its
time in recession: thus P[F(sIT,t ) > 0.8] = 0.22. The γi0 s obtained through this calibra-
tion procedure are reported in Table 3. In order to see how closely this method is able to
match the data, Figure 1 compares the dynamics of F(s) — the solid line — with actual
recessions in the countries of our sample.13 It is important to note that our state of the
economy indicator, F(si,t ), is a function of lagged output growth. The main advantage
of this choice is that assuming a lagged feedback between GDP growth and F(si,t ) per-
mits us to treat this indicator as an endogenous variable when the model is simulated.
This allows the state of the economy to change following a shift in fiscal policy — in
other words it allows us to compute the response of F(si,t ) to a fiscal adjustment. Once
this is done, the impulse response of all variables in the VAR will reflect both the differ-
ence across states (expansion and recession) and the evolving expectation of recession.
If instead si,t was a function of current GDP growth (as in AG 2012b), F(si,t ) and ∆yi,t
would be simultaneous and this would prevent us from allowing the state of the econ-
omy to respond to fiscal shocks. The regime would then remain constant throughout the
fiscal adjustment program thus creating an asymmetry between the stage of estimation
of the model (in which the regime is endogenous and time varying) and the stage of
simulation in which the regime would be assumed to remain unchanged. Moreover, as
pointed out by Ramey and Zubairy 2017, the assumption that the state of the economy
stays constant for the horizon at which the model is simulated (in our case 5 years) can-
not be a valid approximation for recession states, which have a mean duration of less
  11 To obtain values of F(s) for the entire 1981-2014 sample we use data for output growth in the two
years prior to the starting date of the estimation.
   12 We obtain this share by considering as years of recession those in which the number of months

recorded as recessionary by the NBER is higher than 3.
   13 With F(s ) we refer to the economic conditions prevailing at the beginning of the period in which the
              i,t
consolidation is implemented, thus reflecting economic growth in the two previous periods. Consistently
with the way we constructed our indicator, in Figure 1 we plot F(si,t+1 ) as a measure of the state of the
cycle in period t for comparability with actual recessions.



                                                   16
                            Table 3: Calibrated γi ’s and Years in Recession

                                            γ     Years in Recession

                                 AUS      1.14            14%
                                 AUT      1.53            14%
                                 BEL      1.13            14%
                                 CAN      1.09            17%
                                 DEU      1.31            17%
                                 DNK      1.72            19%
                                 ESP      1.70            25%
                                 FIN      4.92            22%
                                 FRA      1.59            14%
                                 GBR      1.43            19%
                                 IRL      1.68            14%
                                 ITA      2.24            22%
                                 JPN      1.65            17%
                                 PRT      1.60            22%
                                 SWE      1.92            19%
                                 USA      1.56            17%

Note. The γi ’s are calibrated using the procedure described in the paragraph. The second column of the
table reports the percentage of recession years (defined as years of negative growth) in every country
computed over the period 1979-2014.


than one year.
    However, the use of a lagging indicator of the business cycle also implies a cost.
Suppose that a fiscal correction at time t, implemented in recession, was able to change
the state of the economy on impact. In this case the correction would be wrongly classi-
fied, based on the lagged indicator, as hitting the economy in a recession. This scenario
however is unlikely in the case of our identified fiscal corrections because our narrative
identification scheme excludes fiscal corrections driven by the cycle. Indeed, for a fis-
cal correction implemented in a recession to instantaneously move the economy into an
expansion very strong non-Keynesian contemporaneous effects would be needed. Such
effects are unlikely when the fiscal correction is selected to be exogenous with respect
to output growth, i.e. it is not driven by the cycle. Finally, even if our procedure induced
mislabelling of the regime, this would be only temporary.
    Weighing these pros and cons we decided, in our main results, to opt for the backward-
looking moving average which allows F(si,t ) to be endogenous. In the robustness sec-
tion we shall report the results obtained by making F(si,t ) dependent on contemporane-
ous output growth, while holding the regime constant over the simulation horizon.




                                                  17
4     Allowing for the “When” and the “How” to be studied
      simultaneously

4.1     A first look at the data
The fiscal adjustment plans for the 16 countries in our sample are constructed as de-
scribed in Section 2 . Tables 4 through 8 illustrate the main features of our plans. Table
4 lists the number of plans that we have identified for each country over the sample of
annual data spanning the years 1981-2014. A new plan is recorded whenever either a
new adjustment is announced or previously announced measures are modified.

                               Table 4: Plans Classification, 1981-2014

                                    Country     TB     EB

                                      AUS        3       4
                                      AUT        1       3
                                      BEL        4      11
                                      CAN        3      16
                                      DEU        3       6
                                      DNK        3       5
                                      ESP        8       7
                                      FIN        2       7
                                      FRA        3       7
                                      GBR        4       6
                                      IRL        6       8
                                      ITA        6      12
                                      JPN        3       5
                                      PRT        4      7
                                      SWE        0       5
                                      USA        4      4

                                      Tot.       57    113    170

Note. Plans are classified according to the category that is most affected. The table reports new plans
only.


   In total we have 170 plans and 216 episodes, that is years during which a fiscal
consolidation is under way (a plan typically lasts more than one year). Of these about
two-thirds are EB and one-third are TB. Table 5 documents the composition of fiscal
plans showing the share of their main component, which determines the nature of the
plan. As shown in the first column of Table 5, in half of TB plans taxes account for
75 percent or more of the total adjustment and the same holds for EB plans. The cases
in which plans are labelled as EB or TB in the presence of a marginally dominant


                                                  18
component (e.g. either the spending share of EB plans or the tax share of TB ones are
less than 55 percent) are rare, as shown in the last column of Table 5.

                            Table 5: The Composition of Fiscal Adjustments

                                              ≥ 0.75    < 0.75     < 0.65      < 0.55

                        TB - 57 plans          30           27         19          9
                        EB - 113 plans         55           58         33          7

                              Tot. Plans: 170                 Tot. Episodes: 216

Note. The table reports the number of EB (TB) plans for which the spending (tax) share of the plan is
higher or equal than 75 percent, lower than 75 percent, lower than 65 percent and lower than 55 percent.
The last rows reports the totals differentiating between plans and episodes. The latter are defined as years
during which a fiscal consolidation is under way (a plan typically lasts more than one year).


    Table 6 analyzes the relative frequency of EB and TB plans and their relationship
with the cycle. EB plans are more frequent than TB plans (113 vs 57). The relative
frequency of TB and EB plans when the recession indicator is high (F(si,t ) > 0.8) or
low (F(si,t ) < 0.2) is not significantly different from the unconditional frequency. In
other words, it is not the case that EB adjustments occur more frequently than TB ones
in a particular state of the economy (recession or expansion). For instance, of all the
consolidations implemented in recession, two-thirds were EB and one-third TB. The
same proportions hold in the full sample. This is important because it implies that, for
instance, it is not the case that TB plans appear to be more recessionary because they
are adopted more often during a recession.

                        Table 6: Fiscal Adjustments and the State of the Economy

                             F(si,t ) ≤ 0.2     0.2 < F(si,t ) ≤ 0.5    0.5 < F(si,t ) ≤ 0.8   F(si,t ) > 0.8

      TB - 57 plans                3                    14                      18                  22
      EB - 113 plans              10                    31                      32                  40

  Years in Sample - 515           94                    189                     133                 99

Note. The table reports the number of EB and TB plans that started in a period of strong expansion
(F(si,t ) ≤ 0.2), moderate expansion (0.2 < F(si,t ) ≤ 0.5), moderate recession (0.5 < F(si,t ) ≤ 0.8) and
strong recession (F(si,t ) > 0.8) together with the total number of years in every state. F(si,t ) is defined
as explained in Section 3.


    Note also that, overall, adjustment plans — independently of their nature, EB or
TB — are more likely to be introduced during a recession. There was a consolidation
in 62 out of 99 years in which F(si,t ) > 0.8, while only in 13 over 94 years in which
F(si,t ) < 0.2. This does not necessarily imply causality from the state of the cycle to

                                                       19
the narratively identified fiscal adjustments, for two reasons. First, as already discussed
in Section 2.4, there are two sources of identification of our fiscal corrections: the tim-
ing and the size. The information reported in Table 6 is limited to the timing. In other
words, even if agents knew that the government is more likely to introduce fiscal consol-
idation measures during recessions they could not predict the size of the consolidation
plan, as this varies a lot in our sample. Moreover it is also difficult to predict the nature
(EB or TB) of a plan before its details are specified. Second, the fiscal measures we
consider are exclusively aimed at increasing the primary surplus (being driven by past
deficits). Thus endogeneity of the fiscal adjustments to the state of the cycle would
mean that governments implement restrictive fiscal actions because the economy is in
a recession. This strategy would be counterintuitive, given that the most likely output
effect of fiscal consolidations is contractionary. The evidence reported in Table 6 would
be much more worrisome if our exogenous fiscal measures were to contain some ex-
pansionary policies. Lastly, fiscal adjustments motivated by the objective of cooling
down output growth, introduced when output is growing strongly, are excluded from
our sample: remember that, following the narrative approach, we have selected fiscal
corrections that are not motivated by the state of the cycle.
    Table 7 shows the length and the size of plans. Most plans have a two-year horizon
and, on average, EB plans last longer than TB ones — suggesting that cutting spending
takes longer than raising taxes. Finally, Table 8 shows the magnitude of, respectively,
the total shift in the primary surplus, the shift corresponding to the spending side and
that corresponding to the tax side in the case of EB, TB and all plans. The average size
of a plan is 1.83 percent of GDP and EB plans are larger than TB ones. The last two
columns confirm that plans are well classified with our scheme: the spending part of
EB plans is larger than that of TB ones and vice versa for taxes. Plans implemented
in recession (F(s) > 0.8) are larger than those implemented in expansion (F(s) < 0.2):
the difference is about 0.9 percent of GDP for EB plans and about 0.5 percent for TB
ones.




                                             20
                                 Table 7: Time Horizon of Fiscal Plans

                                               Horizon of Plans (Years)

                                  1        2      3     4     5      6      AVERAGE

                          TB     16       20      6     7     7       1          2.51
                          EB     26       41      7    14     9      16          2.88
                          All    42       61     13    21    16      17          2.76

Note. The table reports the number of EB and TB plans lasting 1 up to 6 years and their average length.
We define a plan to last 1 year if it only contains unexpected measures to be implemented immediately.
A plan that includes measures to be implemented after one year has a 2 year horizon. Similarly for the
others.


                                         Table 8: Size of Fiscal Plans

                                                              Size of plans (%GDP)

                                                            T OTAL    S PENDING         TAXES

                                                   TB       1.60          0.49          1.10
                         All Sample                EB       1.94          1.46          0.48
                                                All Plans   1.83          1.14          0.69

                                                   TB       1.50          0.55          0.95
                        F(si,t ) ≤ 0.2             EB       1.50          1.34          0.16
                                                All Plans   1.50          1.16          0.34

                                                   TB       1.41          0.47          0.94
                    0.2 < F(si,t ) ≤ 0.5           EB       1.37          1.10          0.27
                                                All Plans   1.38          0.90          0.48

                                                   TB       1.32          0.28          1.04
                     0.5 < F(si,t ) ≤ 0.8          EB       2.07          1.40          0.66
                                                All Plans   1.80          1.00          0.80

                                                   TB       1.95          0.67          1.28
                        F(si,t ) > 0.8             EB       2.40          1.82          0.58
                                                All Plans   2.24          1.41          0.83

Note. The table reports the average total size and the average size of spending and tax measures for the
plans in our sample, 1981-2014. Figures are presented for the whole sample and differentiating between
states of the economy. F(si,t ) is defined as explained in Section 3.



4.2     A model with two sources of non-linearity
In this section we introduce a model that allows us to study, simultaneously, two non-
linearities in the effect of fiscal policy: one related to the state of the cycle, the other to

                                                      21
the composition of the adjustment.

Estimation The model we use is a Smooth Transition Panel VAR with two states,
recession and expansion, and a non-linearity associated with the composition of a fiscal
plan. That is we allow multipliers to differ depending on whether the fiscal consolida-
tion plan is tax-based or expenditure-based. The variables included in this panel VAR
are the growth rate of per capita output (∆yi,t ), the change of tax revenues as a fraction
of GDP (∆τi,t ) and that of primary government spending, also as a fraction of GDP
(∆gi,t ). Define

                                                                                                                                      
                      ∆yi,t                       "                #              "                   #                       eui,t
                                                         gui,t                             u
                                                                                          τi,t
        zi,t =  ∆gi,t                 gi,t =                           τi,t =                               ei,t =  eai,t−1,t 
                                                                                                                              
                                                       gai,t−1,t                         a
                                                                                        τi,t−1,t
                      ∆τi,t                                                                                                 eai,t,t+ j
                                 0
            βh1           βh5                                   0                             0
                                                      ASk,1                            a1
           βh2           βh6     
     βh =                                ASk =  ASk,2                    a =  a2                        similarly f or b, c, d
                                                                                 
           β             βh7     
           h3
                                                        ASk,3                            a3
                                  
            βh4           βh8

   for h = 1, 2, k = 1, 2, 3 and S = E, R.
Our model can thus be written as
              "                    #0 "           #                "                     #0 "                           #"               #
                  1 − F(si,t )              AE1                        1 − F(si,t )                a0 ei,t    b0 ei,t          T Bi,t
    ∆yi,t =                                           zi,t−1 +                                                                               (2)
                      F(si,t )              AR1                          F(si,t )                  c0 ei,t    d0 ei,t          EBi,t
              |                    {z                      } |                                        {z                                 }
                                 Dynamics                                                        Impact at t

        + λ1,i + χ1,t + u1,i,t

              "                    #0 "           #                "                     #0        "          #
                  1 − F(si,t )              AE2                        1 − F(si,t )                    gi,t
    ∆gi,t =                                           zi,t−1 +                                β1                  + λ2,i + χ2,t + u2,i,t
                      F(si,t )              AR2                          F(si,t )                      τi,t

              "                    #0 "           #                "                     #0        "          #
                  1 − F(si,t )              AE3                        1 − F(si,t )                    gi,t
    ∆τi,t =                                           zi,t−1 +                                β2                  + λ3,i + χ3,t + u3,i,t
                      F(si,t )              AR3                          F(si,t )                      τi,t

    In this specification non-linearities affect output growth both on impact and through
the dynamic response of the economy to a consolidation plan. First, we modify the
autoregressive part of the VAR to allow our variables to follow different dynamics in
expansion and in recession, as captured by the coefficient vectors AE and AR . Then,
to estimate the impact of fiscal plans at time t, we augment the VAR equations with
our narratively identified exogenous fiscal shifts. These enter as total fiscal shocks,

                                                                       22
ei,t = τi,t + gi,t , in the output growth equation and as separate τi,t and gi,t shocks in the
equations for revenues and spending.
      In the output growth equation, total fiscal shocks, ei,t , are interacted with two dum-
mies, T Bi,t and EBi,t , that take the value 1 if the plan we are analyzing is mostly based
on tax hikes or on spending cuts, respectively.14 The coefficient vectors a, b, c, d capture
the possible non-linearities associated with the response (on impact) to a consolidation
plan — both stemming from its composition and from the state of the economy: the
effects of T B plans in booms and in recessions are described, respectively, by a and c,
while b and d capture the effects of EB plans in booms and recessions. The vector ei,t
                                h                       i0                     h              i
contains three components eui,t eai,t−1,t eai,t,t+ j : consequently a = a1 a2 a3
describes the heterogeneous effect of unexpected, announced and future announced fis-
cal shifts; similarly for b, c, and d.15
      In the equations for ∆gi,t and ∆τi,t we explicitly allow expenditure, gi,t , and revenue,
τi,t , corrections to have different coefficients. In these equations we include only fiscal
shifts implemented in period t, either unexpected or previously announced: future an-
nounced corrections do not directly affect the dynamics of revenues and expenditures
as their effect is not recorded in national accounts until they are implemented.
      Each equation includes country, λ j,i , and year, χ j,t fixed effects. Finally, uit are
unobservable VAR innovations: these are uninteresting for our analysis, as we do not
need to extract from them any structural shock.16
      There are some interesting points to note about our specification. First, our choice
of interacting total shifts in fiscal variables with the TB and EB dummies allows us to
decompose fiscal adjustments in two mutually exclusive components, which then can
be simulated separately. This would not be possible if gi,t and τi,t were directly included
in the output growth equation because, as already observed, exogenous shifts in taxes
and spending are correlated. While this correlation is not a problem at the estimation
stage, at the simulation stage it would prevent from studying a pure spending or tax
shock, since this would require to simulate a plan where the correlation between taxes
and spending is zero, an assumption which is rejected by the data. Instead, by using
the TB and EB dummies we are able to study the effect of tax-based and spending-
based plans, allowing both gi,t and τi,t to move according to the correlation observed in
  14 See  Section 2.2 for details on how we label plans.
  15 At  the estimation stage we include announced fiscal shift to be implemented up to two years in the
future, that is, we include eai,t,t+1 and eai,t,t+2 , and we restrict their coefficients to be equal. We impose
this restriction to increase statistical power and because the dynamic effect of these shifts will then be
captured by eai,t.−1,t as well.
   16 Rememeber that we do not extract exogenous fiscal shocks from the VAR innovations: the compo-

nents of our exogenous plans are identified outside the VAR using the narrative identification strategy
and are included directly into the model.


                                                     23
the data for each type of plans. Second, in our specification we take into account the
inter-temporal dimension of fiscal plans by including unexpected, announced and future
announced fiscal shifts, allowing them to have heterogenous effects on our variables.17
Third, the use of a VAR which includes the percentage change of revenues and spending
(as a fraction of GDP) and tracks the impact of the narratively identified fiscal shocks
on total revenues and total spending allows us to check the strength of our narratively
identified instruments – for instance it allows us to verify if, following a positive shock
to taxes, revenues indeed increase. Finally, our specification provides a straightforward
way to verify the statistical relevance of the possible non-linearities related to the timing
and to the composition of fiscal plans. The following restrictions can be tested:

(i) a = c, b = d, βi j = βi j+4 for i = 1, 2 and j = 1, 2, 3, 4; the only source of non-
       linearity in the contemporaneous effect of a plan arises from its type (EB vs TB);

(ii) a = b, c = d : the only source of non-linearity in the contemporaneous effect of a
       plan arises from the state of the cycle;

(iii) a = b = c = d, βi j = βi j+4 for i = 1, 2 and j = 1, 2, 3, 4; the impact effects of the
       introduction of a consolidation plan depend neither on the the state of cycle nor
       on the type of plan.

(iv) a = b = c = d, AEk = ARk for k = 1, 2, 3, given βi j = βi j+4 for i = 1, 2 and j =
      1, 2, 3, 4; we are left with a standard linear VAR model without non-linearities.

We will return to these tests in the Results Section below. We now briefly describe how
we use Model 2 to simulate the response of the economy to a fiscal consolidation plan.

Simulation As explained in Section 2.3, we want to simulate the response of the
economy to plans rather than shocks. Fiscal plans have both an intra-temporal and
an inter-temporal dimension: the first refers to the correlation between shifts in taxes,
  u , and government spending, gu , in a given year, and the second is related to the
τi,t                                i,t
correlation between current unexpected shifts, eui,t , and announcements of future shifts
                         a
in taxes and spending, τi,t,t+          a
                               j and gi,t,t+ j . In order to simulate the effect of a plan we
need a model for these correlations. Thus, as already discussed, we complete Model 2
with a set of auxiliary equations describing the correlation between contemporaneous
fiscal shifts and announcements, and modeling the share of tax and spending measures
within a plan. We allow both correlations to be different according to the type of plan,
    17 Earlynarrative studies either collapse unanticipated and announced measures, using fi,t = eui,t +
eai,t,t+ j
        and neglecting eai,t−1,t , as in Romer and Romer 2010, or consider measures only upon implemen-
tation, using fi,t = eui,t + eai,t−1,t and neglecting eai,t,t+ j , as in Guajardo et al. 2014.


                                                  24
TB vs EB. In other words, we allow plans to have a different inter-temporal and intra-
temporal structure according to their type.18 Our auxiliary regressions are


                          u
                         τi,t = δ0T B eui,t ∗T Bi,t +δ EB u
                                                       0 ei,t ∗EBi,t +ε 0,i,t                                 (3)
                                                                       u
                         gui,t = ϑ0T B eui,t ∗T Bi,t +ϑ0EB ei,t ∗EBi,t +υ 0,i,t
                      a            TB u              EB               u
                     τi,t,t+ j = δ j ei,t ∗T Bi,t +δ j ei,t ∗EBi,t +ε j,i,t j = 1, 2
                                                                       u
                  gai,t,t+ j = ϑ jT B eui,t ∗T Bi,t +ϑ jEB ei,t ∗EBi,t +υ j,i,t j = 1, 2

    The first two equations are related to the intra-temporal dimension and describe the
average tax (δ ) and spending (ϑ ) share of EB and TB plans. The next two equations
model the inter-temporal structure and describe the relation between unexpected shifts
and those announced for years t + 1 and t + 2, differentiating between EB and TB plans.
Table 9 shows the estimated coefficients. On the basis of these auxiliary regressions we
construct the eai,t,t+1 = τi,t,t+1
                           a       + gai,t,t+1 and eai,t,t+2 = τi,t,t+2
                                                                a       + gai,t,t+2 needed to compute
impulse responses.19
    Note that our procedure to derive impulse response functions from narrative shocks
is different from the standard approach adopted in the recent empirical literature that
derives impulse responses relying either on a truncated MA representation or on linear
projection methods. We show in Appendix 2 that the standard application of the linear
projections method does not fully exploit the non-linearities of our statistical model.
  18 Alternatively we could have allowed the inter-temporal structure of plans to be country- rather than
plan-specific (see Alesina, Favero and Giavazzi 2015a). We opted for the latter to impose restrictions in
the auxiliary regressions more similar to those in the main system — i.e. coefficients restricted across
countries and unrestricted across types of plans.
   19 Given the presence of non-linearities, impulse responses are constructed using the generalized

method proposed by Koop et al. 1996. This implies computing

                     I (zi,t , n, δ , It−1 ) = E (zi,t+n | ei,t = δ , It−1 ) − E (zi,t+n | ei,t = 0, It−1 )

using the following steps: (i) generate a baseline simulation for all variables by solving the full non-linear
system dynamically forward. This requires setting to zero all shocks for a number of periods equal to
the horizon up to which impulse responses are computed, (ii) generate an alternative simulation for all
variables by considering a particular plan and then solve dynamically forward the model up to the same
horizon used in the baseline simulation, (iii) compute impulse responses to fiscal plans as the difference
between the simulated values in the two steps above, (iv) compute confidence intervals by bootstrapping.
In constructing the bootstrap we have to deal with dependence in the residuals of our system of 48 (3
variables and 16 countries) estimated equations. We do so by constructing a matrix 34x48 (our sample
is 1981-2014 and it contains 34 annual observations) containing all the residuals in our system and by
resampling the rows of such matrix.




                                                              25
                             Table 9: Estimated Coefficients in the Auxiliary Equations

                   Intra-temporal correlations                      Inter-temporal correlations

                     TB                   EB                        TB                         EB

             τ       δ0T B               δ0EB             δ1T B          δ2T B       δ1EB            δ2EB

                   0.7823              0.3918            0.1552        0.0170      −0.0415          0.0072
                   (0.0175)            (0.0104)          (0.0278)      (0.0099)     (0.0165)        (0.0059)


             g      ϑ0T B                ϑ0EB             ϑ1T B          ϑ2T B       ϑ1EB            ϑ2EB

                   0.2177              0.6082            0.1290        0.0305       0.1590          0.0364
                   (0.0175)            (0.0104)          (0.0315)      (0.0152)     (0.0187)        (0.0091)

Note. The table reports the coefficients estimated from the regressions in (3) distinguishing between
intra-temporal and inter-temporal correlations. Standard errors in parentheses.



5         Data and results
Macro data are from the OECD: Appendix 3 provides details on sources and on how we
compute the variables used in the VAR. Our government expenditure variable is total
government spending net of interest payments on the debt: that is we do not distinguish
between government consumption, government investment, transfers (social security
benefits, etc.) and other government outlays. Alesina et al. 2017 investigate whether
multipliers for government transfers differ from those for other spending items finding
very moderate differences (see Section 2.1 for a more detailed discussion). The panel
includes 16 OECD countries over the years 1981-2014.


5.1        Main Results
Before presenting our main results, it is useful to describe the structure of the fiscal
shocks we simulate. We analyze the response of the economy to an EB and TB plan over
five years (from t = 0 to t = 4). In both cases plans represent a permanent reduction
of the primary deficit of 1 percent of GDP. Each plan contains an unexpected fiscal
shock, announced and implemented at t = 0, and two shocks also announced at t = 0
but implemented at t = 1 and t = 2. These plans have a different intra-temporal and
inter-temporal structure following the correlations reported in Table 9. Therefore our
simulated EB plan has, in percentage of GDP, eu0 = 0.86, ea0,1 = 0.10 and ea0,2 = 0.04.20
    20 The  intra-temporal structure of these EB shocks is as follows: τ0u = 0.34, gu0 = 0.52, τ0,1
                                                                                                a = −0.04,

ga0,1            a            a
        = 0.14, τ0,2 = 0.01, g0,2 = 0.03.




                                                        26
Similarly, our simulated TB plan has eu0 = 0.75, ea0,1 = 0.21, ea0,2 = 0.03.21
    We first show the impulse responses from the general unrestricted model 2 that al-
lows for all non-linearities.22 The impulse responses of the variables in our VAR and of
the indicator F(s) are presented in Figure 2. Lines with triangles and squares show the
responses of the variables in the case, respectively, of an EB and a TB plan introduced
at a time when the economy is in an expansionary state (defined as F(s) ' 0.2); the
responses of the economy to EB and TB fiscal consolidations starting in a recessionary
state (defined as F(s) ' 0.8) are indicated by lines with circles and stars. It is important
to remark that the state of the economy is affected by fiscal policy and can change as
a plan evolves. Instead, the nature of the plan (TB, EB) is known upon announcement
and does not change throughout the simulation. Responses are cumulated over time:
thus our impulse response functions measure the deviation of an outcome from its level
absent the change in fiscal policy.
    The first row of Figure 2 shows that the stronger non-linearity is that between TB
and EB plans. In the case of an EB consolidation, the point estimates of the responses
of output growth are almost identical across the two states of the economy, while in
the case of a TB consolidation the point estimates are different, although the difference
is not statistically significant. TB plans are always more recessionary than EB plans
although the difference is larger when the plan is introduced in an expansion than in a
recession.
    The second and third rows of Figure 2 show the responses of government revenues
and government consumption (defined as explained at the top of this section and both
measured as a fraction of GDP) to a TB and an EB plan starting from the two initial
states. Observe that, on average, revenues increase by a larger amount during a TB
consolidation, and spending decreases the most during an EB consolidation. This con-
firms that our classification of plans is trustworthy. Interestingly, we observe a positive
response of revenues also to an EB consolidation, and a negative response of spending
to a TB consolidation implemented in recession (while in expansion the response is just
above zero). This confirms that spending and tax measures are not taken in isolation
and thus supports our choice of analyzing plans rather than individual shifts in taxes
and spending.
    The fourth row of Figure 2 shows the responses of F(s): in all four cases a consoli-
dation increases the recession indicator (the impulse response is always positive). There
is, however, a significant difference between type of plans. During TB consolidations
F(s) increases much more than during EB ones and this holds both in expansions and
  21 The   intra-temporal structure of these TB shocks is as follows: τ0u = 0.59, gu0 = 0.16, τ0,1
                                                                                               a = 0.11,

ga0,1 = 0.10, τ0,2
                 a = 0.01, ga = 0.02.
                              0,2
    22 All the results we present are obtained   using 1000 bootstrap repetitions.


                                                        27
recessions. Note that when a consolidation starts during a recession the difference in
F(s) between tax-based and expenditure-based adjustments initially is not statistically
significant. It becomes significant two years after the start of the consolidation, indi-
cating that TB consolidations worsen the state of the economy for a more prolonged
period of time than EB ones.
    Overall, the total effect on output growth – which is what matters and is the result
of the effect going through the response of F(s) as well as the effect going through all
other coefficients in the model — is always statistically different between the two types
of adjustment.

                                      Table 10: Output Multipliers

                                                                          4 ∆y
                                                   4                    ∑t=0   t
                                                  ∑t=0 ∆yt            4 (∆τ −∆g )
                                                                     ∑t=0    t   t

                                                   −0.46               −0.75
                                       EB
                                                (−0.94; −0.06)     (−1.55; −0.31)
                         Expansion
                                                   −1.50               −3.70
                                       TB
                                                (−2.29; −0.84)     (−8.79; −1.87)


                                                   −0.28               −0.58
                                       EB
                                                 (−0.59; 0.01)     (−1.13; −0.18)
                         Recession
                                                   −0.96               −2.31
                                       TB
                                                (−1.58; −0.44)     (−4.39; −1.26)

Note. The table reports the cumulated and cumulated as fraction of cumulated primary surplus multipliers
obtained from the model where we include all the non-linearities. 90 percent bootstrapped (1000 repeti-
tions) confidence intervals for the first column and one standard deviation for the second in parentheses.


    Table 10 presents the fiscal multipliers of an EB and TB permanent fiscal plan of
one percent of GDP implemented starting in expansion or in recession. Multipliers are
computed following two definitions: we show a cumulated multiplier and a multiplier
defined as the sum of the output response over the simulation horizon, divided by the
sum of the primary surplus response computed as (∆τ − ∆g). The latter is based on
the definition suggested by Woodford 2011 and used by Auerbach and Gorodnichenko
2012b and has the advantage of taking into account the response of taxes and spending
to the fiscal plan, as well as considering the persistence of fiscal shocks. Note that since
our simulated plans contain both spending and tax measures — and both expenditure
and receipts react to EB an TB plans — what we compute here is a primary surplus
multiplier. Regardless of the definition, the multipliers of EB plans are much lower
(in absolute value) than those of TB plans, both in expansion and in recession. In
expansion, a tax-based fiscal consolidation plan of one precent of GDP has a cumulative
multiplier of -1.5, while the cumulative multiplier of a spending-based plan of the same

                                                   28
size is -0.46. Similarly, the primary surplus multiplier of a TB plan is -3.70, while that
of a EB plan is -0.75. Multipliers in recessions are slightly lower (in absolute value)
than in expansions, and exhibit a similar heterogeneity between TB and EB plans.
    We formally test the relevance of the two sources of non-linearity by bringing to the
data the hypotheses introduced in Section 4.2. Table 11 reports the observed value of the
likelihood ratio tests along with their probability under the null derived both on the basis
of the asymptotic distribution and of a bootstrapped distribution that takes explicitly into
account the (possibly small) size of our sample. All hypotheses are rejected at least at
the 5 percent confidence level, regardless of the way we perform the tests. We conclude
that all non-linearities are statistically significant.

                                     Table 11: Tests of Hypotheses

      H0     Likelihood. ratio     Number of Restrictions                     Probability

                                                                A SYMPTOTIC T EST    B OOTSTRAP T EST

      (i)         27.7575                     14                     0.0153                 0.0120
     (ii)         20.1271                      6                     0.0026                 0.0110
     (iii)        45.2928                     20                     0.0010                 0.0020
     (iv)         70.9075                     29                     0.0000                 0.0020

Note. The table reports the likelihood ratios, the number of imposed restrictions on parameters and the p-
values (asymptotic and bootstrap computed with 1000 repetitions) for the four tests introduced in Section
4.2.


     Next we consider two polar cases: the case in which only the “when” determines
the output response to a fiscal adjustment and the case in which only the “how” is rele-
vant. We study these cases notwithstanding the fact that the corresponding restrictions
are rejected. The impulse responses reported in Figure 3 are based on a model in which
we remove the non-linearity across types of plans (imposing a = b, c = d) while keep-
ing that across states of the economy. As in our baseline simulations, the state of the
economy is allowed to respond endogenously to the fiscal policy shift. Looking at the
first row of the figure the response of output after the announcement of a fiscal con-
solidation plan does not appear to be strongly affected by the state of the economy:
the two impulse responses are very similar and their confidence intervals overlap, thus
confirming that the state of the economy — remember that here “state of the economy”
refers to the state at the time the consolidation is first introduced — does not seem to be
very relevant. In other words, overlooking the composition of the fiscal adjustment (TB
or EB), fiscal multipliers do not appear to differ significantly when the economy starts
from an expansion or a recession. This result confirms the finding reported in Owyang
et al. 2013 and in Ramey and Zubairy 2015, 2017. Of course this does not mean that

                                                   29
the welfare effects are also similar: losing one percent of GDP when the economy is al-
ready in a recession can be more harmful compared to losing the same amount of output
when the economy is expanding. The response of the indicator F(s) in the fourth row
confirms that implementing a consolidation always increases the recession indicator —
slightly more when the economy starts from an expansion rather than a recession.
    Finally, in Figure 4 we keep only the non-linearity across type of plans. In other
words we replicate (using a panel VAR rather than estimating a truncated MA represen-
tation) the exercise performed in Alesina, Favero and Giavazzi 2015a. The strong sim-
ilarity between the impulse responses reported here and those reported in the previous
paper suggests that the effect of predictability of the adjustments, which is addressed
within a VAR but not in an MA, is minor.23


5.2     Robustness
In this section we evaluate the robustness of our results along two dimensions. First,
we ask to what extent they depend on the accompanying monetary policy and thus what
could be the effect of fiscal consolidations implemented at the ZLB. Second, we analyze
the effect of adopting an alternative specification of F (s), assuming that the state of the
economy does not change following the shift in fiscal policy.

5.2.1   Fiscal Adjustments at the ZLB

Ideally, one would want to study how multipliers are affected not only by the cycle and
the composition of a fiscal plan but also whether they occur at or close to the zero lower
bound. Unfortunately, we do not have enough observations to consider all three factors
(state of the economy, composition and ZLB) at the same time. What we can check,
however, is whether the asymmetries we identified can be explained by a different (more
or less constrained) response of monetary policy. If the asymmetries in fiscal multipliers
were related to a different response of monetary policy our evidence could considerably
change when monetary policy is constrained.
    In order to assess the potential relevance of the monetary policy response (or lack
thereof at the ZLB) we perform two exercises. First, we split our data in two sub-
samples: euro area countries (Austria, Belgium, France, Finland, Germany, Ireland,
Italy, Portugal and Spain) from 1999 onwards and non euro-area countries (Australia,
Denmark, UK, Japan, Sweden, U.S. and Canada) together with euro area countries be-
fore 1999. The motivation for this split is that the common currency prevents monetary
policy from responding to fiscal developments in individual member countries. How-
  23 Table   13 in Appendix 4 reports the multipliers for these alternative specifications.


                                                      30
ever, while it is true that monetary policy cannot respond at the country level, the ECB
could still respond if fiscal consolidation happened in a large enough number of euro
area countries at the same time. To capture this possible common response of monetary
policy in the euro area, the specification also includes year fixed effects estimated on
euro countries from 1999 onwards. Model 2 is thus extended to

                 "                  #0 "         #
                     1 − F(si,t )          AE1
     ∆yi,t   =                                       zi,t−1 +
                       F(si,t )            AR1
                                                         0                                     
                        [1 − F(si,t )] · Euroi,t                    a0Euro ei,t    b0Euro ei,t
                                                                 0                               "       #
                                                                                   d0Euro ei,t
                                                         
                      F(si,t ) · Euroi,t                       cEuro ei,t                       T Bi,t
             +                                                
                                                                 a0
                                                                                                            +
                [1 − F(s )] · (1 − Euro )
                          i,t               i,t
                                                          
                                                                NoEuro ei,t     b0NoEuro ei,t    EB
                                                                                                      i,t
                    F(si,t ) · (1 − Euroi,t )                     c0NoEuro ei,t   d0NoEuro ei,t
             + λi + χt · Euroi,t + ∂t · (1 − Euroi,t ) + ui,t

where a j = [ a j,1 a j,2 a j,3 ] for j = Euro, NoEuro (similarly for b j , c j , d j ) and
                
                country = AUT, BEL, DEU, ESP, FIN, FRA, IRL, ITA, PRT
Euroi,t = 1 i f
                year ≥ 1991

    Figure 5 plots the impulse response functions from this model. For consolidations
started during an expansion, the heterogeneity between EB and TB adjustments is clear
regardless of whether monetary policy can respond or not. As in the baseline simula-
tions, there is little evidence of heterogeneity across states of the cycle: no heterogeneity
at all in the response of the economy to EB consolidations and some heterogeneity in
the response to TB adjustments.
    For consolidations started during a recession, instead, whether austerity is EB or
TB seems to be irrelevant. But the ability of monetary policy to respond now makes
a difference: the output cost of both types of plans is virtually zero if monetary policy
is unconstrained, while both types of plans are equally recessionary if monetary policy
is constrained. Remember that when we say ”starting in a recession” or ”starting in an
expansion” we mean a probability, respectively, of 0,8 and 0,2 to be in a recession: the
majority of consolidation episodes are not in these two categories but in a situation of a
”neutral” cycles or mild downturns and mild expansions.
    We should use some caution in interpreting these results, since by adding an addi-
tional layer of heterogeneity – euro vs no-euro – we are losing power and some of the
coefficients are more imprecisely estimated, as witnessed by the wider confidence inter-
vals of the impulse responses. Neveretheless it would be fair to conclude that European
austerity between 2010 and 2014 might have been more costly because it was imple-


                                                          31
mented while economies were in a downturn and monetary policy could not respond to
country-specific fiscal plans.
    As a further robustness check, we study whether the response of the economy to
consolidations implemented while monetary policy is at the zero lower bound plays
a significant role in influencing our results. Unfortunately, we cannot split our data
between countries in years at the ZLB and countries in years out of the ZLB because
the number of observations in the former group is too small. As an alternative we
check the stability of our baseline results by removing the observations at the ZLB from
our sample, i.e. we remove euro area countries in 2013 and 2014, the US from 2008
onwards and Japan from 1996 onwards.24 The results of this exercise are presented in
Figure 6. The impulse response functions are very similar to the baseline case and this
confirms that observations at the ZLB do not influence our findings significantly.25
    Note that the findings that monetary accommodation is not very important might
depend on the type of fiscal adjustment that we are considering. As we have already
noted, we measure the effect of permanent adjustments, and the response of monetary
policy to permanent and transitory adjustments is theoretically different. For instance,
permanent adjustments to expenditure by their nature do not affect the natural real rate
of interest26 .

5.2.2    An alternative specification of F(s)

As already discussed, our smooth transition VAR describes the state of economic using
a “backward-looking” moving average and allows the indicator F(si,t ) to evolve fol-
lowing the introduction of a fiscal plan. In this section we analyze how the results are
affected by making F(si,t ) function of contemporaneous output growth, while holding
the state of the economy constant following the introduction of a plan. In practice, we
keep our VAR specification unaltered but we change the definition of µi,t (and, hence,
F (si,t )) as follows:
  24 More  precisely, we perform this check starting form the baseline model and interacting the fiscal
shocks in the equation for output with a dummy equal to one for observations at the ZLB and another
dummy which equals one for observations outside the ZLB. Then, we perform our simulation using the
coefficients estimated on the latter. We do not present the IRFs for consolidations at the ZLB as they are
unreliable, being estimated on a very limited number of observations.
  25 The multipliers computed in these two specifications are reported in Table 14 in Appendix 4.
  26 We are grateful to one of our referees for having made this point.




                                                   32
                                                exp(−γi si,t )
                                 F(si,t ) =                      ,      γi > 0
                                              1 + exp(−γi si,t )
                                              µi,t − E(µi,t )
                                     si,t   =
                                                  σ (µi,t )
                                              ∆yi,t + ∆yi,t−1
                                    µi,t    =
                                                     2

    We report in Figure 7 impulse responses obtained adopting this alternative specifi-
cation. Note that instead of reporting the response of F(s) to the fiscal shock, we plot
its constant level. Indeed, as previously discussed in Section 3, in this framework we
cannot allow F(s) to move in response to the fiscal consolidation, since it is constructed
as a function of the contemporaneous level of output. Hence we need to keep F(s) fixed
either at 0.2 (expansion) or 0.8 (recession) throughout the simulation.
    These results confirm the findings, reported in Auerbach and Gorodnichenko 2012a,
2012b, of an asymmetric output response to spending adjustments. We find a small,
marginally significant, expansionary effect of EB adjustments started in expansion and
a small, significant, recessionary effect of EB adjustments started in recession.27 The
output effect of EB adjustments started in recession is smaller than what reported by
AG. This result is consistent with our identification strategy that selects, using narra-
tive methods, only fiscal consolidations episodes – while Auerbach and Gorodnichenko
2012a, 2012b study both expansions and contarctiosn. We do not expect our impulse
responses to be of the same size of those derived considering both fiscal contractions
and fiscal expansions. Importantly, whenever fiscal adjustments have a significant ef-
fect on output, that is when they start in a recession, the asymmetry between EB and
TB aplans is still present with TB plans being more recessionary than EB ones.


6       Conclusions
Fiscal consolidations can differ along three dimensions: their composition (increases
in taxes vs reductions in expenditures), the state of the business cycles when they are
introduced and whether they occur at the ZLB or, more generally, whether monetary
policy can respond to the consolidation. In this paper we mainly focussed on the first
two aspects. We concluded that both the composition of a fiscal adjustment and the
state of the business cycle matter, but the composition effect is much more robust. On
average expenditure-based permanent adjustments have consistently much lower costs
    27 See   Table 15 in Appendix 4 for the exact multipliers computed in this alternative model.



                                                      33
than tax-based permanent ones. The dynamic response of the economy to a consoli-
dation plan does depend on whether this is adopted in a period of economic expansion
or contraction, but the quantitative significance of this source of non-linearity is small
relative to the one which depends on the type of consolidation. The role of the ZLB
is more difficult to assess given the low number of observations. However, our (admit-
tedly not conclusive) evidence does point towards some but not overly large differences
between episodes at or away from the ZLB, or more generally when monetary policy
cannot react to a fiscal adjustment in a monetary union. This is an issue which deserves
further research.




                                           34
References
Alesina, Alberto, Carlo Favero, and Francesco Giavazzi, “The output effect of fiscal
  consolidation plans,” Journal of International Economics, 2015, 96 (S1), S19–S42.

  , Omar Barbiero, Carlo Favero, Francesco Giavazzi, and Matteo Paradisi, “Aus-
  terity in 2009-13,” Economic Policy, 2015, 30 (83), 383–437.

  , , , , and , “The Effects of Fiscal Consolidations: Theory and Evidence,”
  Working Paper N. 23385, National Bureau of Economic Research May 2017.

Auerbach, Alan J. and Yuriy Gorodnichenko, “Fiscal Multipliers in Recession
  and Expansion,” in “Fiscal Policy after the Financial Crisis,” Alberto Alesina and
  Francesco Giavazzi eds., University of Chicago Press, 2012, pp. 63–98.

   and , “Measuring the Output Responses to Fiscal Policy,” American Economic
  Journal: Economic Policy, May 2012, 4 (2), 1–27.

Barnichon, Regis and Christian Matthes, “Understanding the Size of the Government
  Spending Multiplier: It’s in the Sign,” CEPR Discussion Papers DP11373, C.E.P.R.
  Discussion Papers July 2016.

Baxter, Marianne and Robert G. King, “Fiscal Policy in General Equilibrium,” Amer-
  ican Economic Review, June 1993, 83 (3), 315–34.

Blanchard, Olivier J. and Roberto Perotti, “An Empirical Characterization of the
  Dynamic Effects of Changes in Government Spending and Taxes on Output,” The
  Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2002, 117 (4), 1329–1368.

Caggiano, Giovanni, Efrem Castelnuovo, Valentina Colombo, and Gabriela
  Nodari, “Estimating Fiscal Multipliers: News From A Non-linear World,” The Eco-
  nomic Journal, 2015, 125 (584), 746–776.

Christiano, Lawrence, Martin Eichenbaum, and Sergio Rebelo, “When Is the Gov-
 ernment Spending Multiplier Large?,” Journal of Political Economy, 2011, 119 (1),
 78–121.

Corsetti, Giancarlo, André Meier, and Gernot J Müller, “Fiscal stimulus with
  spending reversals,” Review of Economics and Statistics, 2012, 94 (4), 878–895.

Cos, Pablo Hernández De and Enrique Moral-Benito, “On the predictability of nar-
  rative fiscal adjustments,” Economics Letters, 2016, 143, 69–72.


                                        35
Devries, Pete, Andrea Pescatori, Daniel Leigh, and Jaime Guajardo, “A New
  Action-Based Dataset of Fiscal Consolidation,” IMF Working Papers 11/128, Inter-
  national Monetary Fund Jun 2011.

Eggertsson, Gauti B., “What Fiscal Policy is Effective at Zero Interest Rates?,” in
  Daron Acemoglu and Michael Woodford, eds., NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2010,
  Vol. Volume 25, University of Chicago Press, May 2011, pp. 59–112.

Erceg, Christopher J and Jesper Lindé, “Fiscal consolidation in a currency union:
  Spending cuts vs. tax hikes,” Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control, 2013, 37
  (2), 422–445.

Guajardo, Jaime, Daniel Leigh, and Andrea Pescatori, “Expansionary Austerity?
 International Evidence,” Journal of the European Economic Association, 08 2014,
 12 (4), 949–968.

Jordà, Òscar, “Estimation and inference of impulse responses by local projections,”
  The American Economic Review, 2005, 95 (1), 161–182.

  and Alan M Taylor, “The time for austerity: estimating the average treatment effect
  of fiscal policy,” The Economic Journal, 2016, 126 (590), 219–255.

Koop, Gary, M. Hashem Pesaran, and Simon M. Potter, “Impulse response analysis
 in nonlinear multivariate models,” Journal of Econometrics, September 1996, 74 (1),
 119–147.

Leeper, Eric M., Todd B. Walker, and Shu-Chun Susan Yang, “Fiscal Foresight:
  Analytics and Econometrics,” NBER Working Papers 14028, National Bureau of
  Economic Research, Inc May 2008.

Lemoine, Matthieu and Jesper Lindé, “Fiscal Consolidation Under Imperfect Credi-
  bility,” Working Paper Series 322, Sveriges Riksbank (Central Bank of Sweden) May
  2016.

Mertens, Karel and Morten O. Ravn, “Fiscal Policy in an Expectations-Driven Liq-
 uidity Trap,” Review of Economic Studies, 2014, 81 (4), 1637–1667.

Miyamoto, Wataru, Thuy Lan Nguyen, and Dmitriy Sergeyev, “Government Spend-
 ing Multipliers under the Zero Lower Bound: Evidence from Japan,” CEPR Discus-
 sion Paper No. DP11633, Centre for Economic Policy Research November 2016.

Nakamura, Emi and Jón Steinsson, “Fiscal Stimulus in a Monetary Union: Evidence
  from US Regions,” American Economic Review, March 2014, 104 (3), 753–92.

                                         36
Owyang, Michael T., Valerie A. Ramey, and Sarah Zubairy, “Are government
 spending multipliers greater during periods of slack? Evidence from twentieth-
 century historical data,” The American Economic Review, 2013, 103 (3), 129–134.

Ramey, Valerie A. and Sarah Zubairy, “Are Government Spending Multipliers State
  Dependent? Evidence from U.S. and Canadian Historical Data,” Working Paper,
  University of California, San Diego 2015.

   and , “Government Spending Multipliers in Good Times and in Bad: Evidence
  from U.S. Historical Data,” Journal of Political Economy, 2017, forthcoming.

Romer, Christina D. and David H. Romer, “The Macroeconomic Effects of Tax
  Changes: Estimates Based on a New Measure of Fiscal Shocks,” American Economic
  Review, June 2010, 100 (3), 763–801.

Toda, Hiro Y. and Taku Yamamoto, “Statistical inference in vector autoregressions
  with possibly integrated processes,” Journal of Econometrics, 1995, 66 (1), 225 –
  250.

Woodford, Michael, “Simple Analytics of the Government Expenditure Multiplier,”
 American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, January 2011, 3 (1), 1–35.




                                        37
Appendix 1: Predictability and exogeneity
In a dynamic time-series model, estimation and simulation require, respectively, weak
and strong exogeneity: these requirements are different from lack of predictability. To
illustrate the point consider the following simplified model, which only includes the
unanticipated component of fiscal plans:

                          ∆yt       = β0 + β1 etu + β3 ∆yt−1 + β4 ∆τt−1 + β5 ∆gt−1 + u1t
                           etu = γ1 ∆yt−1 + γ2 ∆τt−1 + γ3 ∆gt−1 + u2t
                           !        "      !                !#
                    u1t                 0         σ11 σ12
                               ∼ N           ,
                    u2t                 0         σ12 σ22

    The condition required for etu to be weakly exogenous for the estimation of β1 is
σ12 = 0. This condition is independent of γ1 , γ2 , γ3 . In other words, when weak exo-
geneity is satisfied, the existence of predictability does not affect the consistency of the
estimate of β1 . Moreover β1 measures, by construction, the impact on ∆yt of u2t , i.e. of
the part of etu that cannot be predicted by ∆yt−1 , ∆τt−1 and ∆gt−1 . In fact, by the partial
                                       ∧          ∧         ∧           ∧
regression theorem, estimating first u2t = etu − γ1 ∆yt−1 + γ2 ∆τt−1 + γ3 ∆gt−1 and then δ1 ,
                                ∧                ∧     ∧
running ∆yt = δ0 + δ1 u2t + vt , gives β1 = δ1 .


Appendix 2: MA’s vs VAR’s
The VAR model described in the text (model (1)) is not the way impulse response
functions are constructed in the recent empirical literature. In the literature the effect
of narratively identified shifts in fiscal variables relies either on estimates of a truncated
MA representation or on linear projection methods. The reason for these choices is that
in the presence of multiple non-linearities the MA representation of a VAR is much
heavier than in the linear case — which means it could only be estimated imposing
restrictions that limit the relevance of such non-linearities. Consider for instance the
following model in which fiscal adjustment plans have heterogenous effects according
to the state of the cycle, but the VAR dynamics does not depend on the state of the
economy, that is, using the terminology in the text, AEi = ARi . Assume also that TB and
EB plans have identical effects.28

                      zi,t = A1 zi,t−1 + (1 − F(si,t ))B1 ei,t + F(si,t )B2 ei,t + ui,t           (4)

    where zi,t is the vector containing output growth and the growth rates of taxes and
  28 Allowing for the presence of TB and EB plans would strengthen our point but at the cost of making
the algebra more complicated.


                                                      38
spending, ei,t are, as in the main text, the narratively identified fiscal adjustments and
ui,t unobservable VAR innovations. From this VAR we would derive the following MA
truncated representations:
                 k                                                               k
       zi,t =   ∑ A1j ((1 − F(si,t− j ))B1 ei,t− j + F(si,t− j )B2 ei,t− j ) + ∑ A1j ui,t− j + A1k+1 zi,t−k−1
                j=0                                                            j=0


    Now apply to this framework the linear projection method. This would amount to
deriving impulse responses for the relevant component of zi,t — say ∆yi,t — running
the following set of regressions29 :

                     ∆yi,t+h = αi,h + (1 − F(si,t ))βh,1 ei,t + F(si,t )βh,2 ei,t + +Γh zi,t + εi,t             (5)

    Now compare this with the more general case in which the VAR dynamics is also
affected by the state of the cycle — that is remove the restriction AEi = ARi , (i = 1, 2, 3):

zi,t = (1 − F(si,t ))A1 (L, E) zi,t−1 + F(si,t )A1 (L, R) zi,t−1 + (1 − F(si,t ))B1 ei,t + F(si,t )B2 ei,t + ui,t

    In this case the truncated MA representation would be much more complicated than
(5) , as the response of zi,t+h to ei,t would depend on all states of the economy between
t and t + h. Estimating the correct linear projection would no longer be feasible.
    To further illustrate the point observe that the correct linear projection to estimate
the effect of ei,t on ∆yi,t+1 :

     ∆yi,t+1 = αi,1 + (1 − F(si,t+1 ))F(si,t )β1,1 ei,t + (1 − F(si,t+1 ))(1 − F(si,t ))β1,2 ei,t +
                        +(F(si,t+1 ))F(si,t )β1,3 ei,t + (F(si,t+1 ))(1 − F(si,t ))β1,4 ei,t
                        +Γh zi,t + εi,t                                                                         (6)

    is in general different from:

                      ∆yi,t+1 = αi,h + (1 − F(si,t ))β1,1 ei,t + F(si,t )β1,2 ei,t + Γh zi,t + εi,t             (7)

   Note, in closing, that the cases in which the two representations coincide are very
specific. Indeed, when (6) is the data generating process and (7) is estimated, the
implied assumption is that the states F(si,t+1 ) = 1 and F(si,t+1 ) = 0 are observationally
equivalent.
   Summing up: if the data are generated by (6) the VAR representation is much more
parsimonious than the linear projection which becomes practically not feasible unless
very strong restrictions are imposed on the empirical model.
  29 Thisis the specification adopted by Auerbach and Gorodnichenko 2012a to estimate a regime-
dependent impulse response.

                                                          39
Appendix 3: Data sources

                                     Table 12: Data Sources

            Variable             Label                        Definition

     Output (real)               gd pv   Gross domestic product, volume, market prices
     Output (nominal)            gd p    Gross domestic product, value, market prices
     Govt. Consumption (real)    cgv     Govt. final consumption expenditure, volume
     Govt. Inventment (real)     igv     Govt. gross fixed capital formation, volume
     Revenues (nominal)          yrg     Current receipts, general govt., value
     Social Security (nominal)   sspg    Social security benefits paid by general govt., value
     Other Outlays (nominal)     oco     Other current outlays, general govt., value
     Population                  popt    Population, all ages, all persons




gdpv, gdp: OECD Economic Outlook n.97; for Ireland, IMF WEO April 2015;

cgv: OECD Economic Outlook n.97; for Ireland we used data from AMECO (final
     consumption expenditure of general government at current prices deflated in 2012
     prices with the correspondent deflator series in the AMECO dataset - price defla-
     tor total final consumption expenditure of general government);

igv: OECD Economic Outlook n.97; for Austria missing data in the period 1978-1994;
     for Ireland, Italy, Portugal, Spain, we used data from AMECO (gross fixed capi-
     tal formation at current prices: general government, deflated with correspondent
     deflator series in AMECO dataset - price deflator gross fixed capital formation:
     total economy); note that for Portugal and Ireland series are respectively in 2011
     and 2012 prices;

yrg: OECD Economic Outlook n.98; for Australia in the period 1978-1988 and Ireland
     before 1990, Economic Outlook n.88;

sspg: OECD Economic Outlook n.98; for Australia in the period 1978-1988 and Ire-
      land before 1990, Economic Outlook n.88;

oco: OECD Economic Outlook n.98; for Australia in the period 1978-1988 and Ireland
     before 1990, Economic Outlook n.88;

popt: OECD Historical Population Data and Projections (1950-2050).

The variables we use in the analysis are constructed as follows:

                                              40
• GDP deflator
                                                                gd pi,t
                                               pgd pi,t =
                                                                gd pvi,t

• Real per capita GDP growth
                                                                     
                                           gd pvi,t             popti,t
                        ∆yi,t = 100 ∗ log              − log
                                          gd pvi,t−1           popti,t−1

• Percentage Change of Government Spending (as fraction of GDP)
                   "                          ocoi,t +sspgi,t                                  ocoi,t−1 +sspgi,t−1   #
                       (igvi,t + cgvi,t ) +      pgd pi,t           (igvi,t−1 + cgvi,t−1 ) +        pgd pi,t−1
   ∆gi,t = 100 ∗                                                −
                                   gd pvi,t                                           gd pvi,t−1


• Percentage Change of Government Revenues (as fraction of GDP)
                                                    "     yrgi,t          yrgi,t−1    #
                                                         pgd pi,t        pgd pi,t−1
                                 ∆τi,t = 100 ∗                      −
                                                        gd pvi,t        gd pvi,t−1




                                                     41
    Appendix 4: Multipliers in the alternative specifica-
tions

                     Table 13: Output Multipliers in the Alternative Specifications

                                                                     4 ∆y
                                           4                        ∑t=0 t
                                          ∑t=0 ∆yt                4 (∆τ −∆g )
                                                                 ∑t=0 t    t




                                         Non-linearity in the state of the cycle

                       Expansion           −0.74                    −1.36
                                        (−1.21; −0.36)           (−2.67; −0.81)
                       Recession           −0.50                    −1.07
                                        (−0.79; −0.25)           (−1.72; −0.67)


                                        Non-linearity in the composition of plan

                          EB               −0.36                    −0.69
                                        (−0.63; −0.13)           (−1.15; −0.36)
                          TB               −1.17                    −3.56
                                        (−1.59; −0.81)           (−6.26; −2.29)

Note. The table reports the cumulated and cumulated as fraction of cumulated primary surplus multipliers
estimated, respectively, in the model in which we include all the non-linearities, the non-linearity in the
business cycle (expansion vs recession) and the non-linearity in the composition of the plan (EB vs TB).
90 percent bootstrapped (1000 repetitions) confidence intervals for the first column and one standard
deviation for the second in parentheses.




                                                     42
Table 14: Output Multipliers Controlling for Monetary Policy and Excluding Zero Lower Bound Obser-
vations

                                                                        4 ∆y
                                                  4                   ∑t=0   t
                                                 ∑t=0 ∆yt           4 (∆τ −∆g )
                                                                   ∑t=0    t   t




                                                            Euro Area

                                                  −0.49                 −0.88
                                      EB
                                                (−1.81; 0.50)      (−2.51; 0.21)
                        Expansion
                                                  −1.20                 −2.86
                                      TB
                                               (−2.37; −0.20)     (−8.16; −0.89)


                                                  −0.60                 −1.22
                                      EB
                                               (−1.14; −0.09)     (−2.37; −0.54)
                         Recession
                                                  −0.69                 −1.57
                                      TB
                                               (−1.39; −0.04)     (−3.20; −0.63)


                                                        Non-Euro Area

                                                  −0.28                 −0.46
                                      EB
                                                (−0.76; 0.17)     (−1.13; −0.04)
                        Expansion
                                                  −1.28                 −3.23
                                      TB
                                               (−2.30; −0.47)     (−8.04; −1.15)


                                                   0.06                 0.11
                                      EB
                                                (−0.29; 0.40)      (−0.35; 0.45)
                         Recession
                                                  −0.08                 −0.14
                                      TB
                                                (−1.21; 0.94)      (−1.91; 1.05)


                                               Excluding Zero Lower Bound

                                                  −0.44                 −0.71
                                      EB
                                               (−0.88; −0.05)     (−1.43; −0.28)
                        Expansion
                                                  −1.31                 −3.21
                                      TB
                                               (−2.05; −0.63)     (−7.16; −1.60)


                                                  −0.34                 −0.71
                                      EB
                                               (−0.65; −0.06)     (−1.25; −0.30)
                         Recession
                                                  −0.88                 −1.99
                                      TB
                                               (−1.60; −0.28)     (−4.11; −1.00)

Note. The table reports the cumulated and cumulated as fraction of cumulated primary surplus multipliers
estimated, respectively, in the model in which we control for monetary policy and when we exclude the
observations at the Zero Lower Bound. 90 percent bootstrapped (1000 repetitions) confidence intervals
for the first column and one standard deviation for the second in parentheses.




                                                  43
                 Table 15: Output Multipliers under Alternative Specification of F(s)

                                                                         4 ∆y
                                                  4                    ∑t=0   t
                                                 ∑t=0 ∆yt            4 (∆τ −∆g )
                                                                    ∑t=0    t   t




                                               Alternative Specification for F(s)

                                                   0.19                 0.27
                                     EB
                                               (−0.04; 0.40)         (0.07; 0.46)
                       Expansion
                                                   0.12                 0.18
                                     TB
                                               (−0.35; 0.64)         (−0.29; 0.64)


                                                  −0.24                −0.41
                                     EB
                                               (−0.36; −0.14)       (−0.60; −0.28)
                        Recession
                                                  −0.55                −0.94
                                     TB
                                               (−0.68; −0.43)       (−1.26; −0.73)

Note. The table reports the cumulated and cumulated as fraction of cumulated primary surplus multipli-
ers estimated, respectively, in the model in which we adopt the alternative specification of F(s) including
current output growth. 90 percent bootstrapped (1000 repetitions) confidence intervals for the first col-
umn and one standard deviation for the second in parentheses.




                                                    44
Figures

                              Figure 1: Evolution of F (s) and Recessions




Note. Evolution of F(s) for the countries in our sample and years of recession (years negative growth per
capita, shaded areas), 1981-2013.




                                                  45
Figure 2: Impulse responses from the model with heterogeneities between EB and TB plans and across
states of the cycle




Note. The graph shows the response of VAR variables and F(s) to a deficit reduction plan of 1 percent
of GDP. IRFs for tax-based shock starting in recession labeled with stars, for tax-based shock starting
in expansion labeled with squares, for expenditure-based shock starting in recession labeled with circles
and expenditure-based shock starting from expansion labeled with triangles. Dashed lines and shaded
areas are for bootstrapped (1000 repetitions) 90 percent confidence intervals.

                                                  46
     Figure 3: Impulse responses from the model with heterogeneity only across states of the cycle




Note. The graph shows the response of VAR variables and F(s) to a deficit reduction plan of 1 percent
of GDP. IRFs for a plan starting in recession labeled with circles, for a plan starting in expansion la-
beled with triangles. Dashed lines and shaded areas are for bootstrapped (1000 repetitions) 90 percent
confidence intervals.



                                                  47
    Figure 4: Impulse responses from the model with heterogeneity only between EB and TB plans




Note. The graph shows the response of VAR variables and F(s) to a deficit reduction plan of 1 percent of
GDP. IRFs for tax-based shock labeled with circles, for expenditure-based shock labeled with triangles.
Dashed lines and shaded areas are for bootstrapped (1000 repetitions) 90 percent confidence intervals.




                                                  48
Figure 5: Impulse responses from the model with heterogeneities between EB and TB plans and across
states of the cycle, controlling for monetary policy

  (a) Constrained Monetary Policy                                       (b) Unconstrained Monetary Policy




Note. The graph shows the response of VAR variables and F(s) to a deficit reduction plan of 1 percent
of GDP in euro area countries – under a common monetary policy – panel (a), and in the other countries
– where monetary policy is free to adjust – panel (b) . IRFs for tax-based shock starting in recession
labeled with stars, for tax-based shock starting in expansion labeled with squares, for expenditure-based
shock starting in recession labeled with circles and expenditure-based shock starting from expansion
labeled with triangles. Dashed lines and shaded areas are for bootstrapped (1000 repetitions) 90 percent
confidence intervals.




                                                  49
Figure 6: Impulse responses from the model with heterogeneities between EB and TB plans and across
states of the cycle, excluding episodes at the ZLB




Note. The graph shows the response of VAR variables and F(s) to a deficit reduction plan of 1 percent of
GDP, from a model where we exclude episodes at the ZLB. IRFs for tax-based shock starting in recession
labeled with stars, for tax-based shock starting in expansion labeled with squares, for expenditure-based
shock starting in recession labeled with circles and expenditure-based shock starting from expansion
labeled with triangles. Dashed lines and shaded areas are for bootstrapped (1000 repetitions) 90 percent
confidence intervals.
                                                  50
Figure 7: Impulse responses from the model with heterogeneities between EB and TB plans and across
states of the cycle, alternative specification of F (s)




Note. The graph shows the response of VAR variables to a deficit reduction plan of 1 percent of GDP,
from a model where we use an alternative specification of F(s) depending on current output growth.
IRFs for tax-based shock starting in recession labeled with stars, for tax-based shock starting in ex-
pansion labeled with squares, for expenditure-based shock starting in recession labeled with circles and
expenditure-based shock starting from expansion labeled with triangles. Dashed lines and shaded areas
are for bootstrapped (1000 repetitions) 90 percent confidence intervals. The cycle indicator is held fixed
                                                   51
throughout the simulation horizon.
