                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




     DO FEMALE EXECUTIVES MAKE A DIFFERENCE? THE IMPACT OF FEMALE
           LEADERSHIP ON GENDER GAPS AND FIRM PERFORMANCE

                                         Luca Flabbi
                                         Mario Macis
                                         Andrea Moro
                                       Fabiano Schivardi

                                      Working Paper 22877
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w22877


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                  December 2016




We thank Manuel Bagues, John Earle, Stephan Eblich, Nicola Lacetera, Giovanni Pica, Kathryn
Shaw, and seminar participants at several conferences and institutions for very useful comments
and suggestions. Partial funding from the IDB Economic and Sector Work grant RG-K1321, the
PRIN grant 2010XFJCLB_001 and the RAS L.7 project CUP:F71J11001260002 is gratefully
acknowledged. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2016 by Luca Flabbi, Mario Macis, Andrea Moro, and Fabiano Schivardi. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Do Female Executives Make a Difference? The Impact of Female Leadership on Gender Gaps
and Firm Performance
Luca Flabbi, Mario Macis, Andrea Moro, and Fabiano Schivardi
NBER Working Paper No. 22877
December 2016
JEL No. J7,M12,M5

                                         ABSTRACT

We investigate the effects of female executives on gender-specific wage distributions and firm
performance. We find that female leadership has a positive impact at the top of the female wage
distribution and a negative impact at the bottom. Moreover, the impact of female leadership on
firm performance increases with the share of female workers. Our empirical strategy accounts for
the endogeneity induced by the non-random assignment of executives to firms by including in the
regressions firm fixed effects, by generating controls from a two-way fixed effects regression,
and by building instruments based on regional trends. The empirical findings are consistent with a
model of statistical discrimination where female executives are better equipped at interpreting
signals of productivity from female workers. The evidence suggests substantial costs of under-
representation of women at the top of the corporate hierarchy


Luca Flabbi                                     Andrea Moro
University of North Carolina - Chapel Hill      Department of Economics
107 Gardner Hall, CB 3305                       Vanderbilt University
Chapel Hill, NC 27599-3305                      VU Station B #351819
luca.flabbi@gmail.com                           Nashville, TN 37235
                                                andrea.moro@vanderbilt.edu
Mario Macis
Johns Hopkins University                        Fabiano Schivardi
Carey Business School                           Bocconi University
100 International Drive, Office 1333            Via Roentgen 1
Baltimore, MD 21202                             Milan, 20136
and IZA                                         Italy
and also NBER                                   Italy
mmacis@jhu.edu                                  and EIEF
                                                fabiano.schivardi@gmail.com




A Web Appendix is available at
https://www.dropbox.com/s/9cr2kyx52tzvdee/femaleceo-webappendix.pdf?dl=0
            Do Female Executives Make a Difference?
                   The Impact of Female Leadership
             on Gender Gaps and Firm Performance∗
        Luca Flabbi, Mario Macis, Andrea Moro, and Fabiano Schivardi

                                    November 30, 2016



                                          Abstract

          We investigate the effects of female executives on gender-specific wage dis-
      tributions and firm performance. We find that female leadership has a positive
      impact at the top of the female wage distribution and a negative impact at
      the bottom. Moreover, the impact of female leadership on firm performance
      increases with the share of female workers. Our empirical strategy accounts for
      the endogeneity induced by the non-random assignment of executives to firms
      by including in the regressions firm fixed effects, by generating controls from a
      two-way fixed effects regression, and by building instruments based on regional
      trends. The empirical findings are consistent with a model of statistical dis-
      crimination where female executives are better equipped at interpreting signals
      of productivity from female workers. The evidence suggests substantial costs
      of under-representation of women at the top of the corporate hierarchy.

      JEL Codes: M5, M12, J7, J16.
      Keywords: executives’ gender, gender gap, firm performance, glass ceiling, sta-
      tistical discrimination




  ∗
     Flabbi: University of North Carolina-Chapel Hill, CPC-UNC, CHILD-CA and IZA,
luca.flabbi@unc.ed. Macis: Johns Hopkins University, IZA and NBER, mmacis@jhu.edu. Moro:
Vanderbilt University, andrea@andreamoro.net. Schivardi: Bocconi University, IGIER, EIEF and
CEPR, fabiano.schivardi@unibocconi.it. We thank Manuel Bagues, John Earle, Stephan Eblich,
Nicola Lacetera, Giovanni Pica, Kathryn Shaw, and seminar participants at many conferences and
institutions for very useful comments and suggestions. Partial funding from the IDB Economic and
Sector Work grant RG-K1321, the PRIN grant 2010XFJCLB_001 and the RAS L.7 project CUP:
F71J11001260002 is gratefully acknowledged.
1        Introduction
This paper investigates how female executives affect firm-level workers’ wage distri-
butions and performance using a unique matched employer–employee panel dataset
representative of the Italian manufacturing sector.
        A growing literature shows that executives’ characteristics such as management
practices, style, and attitudes towards risk can have an effect on firm outcomes.1
We focus on one of these executives’ characteristics: gender. Our focus on gender
follows from the abundant evidence of systematic gender differentials in the labor
market.2 With respect to executives, research has highlighted that women are almost
ten times less represented than men in top positions in firms.3 For example, recent
U.S. data show that even though women are a little more than 50% of white collar
workers, they represent only 4.6% of executives.4 Our own Italian data show that
about 26% of workers in the manufacturing sector are women compared with only
3% of executives and 2% of CEOs. Together, these facts suggest that it is important
to study the realtion between somen’s under-representation among top executives
and firms’ outcomes.
        This paper provides four contributions to the existing literature. First, we de-
velop a theoretical framework highlighting a potential channel of interaction between
female executives, female workers, wage policies, job assignment, and overall firm
performance. The model implies efficiency costs of women’s under-representation
in leadership positions, and generates original empirical predictions. Second, we in-
vestigate the relationship between female leadership and the gender-specific wage
distributions at the firm level. Unlike most of the previous literature, our theoretical
    1
      Bloom and Van Reenen (2007) is one of the first contributions emphasizing differences in
management practices. See also a recent survey in Bloom and Van Reenen (2010). A growing
literature showing the effects of CEO characteristics follows the influential paper of Bertrand and
Schoar (2003). Among recent contributions, see Bennedsen et al. (2012), Kaplan et al. (2012), or
Lazear et al. (2012). For research on executives’ overconfidence, see Malmendier and Tate (2005).
For theoretical contributions, see for example Gabaix and Landier (2008) and Tervio (2008). For
contributions focusing on both executive and firm characteristics, see Bandiera et al. (2011) and
Lippi and Schivardi (2014).
    2
      For an overview of the gender gap in the U.S. labor market in the last twenty years, see Blau
and Kahn (2004), Eckstein and Nagypal (2004) and Flabbi (2010).
    3
      Evidence from U.S. firms is based on the Standard and Poor’s ExecuComp dataset, which
contains information on top executives in the S&P 500, S&P MidCap 400, and S&P SmallCap
600. See for example, Bertrand and Hallock (2001), Wolfers (2006), Gayle et al. (2012), Dezsö
and Ross (2012). The literature on other countries is quite thin: see Cardoso and Winter-Ebmer
(2010) (Portugal), Ahern and Dittmar (2012) and Matsa and Miller (2013) (Norway), Smith et al.
(2006) (Denmark), Gagliarducci and Paserman (2015) (Germany), and Flabbi et al. (2016a) (Latin
America). A related literature is concerned with under-representation of women at the top of the
wage distribution, see for example Albrecht et al. (2003). Both phenomena are often referred to as
a glass-ceiling preventing women from reaching top positions in the labor market.
    4
      Our elaboration on 2012 Current Population Survey and ExecuComp data.


                                                1
framework leads us to focus not on the effects at the mean but on the differential
impacts over different points of the wage distribution. Third, we investigate the rela-
tionship between female leadership and firm performance, focusing on the interaction
between female leadership and gender composition of the workforce. We concentrate
on indicators of firm performance that are less volatile and closer to firm produc-
tivity than those used by previous literature. Previous contributions have typically
used measures of financial performance while we build measures of sales per worker,
value added per worker and Total Factor Productivity (TFP). Finally, we perform a
series of partial-equilibrium counterfactual exercises to compute the cost of women’s
under-representation in top positions in organizations.
      In Section 2 we present our theoretical framework and derive its empirical impli-
cations. Our model extends the seminal statistical discrimination model of Phelps
(1972) to include two types of jobs, one characterized by complex tasks and the
other by simple tasks, and two types of CEOs, male and female. Based on a noisy
ability signal, CEOs assign workers to jobs and wages. We assume that CEOs are
better (more accurate) at reading signals from workers of their own gender.5 We
also assume that complex tasks require more skills to be completed successfully so
that it is optimal to assign more skilled workers to complex tasks. After defining
the equilibrium generated by this environment, we focus on the empirical implica-
tions of a female CEO taking charge of a male CEO-run firm. Thanks to the more
precise signal they receive from female workers, female CEOs reverse the statistical
discrimination suffered by women, adjusting their wages and reducing the mismatch
between female workers’ productivity and job requirements. The model delivers two
sharp empirical implications:

  1. Female workers at the top of the wage distribution receive higher wages when
        employed by a female CEO than when employed by a male CEO. Female work-
        ers at the bottom of the wage distribution receive lower wages when employed
        by a female CEO. The impact of female CEOs on the male workers’ distribu-
        tion has the opposite signs: negative at the top and positive at the bottom of
        the distribution.

  2. The performance of a firm led by a female CEO increases with the share of
        female workers.

These results follow from the assumption that female CEOs are better at processing
information about female workers’ productivity. Therefore, wages of females em-
ployed by female CEOs are more sensitive to individual productivity, delivering the
  5
      We discuss this assumption in Subsection 2.3.


                                                 2
first implication. Moreover, female CEOs improve the allocation of female workers
across tasks, delivering the second implication.
       Our data, described in detail in Section 3, include all workers employed by
firms with at least 50 employees in a representative longitudinal matched employer-
employee sample of Italian manufacturing firms observed between 1982 and 1997.6
Because we observe all workers and their compensation, we can evaluate the impact
of female leadership on the wage distribution at the firm level. Moreover, we can ob-
tain a precise measurement of the leadership at the firm and assess the proportion of
women among its ranks. Because the data set is rich in firm-level characteristics, we
can compute several measures of firm performance which are less volatile and more
representative of firms productivity than previous literature. Finally, since we can
merge this sample with social security data containing the complete labor market
trajectories of all workers who ever transited through any of the firms in the sample,
we can identify firm, worker and executive fixed effects that help in dealing with the
endogeneity issues affecting the regressions of interest.
       We describe our empirical strategy and present the estimation results in Section
4. We analyze the impact of female leadership on wages of male and female workers
allowing for heterogenous effects across the distribution. We also study the impact
of female leadership on firm performance allowing for interaction with the gender
composition at the firm. Assessing the impact of female executives on any firm-level
outcome faces a fundamental identification problem: executives are endogenously
matched with firms. A typical strategy used by previous literature to reduce the
bias has been to focus only on within-firm variation. We use the same firm fixed
effects strategy but we add additional controls for both observed and unobserved
heterogeneity of the executives and of the non-executive workforce at the firm. Un-
observed heterogeneity controls are obtained from a first step two-way fixed effect
wage regression that we can estimate thanks to the large number of complete labor
market trajectories we observe in our data set. To address the potential endogeneity
induced by unobservable time-varying firm characteristics, in the robustness section
we also propose an instrumental variable (IV) strategy. The identifying assump-
tion is that aggregate trends in the proportion of female executives at the regional
level are exogenous with respect to the time-varying firm-level heterogeneity we are
concerned about.
       Our results show that the impact of female executives is positive on women at
the top of the wage distribution but negative on women at the bottom of the wage
   6
    This is the only period over which our data are available and this is the reason why we cannot
provide an analysis using more recent data.



                                                3
distribution. We estimate the opposite effect on men. As a result, we find that
female leadership at the firm reduces the gender wage gap at the top of the wage
distribution and widens it at the bottom, with essentially no effects on average.
   We estimate that the impact of female leadership on firm performance – as mea-
sured by sales per worker, value added per worker, and total factor productivity
(TFP) – is a positive function of the proportion of female workers employed by the
firm. The magnitude of the impact is substantial: a female CEO would increase
overall sales per employee by about 3.7% if leading a firm employing a proportion of
women equal to the average in the sample (about 20%.) All results are robust to the
use of our IV strategy and to an additional set of robustness exercises, dealing with
the selection induced by entry and exit of firms and workers, the definition of female
leadership, the specific empirical specification, and the measure of firm performance.
   Using our estimates, we perform a partial equilibrium counterfactual exercise
to compute the cost of women’s under-representation in leadership positions. The
effects of increasing the share of female-led firms critically depends on how female
CEO are assigned to firms. If they are randomly scattered across firms, productivity
increases by little or, in some cases, it even decreases. If instead, female CEOs
are assigned to all firms with at least a 20% proportion of female workers (about
50 percent of the sample), sales per worker would increase by 14% in the “treated”
firms, and by 6.7% in the overall sample of firms.
   Even though our theoretical framework provides a unified explanation for the full
set of estimation results we obtain, we discuss in Section 5 other relevant theories
of gender inequality that can plausibly explain at least some of them. We consider
explanations using taste-based discrimination models and explanations based on
complementarities in technology affecting productivity by gender. Among the second
set of explanations, we find that mentoring (Athey et al. (2000)) is consistent with all
of our most precisely estimated results and is at odds with only a subset of our least
precisely estimated results. We conclude that, although the evidence lines up more
precisely with the mechanism we propose, additional work is needed to disentangle
the source of gender-specific complementarities at the firm.
   There is a large literature studying gender differentials in the labor market, and
a fairly developed literature studying gender differentials using matched employer-
employee data. However, the literature on the relationship between the gender of
the firm’s executives and gender-specific wages is scant and has focused on the effect
on average wages, not on the effect over the entire wage distribution. Bell (2005)
and Albanesi et al. (2015) study the impact of female leadership in US firms but
only on executives’ wages. Cardoso and Winter-Ebmer (2010) consider the effect on


                                           4
all workers in a sample of Portuguese firms but without allowing for heterogeneous
effects over the wage distribution. Fadlon (2015) tests a model of statistical discrim-
ination similar to ours and assesses the impact of supervisors’ gender on workers’
wages using U.S. data but does not focus on the wage distribution and does not look
at wages at the firm level. Gagliarducci and Paserman (2015) use German linked
employer-employee data to study the effect of female leadership at the firm on es-
tablishments and workers outcomes. They find no significant association between
outcomes and female leadership, including full-time and part-time log wages for men
and women, once firm fixed-effects are introduced. Lucifora and Vigani (2016) study
the impact of the gender of the immediate supervisor on various workers outcomes
for a large set of European countries. They focus on self-reported discrimination and
they estimate that female supervisors reduce the gender gap. However, their data
do not allow for a firm fixed effects approach and the results are from cross-sectional
data with some controls for selection. A related literature, sparked by recent reforms
in European countries, looks at the impact of the gender of a firm’s board members
instead of its executives. Bertrand et al. (2014) documents that a reform mandat-
ing gender quotas for the boards of Norwegian companies reduced the gender gap
in earnings within board members but did not have a significant impact on overall
gender wage gaps.
       Existing literature on the effect of female leadership on firm performance is also
limited. Most of the contributions focus on stock prices, stock returns and market
values as measures of firms performance7 and on the proportion of women among
board members as measure of female leadership.8 Instead, we propose measures of
firm performance that are less volatile and closer to actual firm productivity (sales
per worker, value added per worker and TFP) and measures of female leadership
relating more directly to the day-to-day running of the firm (female CEO and female
proportion of women among top executives).9


   7
     See for example, Wolfers (2006), Albanesi and Olivetti (2009), Ahern and Dittmar (2012); in
the strategy literature, Dezsö and Ross (2012), Adams and Ferreira (2009), Farrell and Hersch
(2005).
   8
     See for example, Matsa and Miller (2013), which looks at operating profits, and Rose (2007),
which looks at Tobin’s Q.
   9
     Among the few contributions looking at the impact of female executives on non-volatile mea-
sures of firm performance are Smith et al. (2006), with information on value added and profits
from a panel of Danish firms and Gagliarducci and Paserman (2015), with information on business
volume and investment from a sample of German linked employer-employee data.




                                               5
2         Theoretical Framework
We present a simple signal extraction model where inequalities are generated by em-
ployers’ incomplete information about workers’ productivity and where employers’
gender matters. The main assumption of our model is that female and male execu-
tives are better equipped at assessing the skills of employees of their same gender. As
discussed in greater detail below, this may be the result of better communication and
better aptitude at interpersonal relationships among individuals of the same gender,
of more similar cultural background shared by individuals of the same gender, or
other factors. From the model we derive a set of implications that we test in our
empirical analysis.

2.1        Environment
We extend the standard statistical discrimination model in Phelps (1972) to in-
clude two types of employers (female and male), and two types of jobs (simple and
complex). The two-jobs extension allows us to obtain implications for efficiency
(productivity), which is one focus of our empirical analysis.10 Female (f ) and male
(m) workers have ability q which is distributed normally with mean µ and variance
σ 2 . Ability, productivity and wages are expressed in logarithms. CEOs observe a
signal of ability s = q + , where  is distributed normally with mean 0 and variance
 2 where g is workers’ gender m or f . The signal’s variance can be interpreted as a
σg
measure of the signal’s information quality. Employers assign workers to one of two
jobs: one requiring complex (c) tasks to be performed and the other requiring simple
tasks (e) to be performed. To capture the importance of correctly assigning workers
to tasks, we assume that mismatches are costlier in the complex job, where workers
with higher ability are more productive. One way to model this requirement is by
assuming that the dollar value of workers’ productivity in the complex (simple) job
is h (l) if workers have ability q > q, and −h (−l) otherwise, with h > l ≥ 0.11
         Firms compete for workers and maximize output given wages. Workers care only
about wages and not about job assignment per se.

    10
     In the standard model of Phelps (1972) discrimination has a purely redistributive nature. If
employers were not allowed to use race as a source of information, production would not increase,
but this is due to the extreme simplicity of the model. See Fang and Moro (2011) for details.
  11
     The threshold rule for productivity is a strong assumption, which we adopted to simplify the
derivation of the model’s outcome, but it is not crucial. What is crucial is that productivity increases
with ability, and that lower ability workers are more costly mismatched in the complex job.




                                                   6
2.2      Homogenous CEOs
It is helpful to start the analysis by exploring the effect of the worker’s signal precision
on labor market outcomes when all CEOs are of the same gender, let us assume male;
in subsection 2.3 we will extend the environment to include female CEOs.
       Firms’ competition for workers implies that in equilibrium each worker is paid
his or her expected marginal product, which depends on her expected ability E(q|s).
Standard properties of the bivariate normal distribution12 imply that E(q|s) = (1 −
αg )µ + αg s, where αg = σ 2 /(σg
                                2 + σ 2 ). Expected ability is a weighted average of the

population average skill and the signal, with weights equal to the relative variance of
the two variables. When the signal is perfectly informative (σg = 0), the population
mean is ignored; when the signal is pure noise (σg = ∞), expected ability is equal to
the population average. With a partially informative signal, the conditional expected
ability is increasing in both q and s.
       The conditional distribution, which we denote with φg (q|s) is also normal, with
mean equal to E(q|s) and variance σ 2 (1−αg ), g = {m, f }. Denote the corresponding
cumulative distributions with Φg (q|s).
       It is optimal for employers to use a cutoff job assignment rule: workers will
be employed in job c if s ≥ sg . The cutoff sg is computed by equating expected
productivity in the two jobs, as the unique solution to

       h (Pr(q ≥ q|s, g) − Pr(q < q|s, g)) = l (Pr(q ≥ q|s, g) − Pr(q < q|s, g)) .           (2.1)

We denote this solution with s(σg ) to stress its dependence on the signal’s precision.
The worker with signal s(σg ) has the same expected productivity (zero) in both
jobs.13 Competition ensures that wages w are equal to expected marginal products,
which are functions of the signal received and the worker’s gender:
                                     
                                     l (1 − 2Φ (q|s)) if s <s
                                               g              g
                        w(s; σg ) =                             .                           (2.2)
                                     h (1 − 2Φ (q|s)) if s ≥ s
                                                g              g



       We now explore the properties of the wage schedule as a function of the signal’s
                2 . Figure 1 displays the outcome for workers with two different
noise variance σg
  12
    See Eaton (1983)
  13
    Equation 2.1 is satisfied when Pr(q ≥ q|s, g) = 1/2 because of the extreme symmetry of the
setup. This implies also that expected productivity is zero for workers with signal equal to the
threshold. This can be relaxed: all that is needed to obtain our qualitative implications is that
productivity increases with ability, and a comparative advantage to place higher ability workers in
the complex job.



                                                7
                    2.0
                    1.5
                                        σε = 1
                                  (more precise signal)
                    1.0
            Wages
                    0.5



                                                                       σε = 2
                                                                 (less precise signal)
                    0.0
                    −0.5
                    −1.0




                           −4.0                  2.0       3.5                           10.0
                                                   Signal

Figure 1: Simulation of the solution to the problem with parameters σ=1,
q = 1.5, µ = 1, h = 2, l = 1.

           2 . The red continuous line displays the equilibrium wages resulting from
values of σg
a more precise signal than the blue dashed line. As standard in statistical discrim-
ination models, the line corresponding to the more precise signal is steeper than
the line corresponding to the less precise signal. This is the direct implication of
putting more weight on the signal in the first case than in the second. As a result of
one of our extensions - the presence of job assignment between simple and complex
jobs - the two lines also display a non-standard feature: a kink in correspondence to
the threshold signal. The kink is a result of the optimal assignment rule: workers
with signals below the threshold are assigned to the simple job, where ability affects
productivity less than in the complex job, therefore both wage curves are flatter to
the left of the thresholds than to the right of the thresholds.
   The following proposition states that the expected marginal product of a worker
is higher when the signal is noisier if the signal is small enough. Conversely, for
a high enough signal, the expected marginal product will be lower the noisier the
signal. Formally,

Proposition 1. Let w(s; σg ) be the equilibrium wage as a function of the workers’
signal for group g, extracting a signal with noise standard deviation equal to σg .
If σf > σm then there exists sb such that w(s; σf ) > w(s; σm ) for all s < sb and
w(s; σf ) < w(s; σm ) for all s > sb.


                                                       8
       The proof is in Appendix A.14 The next proposition states that productivity is
higher when the signal is more precise. This follows observing that expected ability
                                       2 is smaller.
is closer to the workers’ signal when σg

Proposition 2. Let yg (σg ) be the total production of workers from group g when
their signal’s noise has standard deviation σg . Production yg is decreasing in σg .

       For example, with the parameters used in Figure 1, and assuming that female
workers are those with the larger signal noise variance (σm = 1 and σf = 2), 24
percent of males and 13.2 percent of females are employed in the complex job. Be-
cause there are fewer females than males in the right tail of the quality distribution
conditional on any given signal, more females are mismatched, therefore males’ total
value of (log) production is equal to -0.29, whereas females’ is -0.35. To assess the
inefficiency cost arising from incomplete information, consider that if workers were
efficiently assigned, the value of production would be 1.31 for each group.

2.3      Heterogenous CEOs: Female and Male
Consider now an environment in which some firms are managed by female CEOs
and some by male CEOs.15 We assume that female CEOs are characterized by a
better ability to assess the productivity of female workers, that is, female workers’
                                                                           2 < σ2
signal is extracted from a more precise distribution, with noise variance σF   f
(where the capital F denotes female workers when assessed by a female CEO, and
lowercase f when assessed by a male CEO). Symmetrically, female CEOs evaluate
                                                    2 > σ2 .
male workers’ with lower precision than male CEOs: σM   m
       This assumption may be motivated by any difference in language, verbal and
non-verbal communication styles and perceptions that may make it easier between
people of the same gender to provide a better understanding of personal skills and
attitudes, improve conflict resolutions, assignment to job-tasks, etc. A large socio-
linguistic literature has found differences in verbal and non-verbal communication
styles between groups defined by race or gender that may affect economic and social
outcomes (see e.g. Dindia and Canary (2006) and Scollon et al. (2011)).16 Recent
  14
     This “single-crossing” property of the wage functions of signals of different precision relies on
assuming symmetry of the production function and of the signaling technology. However the result
that a more precise signal implies higher wages at the top of the distribution, and lower wages at
the bottom, is more general, and holds even if the wage functions cross more than once.
  15
     We do not model the change in CEO gender or how the CEO is selected as we are inter-
ested in comparing differences in gender-specific wage distributions between firms where the top
management has different gender.
  16
     There exists also an extensive medical literature showing how physician-patient interactions
are affected by the gender of both the physician and the patient (see Cooper-Patrick et al. (1999)
Rathore et al. (2001), and Schmid Mast et al. (2007)).


                                                  9
employee surveys also indicate that significant communication barriers between men
and women exist in the workplace (Angier and Axelrod (2014), Ellison and Mullin
(2014)). In the economics literature, several theoretical papers have adopted an as-
sumption similar to ours. Lang (1986) develops a theory of discrimination based on
language barriers between “speech communities” defined by race or gender. To moti-
vate this assumption, Lang surveys the socio-linguistic literature demonstrating the
existence of such communication barriers. Cornell and Welch (1996) adopt the same
assumption in a model of screening discrimination. Morgan and Várdy (2009) dis-
cuss a model where hiring policies are affected by noisy signals of productivity, whose
informativeness depends (as in our assumption) on group identity because of differ-
ences in “discourse systems”. More recently, Bagues and Perez-Villadoniga (2013)’s
model generates a similar-to-me-in-skills result where employers endogenously give
higher valuations to candidates who excel in the same dimensions as them. This
result can also provide a foundation to our assumption if female workers are more
likely to excel on the same dimensions as female executives.
    The equilibrium features described in Section 2.2 carry through in the envi-
ronment with heterogenous CEOs. In this new environment we can compare the
equilibrium wages and firm performance in firms with CEOs of different gender. Fo-
cus for example on the wage distributions of female workers. Figure 2 displays the
wage distributions of female workers employed at firms with female or male CEOs.
The distribution displayed by the dashed blue line was computed using a signal with
                2 = 3, representing draws from the (less precise) signals received
noise variance σf
by male CEOs; the distribution displayed by the solid red line was computed using
                              2 = 2, representing draws from the (more precise)
a signal with noise variance σF
signals received by female CEOs. As stated in Proposition 1, Figure 2 shows that
the wage distribution of female workers employed at female CEOs firms has thicker
tails.17 Women working for a female CEO are more likely to be assigned to the
complex task and they earn higher wages at same signals for all the signals above
the single crossing reported in Figure 1. This generates the fatter right tail. Below
the threshold corresponding to the single crossing, women working for a female CEO
earn lower wages at same signal than women working for a male CEO because the
female CEO has a better assessment of how low productivity really is in those cases.
This generates the fatter left tail. The following prediction follows directly from
Proposition 1:

Empirical implication 1. Wages of female workers in firms with female CEOs are
  17
     Other parameters used in this simulation: σ = 1, q = 1, µ = .5, h = 1.1, l = 1. We picked these
parameters to produce a graph that could show the qualitative features of the proposition.


                                                10
                                            Female CEOs (more precise signal)
                                            Male CEOs (less precise signal)

                     1.5
                     1.0
           Density
                     0.5
                     0.0




                           −1           0                        1               2

                                              Female wages


        Figure 2: Simulation of the wage distributions of female workers


higher at the top of the wage distribution, and lower at the bottom of the wage distri-
bution relative to wages of female workers employed by male CEOs. Symmetrically,
wages of male workers in firms with female CEOs are higher at the bottom and lower
at the top of the wage distribution relative to wages of male workers employed by
male CEOs.

       As a result, and as Figure 2 makes clear, we should also expect the variance of
the wage distribution of female workers employed by female CEOs to be higher than
the variance of the wage distribution of female workers employed by male CEOs.
The opposite should be true on the variance of male wages.
       The model has implications for firm performance as well. Proposition 2 states
that total production is higher the lower the signal noise since CEOs can better match
workers to jobs. As a result, we should observe that female CEOs can improve firm
performance by implementing a better assignment of female workers.18 Therefore,
we will test the following empirical prediction:
  18
     Symmetrically, female CEO’s assignment of male workers has the opposite effect. However,
this effect might be weakened if female CEOs, upon assuming leadership, could “trust” the previous
assignment of male workers made by a male CEO. We are agnostic about the details of job reas-
signment of workers of a different gender, which we do not model, and we focus on an implication
that is robust to such details.



                                                  11
Empirical implication 2. The productivity of firms with female CEOs increases
with the share of female workers.

         We derived Propositions 1 and 2 using specific distributional assumptions, but
the empirical implications are robust to alternative distributions of the signal’s noise
and of the underlying productivity. A higher signal precision always implies less mis-
matching of workers to jobs, and a higher correlation of signals with productivity
always implies lower wages when the signal is small and higher wages when the signal
is high. These implications are also robust to alternative specifications of the signal
extraction technology. In the online appendix (Flabbi et al. (2016b)), we derive the
same empirical implications assuming a dynamic model where signals are extracted
every period. Assuming all firms initially have male CEOs, firms acquiring female
CEOs update the expected productivity of female workers with higher precision.
The implications follow because female CEOs will rely on a larger number of more
precise signals from female workers than male CEOs.
         We do not model explicitly the selection process into executive positions (al-
though in the empirical part we will take into account that such process might differ
by gender) or how labor force dynamics are affected by CEO gender in a “general
equilibrium”. The change of a CEO’s gender in our model will affect incentives for
workers to leave the firm hoping to extract a more advantageous signal. Our results
therefore assume rigidities in workforce mobility, which can be motivated by hiring
and firing costs. However, the equilibrium wages by CEO and worker’s gender de-
rived in our propositions are nevertheless optimal and are indicative of the directions
of wage changes we should expect when a CEO of different gender is appointed.19


3         Data and Descriptive Statistics
3.1        Data Sources and Estimation Samples
We use data from three sources that we label INVIND, INPS and CADS. From
these three sources of data, we build a matched employer-employee panel data set
and from this matched data set we extract our final estimation samples.
         INVIND stands for the Bank of Italy’s annual survey of manufacturing firms,
an open panel of about 1,000 firms per year, representative of Italian manufactur-
ing firms with at least 50 employees. INPS stands for the National Social Secu-
rity Institute which provided the work histories of all workers ever employed at an
    19
    This motivates in the empirical analysis the inclusion, in our benchmark specification, only of
data from workers that were not hired after the new CEO was appointed. We check the robustness
of our results to the inclusion of all workers.


                                                12
INVIND firm in the period 1980-1997,20 including spells of employment in firms
not included in the INVIND survey. We match the INVIND firms with the INPS
work histories thanks to unique worker and firms identifiers to create what we call
the INVIND-INPS data set. This data set includes for each worker: gender, age,
tenure21 , occupational status (production workers, non-production workers, execu-
tives), annual gross earnings (including overtime pay, shift work pay and bonuses),
number of weeks worked, and a firm identifier. We exclude all records with missing
entries on either the firm or the worker identifier, those for workers younger than
15, and those corresponding to workers with less than four weeks worked in a given
year. For each worker-year, we kept only the observation corresponding to the main
job (the job with the highest number of weeks worked). Overall, the INVIND-INPS
data set includes information on about a million workers per year, more than half
of whom are employed in INVIND firms in any given year. The remaining workers
are employed in about 450,000 other companies of which we only know the firm
identifier.
       In Table 1 we report summary statistics on workers’ characteristics for the
INVIND-INPS data set. About 67% of observations pertain to production work-
ers, 31% to non-production employees, and 2.2% to executives. Even though they
represent about 21% of the workforce, women are only 2.5% of executives. On av-
erage, workers are 37 years old and have 5 years of tenure. Average gross weekly
earnings at 1995 constant prices are around 388 euros, with women earning about
24% less than men (309 euros vs. 408 euros).
       CADS, the third data source we use, stands for Company Accounts Data Service
and includes balance-sheet information for a sample of about 40,000 firms between
1982 and 1997, including almost all INVIND firms. The data include information
on industry, location, sales, revenues, value added at the firm-year level, and a firm
identifier. Again thanks to a unique and common firm identifier, we can match
CADS with INVIND-INPS.
       Most of our empirical analysis focuses on the balanced panel sample consisting of
firms continuously observed in the period 1988-1997. In Table 1 we report summary
statistics both on this sample and on the entire, unbalanced INVIND-INPS-CADS
sample for the same period. Notice that the unit of observation on the sample is
a firm in a given year while in the INVIND-INPS was a worker in a given firm in
  20
     The provision of these work histories data for the employees of the INVIND firms was done
only once in the history of the data set and therefore can only cover firms and workers up to 1997.
This is the reason why we cannot work on more recent data.
  21
     Tenure information is left-censored because we do not have information on workers prior to
1981.



                                                13
Table 1: Descriptive statistics: INVIND-INPS sample and INVIND-
INPS-CADS sample


                          INVIND-INPS                INVIND-INPS-CADS
                                                Unbalanced        Balanced
                                                    panel                      panel
                        Mean    Std.Dev.    Mean           Std.Dev.   Mean            Std.Dev.
   % Prod. workers      66.5                67.6            (18.7 )   67.4             (18.3)
   % Non-prod. wrk      31.3                29.8            (17.7)    30.0             (17.3)
      % Executives       2.2                2.5              (1.7)     2.6              (1.8)
        % Females       21.1                26.2            (20.9)    25.8             (20.1)
     % Fem. execs.       2.5                 3.3            (10.3)     3.4             (10.1)
    % Female CEO                             2.1                       1.8

                Age     37.0    (10.1)       37.2            (3.6)      37.4            (3.4)
              Tenure     5.1     (4.1)        8.1            (2.6)       8.7            (2.3)
      Wage (weekly)     387.2   (253.8)     400.3           (86.0)     404.5           (88.7)
       Wage (males)     408.1   (271.8)     429.3           (92.7)     433.9           (97.5)
      Wage (females)    309.5   (146.6)     343.3           (67.0)     346.4           (68.5)

   Firm size (empl.)                        675.0       (2,628.6)      704.2       (1,306.9)
   Sales (’000 euros)                      110,880      (397,461)     118,475      (231,208)
    Sales/worker (ln)                        4.93         (0.62)        4.95         (0.57)
  Val. add./wkr (ln)                         3.77         (0.43)        3.79         (0.41)
                 TFP                         2.49         (0.50)        2.49         (0.49)

     N. Observations       18,664,304                5,029                      2,340
           N. Firms          448,284                  795                        234
         N. Workers         1,724,609
           N. Years             17                    15                         10


a given year. The unbalanced INPS-INVIND-CADS panel includes 5,029 firm-year
observations from a total of 795 unique firms. Of these, 234 compose the balanced
panel. In the unbalanced sample, average gross weekly earnings at 1995 constant
prices are equal to about 405 euros. On average, workers are 37.2 years old and have
8 years of tenure. 68% of workers are blue collar, 30% white collar, and 2.5% are
executives. The corresponding statistics in the balanced sample are very similar.




                                           14
3.2      Female Leadership
We identify female leadership from the job classification executive 22 in the data. As
already observed by Bandiera et al. (2011), one advantage of using data from Italy
is that this indicator is very reliable because the job title of executive is subject to
a different type of labor contract and executives are registered in a separate account
with the social security administration agency (INPS). We identify the CEO as the
executive with the highest compensation in a firm-year. This procedure is supported
by the following: i) Salary determination in the Italian manufacturing sector is such
that the compensation ordering follows very closely the hierarchical ranking within
each of the three broad categories we observe (executives, non-production workers,
production workers); ii) The firm’s CEO is classified within the executive category;
iii) We have a very detailed and precise measure of compensation because we have
direct access to the administrative data that each firm is required by law to report
(and that each worker has the incentive to verify is correctly reported); iv) We have
access to all the workers employed by a given firm in a given year.23
       Using these definitions, we find that although females are 26.2% of the workforce
in INVIND firms, they are only 3.3% of the executives, and only 2.1% of CEOs. The
descriptive statistics for the balanced panel are quite similar to those referring to the
unbalanced sample and confirm the under-representation of women in top positions
in firms found for other countries. In particular, the ratio between women in the
labor force and women classified as executives is very similar to the ratio obtained
from the ExecuComp24 data for the U.S.
       Women’s representation in executive positions in Italy has increased over time
but remains small: In 1980, slightly above 10 percent of firms had at least one female
executive, and females represented 2% of all executives and 1% of CEOs; In 1997,
these figures were 20%, 4% and 2%, respectively. There is substantial variation
across industries in the presence of females in the executive ranks, but no obvious
pattern emerges about the relationship between female leadership and the presence
of females in the non-executive workforce in the various industries.25
  22
      The original job description in Italian is dirigente, which corresponds to an executive in a US
firm.
   23
      We have the complete set of workers only for the INVIND firms and as a result we can only
assign CEO’s gender to INVIND firms. However, this is irrelevant for our final estimation sample
at the firm level since for other reasons explained below we limit our main empirical analysis to
a subset of INVIND firms. For another example in the literature using wage ranking to infer top
managers, see Tate and Yang (2015).
   24
      Execucomp is compiled by Standard and Poor and contains information on executives in the
S&P 500, S&P MidCap 400, S&P SmallCap 600. See for example, Bertrand and Hallock (2001),
Wolfers (2006), Gayle et al. (2012), Dezsö and Ross (2012).
   25
      See Table B1 in Flabbi et al. (2016b) for details.



                                                 15
Table 2: Descriptive statistics: Firms with Male and Female CEO in
INVIND-INPS-CADS sample

                                            Male CEO              Female CEO
                                        Mean      St.Dev.       Mean     St.Dev.
                       CEO’s age         49.5       (7.1)        46.6      (7.1)
                     CEO’s tenure        4.4        (3.7)        4.0       (2.8)
             CEO’s annual earnings     199,385   (144,508)     128,157   (54,643)

             % Production workers       67.5         (18.7)     75.4          (13.5)
              % Non-prod. workers       30.0         (17.8)     22.2          (13.1)
                      % Executives      2.5           (1.7)      2.4           (1.4)
                         % Females      25.9         (20.7)     37.2          (27.0)
               % Female executives      2.4           (6.9)     46.8          (29.5)
    % Female executives (excl. CEO)      3.3         (10.3)     15.9          (28.6)

            Firm size (employment)      683.7      (2,655.4)    270.3         (409.9)
                              Age       37.2         (3.6)       35.9           (3.5)
                            Tenure       8.1         (2.6)        8.6           (2.2)
             Wage (earnings/week)       401.6       (86.0)      341.3          (61.7)
                      Wage (males)      430.6       (92.8)      369.4          (64.2)
                    Wage (females)      343.3       (66.2)      345.4          (97.1)

             Sales (thousand euros)    112,467     (401,486)   37,185     (55,982)
               Sales per worker (ln)     4.9          (0.6)      4.7        (0.6)
        Value added per worker (ln)      3.8          (0.4)      3.6        (0.4)
                               TFP       2.5         (0.5 )     2.4         (0.5)

                    N. Observations              4,923                  106
                          N. Firms              788 60                   33
                          N. Years                 15                    10


   In Table 2 we compare firms with a male CEO with those with a female CEO.
Firms with a female CEO are smaller, both in terms of employment and in terms of
revenues, pay lower wages, and employ a larger share of blue collar workers. Firms
with a female CEO also employ a larger share of female workers (37 vs. 26 percent).
However, when one looks at measures of productivity (sales per employee, value
added per employee, and TFP), the differences shrink considerably. For instance,
total revenue is on average about 3 times higher in firms with a male CEO than in
firms with a female CEO, but revenue per employee, value added per employee and
TFP are only about 21 percent, 19 percent and 4 percent higher, respectively.




                                          16
4         Empirical Analysis
4.1        Specification and Identification
The unit of observation of our analysis is a given firm j observed in a given year t.
We are interested in the impact of female leadership on workers’ wage distributions
and firms’ performance.
         We will estimate regressions of the following form:

                        0           0          0
 yjt = βF LEADjt + F IRMjt γ + W ORKjt δ + EXECjt χ + λj + ηt + τt(j) t + εjt (4.1)

where: yjt is the dependent variable of interest, either moments of the workers’ wage
distribution or measures of firm performance, and β is the coefficient of interest. The
regressors and controls are defined as follows: F LEADjt is the measure of female
leadership used in the regression: either a female CEO dummy or the fraction of
female executives; F IRMjt is a vector of observable time-varying firm character-
istics (dummies for size, industry, and region); W ORKjt is a vector of observable
workforce characteristics aggregated at the firm-year level (age, tenure, occupation
distribution, fraction female) plus worker fixed effects aggregated at the firm-year
level and estimated in a “first step” regression described in detail below; EXECjt is a
vector of observable characteristics of the firm leadership used in the regression (age
and tenure as CEO or executive) plus CEO’s or executives’ fixed effects estimated
in the first step regression described in detail below;26 λj are firm fixed effects; ηt
are year dummies and τt(j) are industry-specific time trends.
         The main challenge in estimating the impact of female CEOs (or female leader-
ship in general)27 on workers’ wages and firms’ performance is the sample selection
bias induced by the non-random assignment of CEOs to firms. In particular, it is
possible that:

     1. unobservable firm characteristics may make some firms more productive than
           others, and this unobserved firm-level component may not be randomly as-
           signed between male- and female-led firms;

     2. the workforce composition of firms led by women might systematically differ
           from that of firms led by men;
    26
      When the female leadership measures is the female CEO dummy we simply use the CEO’s
value of the listed regressors; when the leadership measure is the proportion of female executives
at the firms, we use the average of the listed regressors over the firm’s executives.
   27
      To simplify the discussion, we present the identification for the case in which female leadership
is represented by the dummy female CEO. The same discussion carries through when we use the
fraction of female executives as a measure of female leadership.


                                                  17
   3. the selection on unobserved individual ability in the position of CEO may not
         be the same by gender so that women CEOs may be of systematically higher or
         lower ability than men CEOs. As a result, female leadership indicators might
         be capturing such differences rather than gender effects.

       Our strategy to address these issues is to control for firm fixed effects, work-
force composition effects, and CEO effects. First, we include controls for a set of
time-varying, observable firm characteristics, workforce characteristics, and CEO
characteristics. Second, we control for time-invariant firm-level heterogeneity by es-
timating equation (4.1) with firm fixed effects both for wages and firm performance.
Using within-firm variation to identify the impact of female leadership at the firm
level has so far been the identification strategy most commonly employed in the liter-
ature.28 Third, and new in the literature, we add controls for unobservable workforce
and CEO heterogeneity obtained from a first step two-way fixed effects regression,
as described next.
       Our matched employer-employee data includes the entire work history (between
1980 and 1997) of all the workers who ever transited through one of our J INVIND
firms. This large matched employer-employee data set (almost 19 million worker-year
observations) contains a large number of transitions of individuals across (INVIND
and non-INVIND) firms and is thus well suited to estimate two-way fixed effects as
in Abowd et al. (1999)(henceforth, AKM). An individual fixed effect estimated from
such a regression has the advantage of controlling for the firms the worker or executive
has ever worked for. As a result, it can capture those scale effects in individual
productivity which are usually captured by education, other time-invariant human
capital or other proxies for “ability” and skills.29
       Our strategy is to use the individual fixed effects from an AKM regression to
construct proxies for CEO/executive and average worker ability at the firm-year
level to include as controls in regression 4.1. Specifically, we perform the two-way
fixed effects procedure proposed by Abowd et al. (2002) by estimating the following
equation:
                                                           J
                                                           X
                           wit =   s0it β   + η t + αi +         djit Ψj + ζit .                (4.2)
                                                           j=1

The dependent variable is the natural logarithm of weekly wages. The vector of
  28
     See for example, Smith et al. (2006), Albanesi and Olivetti (2009), and Gagliarducci and Paser-
man (2015)
  29
     Including these controls as described in detail below also helps to alleviate the fact that our
data set, as is frequently the case with administrative data, does not include a particularly rich set
of controls at the individual worker level. For example, we have no measure of education or other
formal training in the data which are usually included as controls in wage regressions.


                                                   18
observable individual characteristics, s0 , includes age, age squared, tenure, tenure
squared, a dummy variable for non-production workers, a dummy for executives
(occupational status changes over time for a considerable number of workers), as
well as a full set of interactions of these variables with a female dummy (to allow the
returns to age, tenure and occupation to vary by gender), and a set of year dummies.
Our original sample consists of essentially one large connected group (comprising 99%
of the sample). Thus, in our estimation we focus only on this connected group and
disregard the remaining observations. The identification of firm effects and worker
effects is delivered by the relatively high mobility of workers in the sample over the
relatively long period under consideration: about 70 percent of workers have more
than one employer during the 1980-1997 period, and between 8 and 15 percent of
workers change employer in a given year. The α̂i obtained by this procedure for the
firms’ CEOs and executives are included in the vector EXECjt to control for CEO’s
individual heterogeneity. Moreover, we also used them to compute the mean α̂i on
the workers of a given firm j in time t, which we then include among the controls
for workforce composition (W ORKjt ).30
    The AKM method hinges on the assumptions of exogenous mobility of work-
ers across firms conditional on observables. We follow Card et al. (2013) (CHK
henceforth) in performing several tests to probe the validity of the assumption.31
We conclude that in our context, similarly to what found by CHK in the case of
Germany, the additively separable firm and worker effects obtained from the AKM
model can be taken as reasonable measures of the unobservable worker and firm
components of wages. Tests and results are reported in detail in the Flabbi et al.
(2016b).32
    The three steps described above provide controls for: (i) time-varying, observ-
able firm characteristics, workforce characteristics, and CEO characteristics; (ii) un-
   30
      Under our model, the workers’ wages from which we have estimated these worker fixed effects
are affected by statistical discrimination. This does not introduce a bias in the estimate of the mean
α̂i on the workers of a given firm j in time t because the model, as common in standard statistical
discrimination models, does not imply “group discrimination”. Moreover, the group of workers we
have at each firm is large enough to deliver credible estimates: Our firms are relatively large by
construction (firms are included in the INVIND sample only if they employ at least 50 employees)
and the median number of workers in INVIND firms is around 250.
   31
      Specifically, a model including unrestricted match effects delivers only a very modest improved
statistical fit compared to the AKM model, and the departures from the exogenous mobility as-
sumption suggested by the AKM residuals are small in magnitude. Moreover, wage changes for
job movers show patterns that suggest that worker-firm match effects are not a primary driver of
mobility in the Italian manufacturing sector. Instead, the patterns that we uncover are consistent
with the predictions of the AKM model for job movers.
   32
      The two-way fixed effect regressions generate expected results: wages exhibit concave age and
tenure profiles, and there is a substantial wage premium associated with white collar jobs and,
especially, with executive positions.


                                                 19
observable time-invariant firm characteristics; and, (iii) unobservable time-invariant
CEO/executive and average worker heterogeneity. These three steps constitute our
preferred identification strategy and generate our benchmark specifications. In a
fourth step, we provide extensive robustness analyses. Specifically, we address the
robustness of our estimation results with respect to: the inclusion of workers hired
by the new CEOs; separate impacts of being a newly nominated CEO; exit and
entry of firms; different measures of female leadership and firm performance; and
unobservable time-varying firm-level shocks potentially correlated with the CEO’s
gender. This last robustness exercise is conducted by building novel instruments
applying Bartik’s seminal idea (Bartik (1991)) to our firm-level analysis.
    The estimation of equation (4.1) for the various dependent variables of interest is
presented in Section 4.2 and 4.3. All regressions share the same baseline specification
which includes firm fixed-effects, time-varying firm controls, workforce composition
controls and controls for CEOs’ characteristics. Specifically, the complete set of
controls is: CEO age, tenure as CEO, CEO fixed effects computed in the 2-way
fixed-effects regression described above, the fraction of non-executive female workers,
the fraction of non-production workers, the mean age of the workforce, the average
of workers’ fixed effects computed in the 2-way AKM fixed-effects regression, a set of
15 region dummies, 20 industry dummies, 4 firm-size dummies, year dummies, and
industry-specific time trends. Notice that the firm fixed effects also control for the
firms’ownership type, which for the vast majority of the companies in our sample
does not change over time.33

4.2    Female Leadership and Firm-Level Workers Wages
       Distributions
In the model we presented in Section 2, female CEOs extract more precise signals
of productivity from female workers. A more precise signal implies that women at
the top of the wage distribution should earn higher wages than females at the top
of the distribution employed by male CEOs. Women at the bottom of the wage
distribution, on the other hand, should earn lower wages when employed by female
   33
      There are four types of firms in our dataset: family firms, conglomerates, foreign/institution
owned and government owned. The presence of female executives appears to be similar across
ownership types, with the exception of government owned firms, where female executives are almost
non-existent (government-owned firms are lessn than 5% of the sample). In the full sample, women
are 3.3% of executives in family firms, 2.4% in conglomerates, and 3.3% in foreign/institution-owned
firms. The proportions of firm-year observations with a female CEO is 1.8% among family firms,
1.2% among conglomerates, and 1.1% among foreign/institution-owned firms. In the balanced
panel, proportions are also relatively stable with, respectively, 4.6%, 2.8% and 5.5% of female
executives and 3.0%, 1.5% and 2.7% of female CEOs.



                                                20
Figure 3: Coefficients of female CEO dummy on average wages by quantile
of the female and male wage distributions



                      0.10



                                  Females
                                  Males
        Coefficient
                      0.04
                      0.00




                              1             2               3            4
                      ⌧0.04




                                                Quantiles


CEOs. As a result, the overall wage dispersion of female workers in each firm should
be higher in firms managed by women CEOs.

4.2.1      Results

Motivated by this prediction, we estimate equation (4.1) using as dependent variables
yjt a set of firm- and gender-specific moments of the workers’ wages distribution:
the standard deviation, average wages below and above the median, below the 10th
and above the 90th percentile, and average wages within each quartile of the wage
distribution. Our main regressor of interest is the measure of female leadership:
a female CEO dummy or the share of female executives. As described in Section
4.1, all regressions include firm fixed-effects, time-varying firm controls, workforce
composition controls and controls for CEOs’ characteristics.
   Figure 3 summarizes our main results by reporting the estimated coefficients
on the female CEO dummy on the four quartiles of the wage distribution using
our benchmark specification. The red continuous line shows that female leadership
has a positive effect on female wages at the top of the distribution and a negative
effect at the bottom of the distribution. The effect on the male wage distribution,
illustrated by the blue dashed line, is symmetric and of the opposite sign. The effects
are consistently increasing, moving from the bottom to the top of the female wage
distribution, whereas they are decreasing moving from the bottom to the top the

                                                 21
male distribution. These results conform to Empirical prediction 1 of Section 2.
    To provide details on the precision and robustness of these results, we report
the estimated effects of female leadership on various moments of the female wage
distribution in Table 3 and of the male wage distribution in Table 4, according to six
different specifications (panels (a) through (g)).34 Coefficient estimates for the more
relevant controls for the benchmark specification are reported in the Appendix, and
for the other specifications in the Web Appendix.
    Panel (a) reports the results of our benchmark specification, where the measure
of female leadership is a dummy variable indicating whether the firm is managed by
a female CEO. This specification is estimated using the balanced sample to avoid the
selection of firms entering and exiting the sample. To eliminate possible confounding
effects induced by workers being hired or leaving after the appointment of the female
CEO, we used only observations on workers hired under the previous CEO and who
stay at the firm during the female CEO’s tenure. Other specifications show that this
sample selection and choice of variables do not significantly affect our results.
    For each specification, the tables report the estimated coefficient on the measure
of female leadership. In addition, because our model makes specific predictions on
the effects of female leadership on the wage variance, and on wages at the top and
bottom of the gender-specific wage distributions, we report the p-values of 1-tailed
tests of the model’s predictions.35 Specifically, we test the null hypothesis that female
leadership has zero impact on the dependent variable against different alternatives
specified according to the predictions of the model. That is, we test against the
alternative hypothesis that female leadership has a positive impact on the variance
of female wages, a positive impact at the top of the female wages distribution and
a negative impact at the bottom. On the corresponding moments of the male wage
distribution, the alternative hypothesis is that the impact of female leadership has
the opposite signs. Top and bottom are defined as above and below the median.36
   34
      Dependent variables in columns (4)-(9) are defined as follows: Decile 1 (column 4): average
wage of earners below the 10th percentile of the wage distribution. Decile 10 (column 5): average
wage of earners above the 90th percentile. Quantile 1: average wages below the 25th percentile;
Quantile 2: average wages between the 25th and 50th percentile; Quantile 3: average wages between
the 50th and the 75th percentile; Quantile 4: average wages above the 75th percentile of the wage
distribution.
   35
      Given that individual CEO effects are generated regressors from a first step estimation, in
all specifications except (f)-(h), P-values are computed using bootstrapped standard errors with
300 replications. As described in detail in the Appendix, our bootstrapping procedure resamples
firms, stratifying by firms that never had a female CEO and firms that had a female CEO. In
specification (f)-(h), standard errors are clustered at the firm level. Standard errors are reported
in the Appendix for the benchmark specification and in the Web Appendix (Flabbi et al. (2016b))
for the other specifications.
   36
      Note that the theory predicts that the effects of female leadership should be positive or negative
at the top or bottom but does not predict non-parametrically where the change of sign should occur.


                                                  22
 Table 3: Impact of female leadership on moments of the firm-level female
 wage distributions

                                                          Average wages
Dependent           Std.
           →                       Median               Decile                     Quantiles
 variable:          dev.
                              Below    Above          1       10    1              2       3         4
                     (1)       (2)      (3)          (4)     (5)   (6)            (7)     (8)       (9)

                                            (a) Benchmark
    Coefficient     0.475     -0.030      0.078    -0.043 0.167        -0.031    -0.026   0.006    0.104
 1-tail P-value     0.000     0.090       0.003    0.124 0.004         0.147     0.112    0.424    0.001

                                           (b) All workers
    Coefficient     0.418     -0.032      0.049    -0.038 0.121        -0.036    -0.027   -0.020   0.072
 1-tail P-value     0.000     0.041       0.062    0.146 0.009         0.108     0.043    0.824    0.027

                                  (c) With controls for new CEO
    Coefficient     0.477     -0.030    0.079    -0.043 0.168 -0.030             -0.026   0.007    0.105
 1-tail P-value     0.000     0.090     0.003     0.124 0.004 0.148              0.112    0.410    0.001

                                            (d) Full panel
    Coefficient     0.403     -0.016      0.073    -0.004 0.170        -0.007    -0.022   0.006    0.096
 1-tail P-value     0.000     0.206       0.000     0.448 0.000        0.390     0.121    0.370    0.000

           (e) Different measure of female leadership: fraction of female executives
    Coefficient     2.108   -0.036    0.310    -0.114 0.789 -0.053 -0.022 -0.007                   0.421
 1-tail P-value     0.000   0.188     0.000     0.109 0.000 0.172         0.286    0.571           0.000

              (f) Without controls for unobservable workforce and CEO ability
    Coefficient   0.460    -0.035    0.072    -0.045 0.159 -0.035 -0.032 0.001                     0.097
 1-tail P-value   0.000    0.037     0.009    0.086 0.007 0.093      0.051    0.481                0.004

                                     (g) IV on specification (f)
    Coefficient     0.948     -0.096     0.059   -0.441 0.165          -0.213    -0.018   -0.018   0.067
 1-tail P-value     0.000     0.111      0.287    0.015 0.194          0.023     0.387    0.618    0.315

                            (h) IV on specification (f) and (e) combined
    Coefficient     1.464      -0.162   0.075     -0.666 0.243 -0.333            -0.047   -0.043   0.088
 1-tail P-value     0.000      0.066    0.333      0.002 0.216 0.009             0.306    0.680    0.350

 Firms fixed-effects regressions. Dependent variables are in logs. Dependent variables in columns
 (4-9) are defined in Footnote 34. Coefficients for a larger set of explanatory variables and standard
 errors are reported in Appendix and the online appendix (Flabbi et al. (2016b)). Number of
 observations: 2,340 (234 Firms, 10 years), all specifications except (d); specification (d): 5,029
 observations (795 firms). P-values are computed using bootstrapped standard errors with 300
 replications in (a)-(e) and by standard errors clustered at the firm level in (f)-(h).

                                                   23
  Table 4: Impact of female leadership on moments of the firm-level male
  wage distributions

                                                            Average wages
Dependent            Std.
           →                       Median                Decile                      Quantiles
 variable:           dev.
                              Below    Above          1        10     1             2        3        4
                      (1)      (2)      (3)          (4)      (5)    (6)           (7)      (8)      (9)

                                             (a) Benchmark
    Coefficient     -0.107     0.021     -0.027    0.029 -0.069         0.031     0.016    0.010    -0.039
 1-tail P-value     0.130      0.118      0.188    0.091   0.116        0.047     0.193    0.667     0.148

                                            (b) All workers
    Coefficient     -0.113     -0.016    -0.037 -0.023 -0.071           -0.016    -0.015   -0.014   -0.047
 1-tail P-value     0.095      0.894      0.080     0.919   0.078       0.901     0.870    0.183     0.076

                                   (c) With controls for new CEO
    Coefficient     -0.105     0.022    -0.027    0.029 -0.067 0.031              0.016    0.010    -0.039
 1-tail P-value     0.133      0.115     0.194    0.090    0.120 0.046            0.188    0.670     0.153

                                             (d) Full panel
    Coefficient     -0.152     0.030     -0.038    0.058 -0.092         0.049     0.019    0.005    -0.054
 1-tail P-value     0.021      0.002      0.069    0.000    0.035       0.000     0.038    0.630     0.049

            (e) Different measure of female leadership: fraction of female executives
    Coefficient -0.232       0.008     -0.091 -0.024 -0.203 -0.004 0.016            0.004           -0.128
 1-tail P-value     0.132    0.409      0.067   0.648    0.039    0.539    0.303    0.550            0.048

                  (f) Without controls for unobservable workforce and CEO ability
    Coefficient       -0.187  0.018     -0.043    0.023 -0.104 0.026     0.013    0.007             -0.060
 1-tail P-value       0.013   0.154      0.059    0.148   0.027    0.077 0.231    0.629              0.037

                                     (g) IV on specification (f)
    Coefficient     -0.342     0.078    -0.054   0.075 -0.142           0.076     0.077    0.054    -0.093
 1-tail P-value     0.063      0.019     0.258   0.131     0.167        0.037     0.047    0.846     0.178

                             (h) IV on specification (f) and (e) combined
    Coefficient     -0.559     0.103    -0.101     0.090 -0.246 0.095             0.102    0.071    -0.162
 1-tail P-value     0.030      0.040     0.208     0.226    0.117   0.119         0.049    0.832     0.138

  Firms fixed-effects regressions. Dependent variables are in logs. Dependent variables in columns
  (4-9) are defined in Footnote 34. Coefficients for a larger set of explanatory variables and standard
  errors are reported in Appendix and the online appendix (Flabbi et al. (2016b)). Number of
  observations: 2,340 (234 Firms, 10 years), all specifications except (d); specification (d): 5,029
  observations (795 firms). P-values are computed using bootstrapped standard errors with 300
  replications in (a)-(e) and by standard errors clustered at the firm level in (f)-(h).

                                                    24
    The results on the benchmark specification (row (a)) show that:
    (i) Female leadership has a strong, economically and statistically significant pos-
itive effect on the variance of women’s wages, as predicted by the theory. The
standard deviation of female wages is almost 50% larger when the firm is managed
by a female CEO. The effect on the male wage variance is also strong (about 10%)
and, as predicted by our model, of the opposite sign, but less precisely estimated.
    (ii) The effect of female leadership on wages at the top of the female wage dis-
tribution (columns 3, 5, and 9) is strongly positive and statistically significant, with
P-values of less than 1%. Females with wages above the median earn on average 7.8%
more when working for a female CEO than for male CEOs (Table 3, column 3). The
effect of female leaderships is stronger at the right end of the wage distribution: the
(highly significant) positive impact of female leadership is 10.4% for females with
wages above the 25th percentile (column 9) and 16.7% for those earning above the
10th percentile (column 5). Symmetrically, the effect of female leadership on wages
at the bottom of the male wage distribution (Table 4, columns 2, 4, 6, and 7) is
positive and significant at levels close or below the 10% level.
    (iii) The effect of female leadership is monotonically increasing moving from the
bottom to the top of the female wage distribution (compare the estimates of columns
2 and 3, 4 and 5, and of columns 6 through 9). The opposite holds true for the effect
on male wages. This is the result illustrated in Figure 3.
    (iv) The effect of female leadership at the bottom of the female wage distribution
(columns (2), (4), and (6)) is negative and large across all specifications, although it
is less precisely estimated than the effects at the top of the wage distribution.
    (v) The estimates on the third quantile of the wage distribution (column 8 in
both tables) do not reject the hypothesis that the coefficients are zero. This is still
consistent with the theory, which predicts that the effects of female leadership should
be zero somewhere in the interior of the wage distribution, but does not predict non-
parametrically where the change of sign should occur.

4.2.2    Robustness

We describe here robustness analyses of the results. To ease the comparison, results
are reported in the same tables (3 and 4).
    We first address the sensitivity of our results to excluding workers hired by the
female CEO. Since we do not explicitly model selection of workers or hiring decisions,
our benchmark specification only included workers hired under the previous CEO
Therefore, choosing the median is arbitrary. This is the reason why we add other possible cuts to
the wage distribution: top and bottom 10% and quartiles.


                                               25
and who stayed at the firm during the female CEO’s tenure. Panel (b) presents
results after removing this restriction, i.e. including in the sample workers hired by
the new CEO. On the female samples (Table 3), there is only a small decrease in the
magnitude of the effects at the top of the distribution. On the male samples, point
estimates have the same sign and similar magnitudes, but we lose significance at the
bottom of the distribution.
   The second concern relates to the treatment effect we are trying to identify. A
firm changing from being led by a male CEO to a female CEO implies a change of
CEO. The effect that we are estimating could be due to the change of leadership
rather than to the change in the leadership’s gender. In panel (c) all the regressions
include an additional control for whether the CEO was recently appointed. Results
are almost identical to those from the benchmark specification.
   The third concern relates to the selection of firms. In the benchmark specification
we focus on a balanced panel sample since we do not explicitly model entry and exit of
firms and the data do not specify whether firms no longer in the data were liquidated
or acquired. Panel (d) reports the results on the full (unbalanced) panel. The
estimation sample changes substantially and the sample size increases significantly:
from 234 firms observed over 10 years in the balanced panel, to 795 firms observed
over a maximum of 10 years for a total of 5,029 observations. Despite this major
change in the estimation sample, most results are very similar to the benchmark
specification. The estimates at the bottom of the female distribution are less precise
and have smaller magnitudes than in the benchmark, but they maintain the expected
sign.
   The fourth concern refers to the measure of female leadership we use. The CEO’s
gender is an important measure of female leadership, it has been used in previous
literature and it fits well with our theoretical model. However, the identification
hinges on the relatively small number of firms experiencing a switch in CEO’s gender.
We use the proportion of female executives at the firm to evaluate the impact of a
leadership measure displaying more variation than the female CEO dummy. Results
are presented in panel (e). On the female sample, all the signs are consistent with
the benchmark specification, the estimates are very precise on the regressions on the
standard deviation and the top of the wage distribution whereas they have P-values
slightly higher than 0.1 in the regressions at the bottom of the wage distribution.
On the male sample, the bottom decile and quantile show the wrong sign, but the
coefficients are very imprecisely estimated. All of the other estimates are consistent
with the benchmark.
   The fifth robustness check is about the calculation of the standard errors. All of


                                         26
our specifications include generated regressors (the workers’ and CEOs’ fixed effect
obtained from the two-way fixed effects regression). For this reason (and since we
do not have an expression for the variance and covariance matrix from the AKM
procedure), we have bootstrapped the standard errors. Panel (f) reports results
from a specification which does not include the generated regressors so that we can
compute standard errors clustered at the firm level in the conventional way. All of
the estimates have the expected sign and comparable magnitudes. With respect to
the benchmark, P-values are generally smaller on the female sample and at the top
of the distribution of the male sample, and higher at the bottom of the male sample.
       The sixth robustness exercise accounts for potential endogeneity induced by time-
varying firm-level shocks. For example, a significant change to unobservable traits
such as "corporate culture" may lead to the appointment of a female CEO, but also
directly impact wages and performance. Such shocks cannot be controlled for by the
firm fixed-effects we have in our specifications because they are time-invariant. To
address this problem we construct a set of instruments inspired by Bartik (1991).
The instruments exploit aggregate growth in the proportion of female executives at
the region-year level.37 We assume that aggregate trends in female leadership are
exogenous with respect to the time-varying firm-level heterogeneity we are concerned
about, but they are potentially co-moving with actual firm-level values once we apply
aggregate growth rates to firm-specific initial conditions (recall that the endogeneity
of firm-specific initial conditions is controlled for by firm fixed-effects.) The firm-
specific initial conditions we use are the proportion of female executives and the
predicted probability of having a female CEO in a given base year for a firm. The
instruments are built applying aggregate growth rates to these base-year values. A
detailed explanation of the instruments’ construction is provided in Appendix C.38
       Results are reported in Panels (g) and (h). Panel (g) reports IV results on spec-
ification (f), i.e. the specification without the generated regressors obtained from
the two-way fixed effects regression. We prefer to avoid generated regressors in our
IV firm fixed-effects procedure in order to use conventional statistics to evaluate the
first stage and compute standard errors. Panel (h) reports IV results on a specifica-
tion without generated regressors but uses the other measure of female leadership:
fraction of female managers. The first stages of our IV procedure do not indicate
the presence of weak instruments problems.39 Yet, they explain a limited amount of
  37
     There are a total total of 21 regions in our data.
  38
     Due to data limitations, the base year we consider is 1988, the first year of the estimation panel
data. We have experimented with earlier base years but the loss of observations in the balanced
panel became quickly too severe. The predicted probability of having a female CEO in a given base
year is based on a firm-year level probit
  39
     See the Appendix and the online appendix (Flabbi et al. (2016b)).


                                                  27
variation. This issue, coupled with the already relatively small number of identifying
observations, leads to larger standard errors and higher P-values in most of our IV
regressions. Only the regressions on the standard deviation and on the bottom of
the wage distribution for women deliver P-values within the range of conventional
significance levels. If the IV estimates are imprecise, the sign and magnitude are
entirely in line with our benchmark specifications. This is true both in the specifica-
tions using female CEO as the measure of female leadership and in those using the
fraction of female executives. It also holds both on the regressions using the female
wage distribution and on those using the male wage distribution.

4.2.3   Summing up

To summarize, the point estimates’ signs of the differential impact of female leader-
ship over the wage distribution are consistent with the prediction of our theoretical
framework. These effects are strong and robust across specifications. They are also
strongly statistically significant when predicted to be positive, with the exception of
the IV specifications. When they are predicted to be negative, the estimates that
we obtain are close to and often below conventional levels of statistical significance.
   Despite the lack of strong statistical significance at the bottom of the wage distri-
butions in some specifications, we argue that the results are remarkably consistent
with our proposed mechanism. There are at least four factors that support this
claim. First, the sign of the point estimates is consistent across specifications. In
particular, results are robust to extending the data to include the full panel of firms,
and to including all workers (not just those that were employed at the time the fe-
male CEO took charge of the firm). They are also robust to excluding the generated
regressors computed in the two-way fixed-effects regression. In this case, the point
estimates are more precisely estimated even though the reported standard errors are
clustered at the firm level. As expected, the IV estimates are more imprecise, but
signs and magnitudes are in line with benchmark specifications. Second, the effects
are generally stronger at the extremes of the distribution, as one can observe by
comparing the extreme deciles to the first and fourth quartiles. A stronger impact
at the extremes is predicted by our model, as made clear by Figure 2 in Section 2.
Third, the effects are increasing from the left to the right of the female wage distribu-
tion, consistent with the theory. The opposite occurs on the male wage distribution.
Finally, downward wage rigidity works against finding large negative effects at the
bottom of the wage distribution. It is therefore possible that the lower precision
of the estimates at the the bottom is more related to ignoring institutional factors
that may reduce downward wage adjustments than to a significant violation of the


                                           28
mechanism we propose.

4.3      Female Leadership and Firm-Level Performance
This section is motivated by the second Empirical Implication of our theoretical
framework. Female executives improve the allocation of female talents within the
firm by counteracting pre-existing statistical discrimination from male executives.
We expect the efficiency-enhancing effects of female leadership to be stronger the
larger the presence of female workers.

4.3.1      Results

Table 5 presents the estimation results from firm performance regressions, i.e. coef-
ficients from estimating equation (4.1) where the dependent variable yjt is one of the
three measures of firm performance: sales per employee, value added per employee,
and TFP.40 The female leadership measures and the controls are the same as those
used in the wage regressions. As in the previous subsection, our benchmark specifi-
cation focuses on the balanced panel of firms that were continuously observed from
1988 through 1997 (panel (a) in the table). The other panels report results from our
robustness analysis and they are discussed in section 4.3.2. In Table 5 we report the
coefficients only on the variables of interest for our results. The Appendix reports
the set of estimated coefficients for the other main explanatory variables.
       Columns 1, 3, and 5 present specifications without interacting the female leader-
ship variable with the share of females in the firm’s workforce, and confirm previous
results from the literature: as found by Smith et al. (2006), Albanesi and Olivetti
(2009), and Gagliarducci and Paserman (2015)41 female executives do not have a
significant impact on firm performance once one controls for firm fixed effects.42
       However, when we change the specification in order to assess Empirical Implica-
tion 2 from our model, results are different. Columns 2, 4, and 6 of Table 5 report
the estimated coefficients from specifications where the measure of female leadership
is interacted with the proportion of non-executive female workers at the firm.43 Our
model predicts a positive effect of this interaction because female CEOs improve
  40
     We computed TFP using the Olley and Pakes (1996). See Iranzo et al. (2008) for details.
  41
     Recent work on the impact of gender quotas for firms’ boards have found a negative impact
on short-term profits (Ahern and Dittmar (2012), Matsa and Miller (2013)). However, first, these
papers consider the composition of boards, not executive bodies; second, it is not clear whether
the impact is due to imposing a constraint on the composition of the board or to the fact that the
added members of the boards are female.
  42
     The only exception is TFP reporting a marginally significant negative impact.
  43
     Just as in the wage regressions, we only focus on non-executives because the theory presented
in Section 2 is not modeling promotion to executive, executive pay or interaction within executives.


                                                29
      Table 5: Impacts of female leadership on firm-level performance

         Dependent                  Sales per          Value added
                    →                                                            TFP
          variable:                 employee           per employee
                                  (1)       (2)        (3)      (4)        (5)         (6)

                                            (a) Benchmark
        Female leadership        0.033      -0.120   -0.046     -0.245    -0.059    -0.213
        Std. Error              (0.039)    (0.045) (0.038)     (0.041)   (0.029)   (0.039)
        Interaction                         0.610                0.795               0.616
        1-tail P-value                      0.007                0.003               0.019

                                            (b) Full Panel
        Female leadership        0.029      -0.009    -0.049    -0.093    -0.061    -0.096
        Std. Error              (0.024)    (0.034) (0.026)     (0.032)   (0.024)   (0.031)
        Interaction                         0.123                0.144               0.115
        1-tail P-value                      0.066                0.022               0.041

          (c) Different measure of female leadership: fraction of female executives
        Female leadership    0.025    -0.322     -0.208    -0.429    -0.236    -0.413
                            (0.098) (0.194) (0.119) (0.221) (0.126) (0.238)
        Interaction                    1.098                0.697               0.559
        1-tail P-value                 0.007                0.083               0.146

               (d) Without controls for unobservable workforce and CEO ability
        Female leadership     0.027     -0.104   -0.064   -0.234    -0.072   -0.200
        Std. Error           (0.061) (0.071) (0.058) (0.057) (0.045) (0.051)
        Interaction                     0.523              0.677              0.513
        1-tail P-value                  0.001              0.000              0.002

                                     (e) IV on specification (d)
        Female leadership        0.212     -0.131   -0.219     -1.174     -0.399    -1.701
                                (0.159) (0.452) (0.279) (0.773)          (0.352)   (1.118)
        Interaction                        0.645                1.821                2.472
        1-tail P-value                     0.165                0.064                0.076

                        (f) IV on specification (d) and (c) combined
        Female leadership     0.292   -0.218     -0.323    -1.336   -0.593          -1.887
                             (0.263) (0.517) (0.358) (0.859) (0.427)               (1.241)
        Interaction                    1.051                2.087                    2.668
        1-tail P-value                 0.080                0.067                    0.086
Firms fixed-effects regressions. Female leadership: Female CEO dummy (panels a, b, d, e); Fraction
of female executives (panel c, f); Interaction: female leadership interacted with the fraction of
female workers (non-executive). Coefficients for a larger set of explanatory variables and standard
errors are reported in Appendix B and in the online appendix (Flabbi et al. (2016b)). P-values
are computed using bootstrapped standard errors with 300 replications in (a)-(c) and by standard
errors clustered at the firm level in (d)-(f).
                                                  30
firm performance by better allocating female workers. The higher the proportion
of women, the higher the potential for gains in reallocation. Consistently with this
prediction, we find a positive and significant coefficient on the interaction variable
for each of the three measures of firm performance. The magnitude of the impact
is substantial: for example, looking at column (2) we see that a female CEO taking
over a firm employing the average proportion of women in the sample (about 25%)
would increase sales per employee by about 3.2%; if half of the firm’s workers were
women the impact would be about 18.5%.

4.3.2   Robustness

As in the wage regressions section, we provide a robustness analysis of the results
presented in the benchmark specification. They are reported in panels (b) to (f) and
address the same set of concerns.
   Panel (b) reports results obtained using the full (unbalanced) panel. Again, the
change in the estimation sample is substantial but the main effects still hold. The
interaction term registers a positive effect, even if the magnitude is smaller and the
estimates more imprecise but still significant.
   Panel (c) reports results using the proportion of female executives as a measure
of female leadership. We estimate an economically significant positive effect. The
estimated effect is statistically significant for Sales and Value Added per employee,
whereas it is not significant for TFP.
   Panel (d) is obtained from regressions that do not include the generated regressors
in order to avoid the computation of the standard errors by bootstrap. The point
estimates are of a similar order of magnitude and the P-values rejecting a negative
effect on the interaction are even stronger than in the benchmark specifications.
   Panels (e) and (f) report estimates obtained from firm fixed effects IVs using the
same instruments used in section 4.2.2 and described in details in the Appendix.
The main results of the benchmark specification are confirmed both on regressions
using female CEO as measure of female leadership and on regressions using fraction
of female executives. The interaction is positive on all specifications and the mag-
nitude is generally larger than on the benchmark, in particular on TFP. The 1-tail
test rejects a negative impact at conventional levels on all specifications with the
exception of female CEO on sales per employee. In this case the P-value is slightly
above 10% registering a value of 0.165.




                                          31
4.3.3       Summing up

Empirical Prediction 2 in our model implies that the productivity of firms with fe-
male leadership should increase with the share of female workers. We asses this
prediction by introducing an interaction term in firm fixed effects regressions which
use three measures of firm performance as dependent variable. The crucial inter-
action is between the measure of female leadership and the proportion of female
workers at the firm. The model predicts a positive coefficient on this interaction.
       All our point estimates return an economically significant positive coefficient. A
series of 1-tail tests broadly reject a negative interaction in 16 out of 18 specifications.
The two specifications not rejecting the null at least at a 10% level report P-values
fairly close to it.44 We view these results as fully consistent with Empirical prediction
2 derived from the model.

       We conclude our empirical analysis claiming that our theoretical model provides a
unified framework able to explain the full set of empirical results found in this section.
Our proposed mechanism can account for effects as varied as the differential impact
of a CEO’s gender along the wage distribution and the strong positive interaction
between female leadership and female workers when increasing firms’ productivity.

4.4       Potential efficiency gains from gender quotas
In order to provide an order of magnitude of the potential efficiency gains generated
by increasing the presence of women in corporate leadership positions, for example
through gender quotas, we consider a partial-equilibrium exercise using the param-
eter estimates from our benchmark specification reported in Table 5. We performed
two counterfactuals. One is a “targeted” exercise where we allocated a female CEO
to all firms whose performance would improve as a result, that is, firms with at least
20 percent of female employees. This results in 51% of firms with a woman CEO. In
the other exercise, we assign a female CEO to the same proportion of firms (51%)
selected randomly. Results are reported in Table 6.
       If Female CEOs are allocated randomly, the average percent change is small,
and its sign depends on the measure of performance. In contrast, our “targeted”
exercise delivers large positive effects in the firms that are assigned a female CEO,
and also positive effects overall. For example, in this scenario sales per worker would
increase by 14.2% in the “treated” firms (firms whose CEO’s gender has changed)
and by 6.7% in the overall sample of firms. This is because our findings imply large,
positive interaction effects between female leadership and the share of female workers.
  44
       14.6% in specification (c) on TFP and 16.5% in specification (e) on sales per employee.


                                                  32
                             Table 6: Impact of gender quotas

           Counterfactual               Average percent gain             Percent gain for treated
CEO Allocation              Quota   Sales    Value added       TFP     Sales    Value added       TFP
Female share > 20%          51%      6.7           4.2          2.1     14.2          8.7          4.3
Random                      51%      1.9          -2.1         -2.7      3.7         -4.1         -5.4

  Average percent gains relative to fitted data. “Treated” firms are firms that acquire a female CEO.


  Although our exercises ignore general equilibrium effects, these results confirm that,
  based on our estimates, the order of magnitude of the efficiency gains from having a
  larger female representation in firm leadership can be quite large.45


  5        Empirical Results and Alternative Theories of
           Gender Inequality.
  Our empirical analysis is motivated by a theory of gender inequality focusing on
  asymmetric information on productivity. We argue in Section 4 that our estimation
  results are consistent with the predictions of this theoretical framework. At the same
  time, the theoretical framework provides a unified explanation for the variety of
  estimation results we obtain. However, other relevant theories of gender inequality
  can plausibility explain or provide mechanisms for at least some of our empirical
  results. We will discuss alternative models focusing on two aspects: (i) preferences
  for workers of a specific gender and (ii) complementarities in technology affecting
  productivity by gender.

  5.1       Gender Preferences
  The first alternative theory is based on the taste-based discrimination model first
  proposed by work of Becker (1971). In the standard setup, employers’ discrimination
  is equivalent to assuming in our model that executives receive a disutility from
  employing workers of the opposite gender. The first implication of this model is that
  male executives pay women less than equally productive men. The gender wage gap
  will be larger the larger the disutility from employing women. Female executives
  will engage in a similar symmetric behavior against men. The result is a gender gap
      45
      The effect on the average gender wage gap, not shown in the table, is small. In firms acquir-
  ing female leadership, the higher wages of female workers at the high end of the distribution are
  compensated by lower wages at the low end of the wage distribution.



                                                  33
that is homogenous across the wage distribution, which is difficult to reconcile with
the differential effects we find along female and males’ wage distributions and that
we report in Section 4.2.
    A theory based on preferences can explain very well the impact of a female CEO
at the top of the wage distribution: a positive effect for female workers (which are
not discriminated against) and negative for male workers (which are discriminated
against). However, it cannot explain the opposite impact observed at the bottom of
the distribution where we find that the impact of a female CEO is a wage decrease for
female workers and a wage increase for male workers. To be reconciled with all of our
evidence, this theory would require the ad-hoc assumption that CEOs preferences
differ in intensity by workers’ wage or skill level. For example that female CEO
have preferences for female workers at the top of the distribution, and hold prejudice
against women at the bottom of the distribution.
    A preference-based theory is also difficult to reconcile with one of our strongest
finding in Section 4.3: the large, statistically significant, and robust effect on firms’
performance of the interaction of female leadership with the share of female work-
ers. Discriminating CEOs optimize when workers’ marginal products is equal to
their marginal cost (wage plus additional psychic cost if the worker is discriminated
against). Therefore, employers have no reason to allocate workers to a task where
their marginal product is lower, regardless of the worker’s gender or the strength of
the employer’s prejudice. Negative productivity effects are generated when employ-
ers misallocate workers across tasks. Hence, the gender composition of the workforce
in itself has no implications on productivity without assuming special preferences for
task assignment46 .

5.2    Complementarities Between Female Leadership and Female
       Workers.
The second possible theory focuses on technological complementarities that may
affect productivity by gender differently.
    The first relevant example of this technology is mentoring. Mentoring is an
activity in which upper-level employees are able to increase the productivity of lower-
level employees with whom they are in contact.47 Complementaries by gender takes
  46
     These implications are robust to the market structure allowing the discriminating firm to sur-
vive. As pointed out by Arrow (1973), discriminating firms, being less profitable, cannot survive in
a competitive environment, but when non-competitive features of the product market are present
discrimination may persist. See for example Black (1995) and Rosén (2003) for theoretical contri-
butions and Flabbi (2010) and Charles and Guryan (2008) for empirical evidence.
  47
     We follow the formal definition provided in Athey et al. (2000). For examples of empirical



                                                34
place when mentoring is more effective between employees of the same gender. In
our case, the upper-level employees are the CEOs and executives and the lower-
level employees with whom they are in contact may be the entire workforce or just
the most skilled or higher ranked workers at the firm, depending on the internal
organization of the firm and its size. We do not have enough data variation to study
differential impacts for different firm sizes and we do not have enough observables
to build different skills levels within the labor force. However, in Section 4.2 we
find that female CEOs and executives have a positive impact on wages of women at
the top of the distribution. This is consistent with a model of mentoring under the
assumptions that CEOs and top executive are more in contact with workers at the
top of the wage distribution and that mentoring is more common or effective with
employees of the same gender. If mentoring also has a positive impact on improving
the matching of mentored workers to tasks, this theory is also consistent with our
main results on productivity reported in Section 4.3.
    Mentoring, however, has difficulties in explaining our results at the bottom of
the wage distributions, namely the fact that female CEOs and executives decrease
the wages of women and increase the wages of men in this part of the distribution.
Results at the bottom of the wage distribution are more consistent with another
technology which has exactly the opposite effect: the so called called “Queen Bee
syndrome”.48 In this theory, women who have managed to reach top-positions in
male dominated environment (like the female CEOs and executives that we observe
in our data) engage in the opposite of mentoring other women, i.e. they intentionally
damage their career prospects. We could not find strong supporting evidence of
this technology in the empirical economics literature. Moreover, we find difficult to
rationalize a technology where female CEOs act as benevolent mentors for women
at the top of the wage distribution and as malevolent “Queen Bees”at the bottom.
Finally, it is not clear what the overall impact on productivity should be of such a
mixed technology.
    A more credible assessment of the mentoring technology in light of our empirical
results is that the estimation results consistent with the theory are more robust
and precisely estimated than those against it. The crucial discriminating evidence
between a mentoring model and our statistical discrimination model is the differential
impact of female CEOs and executives at the bottom of the wage distribution but
this is also the weakest set of results in our empirical analysis. With our sample
works discussing and assessing empirical implications related to this concept, see Matsa and Miller
(2013), Bell (2005), and Bednar and Gicheva (2014)
  48
     See Bednar and Gicheva (2014) for use in the economics literature and Staines et al. (1974) for
the original concept from psychology.



                                                35
size and data variations we could not go beyond the evidence presented in Section
4. Other relevant empirical works available in this area do not provide a definitive
answers. If numerous works exist confirming the positive impact of female leadership
at the top of the distribution,49 only Tate and Yang (2015) find significant impact
at the bottom of the wage distribution but with the opposite sign with respect to
us. However, they admit that the results may be partially driven by the very few
observations of women at the top of the distribution.50 We therefore conclude that
additional work is needed – possibly using larger data sets with more data variation
– in order to check this specific impact of the interaction between workers and firms’
leadership.
         The second relevant example of gender-specific complementarities in technology
is the ability of executives to infer the imperfectly observed productivity of lower-
level employees. Complementaries by gender appear when this ability is enhanced
when executives and employees are of the same gender. This is essentially the as-
sumption we have used in our proposed theoretical framework. In Section 2.3 we
have mentioned easier communication between same-gender workers as a possible
foundation for the assumption. If this easier communication is enhanced by men-
toring activity then the mentoring technology we just discussed may give additional
foundation to the main assumption we have used on our theoretical framework.
         In conclusion, we believe that our results support the notion that complementar-
ities exist between female skilled workers and firms’ female leadership. Our results
suggest, but cannot definitively support that the nature of such complementarities
takes the form implied by our statistical discrimination model. Additional investiga-
tion is therefore needed to confirm the particular form of complementarities taking
place at the firm and to identify the relevent mechanisms behind it.


6         Conclusion
Motivated by a recent literature showing the importance of executives’ personal
traits in determining firm policies and outcomes, and by the traditional literature
on gender differentials in the labor market, we investigate whether female executives
make a difference on gender-specific wage distributions and on firm performance.
    49
     See for example Matsa and Miller (2013) and Bell (2005).
    50
     Bednar and Gicheva (2014) is a recent contribution presenting different but related evidence.
They use a panel dataset matching Athletic Directors with Universities and including information
about the gender composition in lower levels of the job ladder in order to look at the impact
of female leadership on career progression by gender. They do not find evidence that gender is
predictive of a supervisor’s female-friendliness and therefore do not add conclusive empirical results
with respect to our issues.



                                                 36
   We find that female leadership increases the variance of women’s wages at the firm
because of a positive impact on wages at the top of the distribution and a (smaller)
negative impact on wages at the bottom. In our preferred specification, female CEOs
increase wages for women in the top 25% of the women’s wage distribution by about
10 percentage points and they decrease wages for women in the bottom 25% by about
3 percentage points. The impact on the men’s wage distribution has opposite signs.
When looking at the impact on firm performance, we estimate that the interaction
between female CEOs and the share of female workers employed at the firm has a
positive impact on firm performance. The magnitude of the impact is substantial:
in our preferred specification, a female CEO taking over a male-managed firm with
at least 20% women in the workforce increases sales per employee by about 14%.
   Our main specification deals with the endogeneity induced by the non-random
assignment of executives to firms by estimating firm fixed effects regressions and
by introducing controls for both observed and unobserved heterogeneity of the ex-
ecutives and of the non-executive workforce at the firm. We obtain unobserved
heterogeneity controls from a first step two-way fixed effects wage regression esti-
mated on a large longitudinal matched employer-employee sample of Italian firms.
To address the impact of unobservable time-varying firm characteristics, we also pro-
pose an IV strategy based on the assumption that aggregate trends in the proportion
of female executives at the regional level are relatively exogenous with respect to the
time-varying firm-level heterogeneity we are concerned about.
   Our results are robust to the employing our IV strategy and to an additional
array of robustness exercises: alternative measures of female leadership, different
empirical specifications, different sample selection criteria for firms and workers, and
different measures of firm productivity.
   Our empirical analysis is motivated by a model of statistical discrimination where
female executives are better equipped at interpreting signals of productivity from fe-
male workers. As a result of this attenuated information asymmetry, female CEOs
taking charge of previously male-led firms are able to reverse statistical discrimina-
tion, paying women wages that are closer to their actual productivity and matching
them to jobs that are more in line with their skills. Our estimation results are con-
sistent with the prediction of this theoretical framework. At the same time, the
theoretical framework provides a unified explanation for the variety of estimation
results we obtain. However, we acknowledge that an alternative theory of gender
inequality – gender-specific mentoring – can explain most of our empirical results
and is in contradiction only with our least robust and least precise estimates. We
conclude that additional empirical work is needed to confirm the particular form of


                                           37
gender complementarities taking place at the firm.
       Interpreting our results through the implications of our theoretical model suggests
that there are potentially high costs associated with the under-representation of
women at the top of corporate hierarchies. Companies with a substantial female
presence would be likely to benefit from assigning women to leadership positions.
Results from a partial-equilibrium counterfactual experiment based on our point
estimates show that if all the firms with at least 20% of female workers were lead by
female CEOs, they would see their sales per worker increase by about 14.2%. From a
public policy point of view, the same partial-equilibrium counterfactual experiment
shows that an integrated generalized extension of women in leadership positions
would lead to a much smaller51 but still positive effect on sales per worker.




  51
    3.7% instead of 14.2%, see Table 6. Results on Value Added and TFP would actually turn from
positive to negative, with magnitudes always smaller than in the sales per worker case.


                                              38
A      Appendix: Proof of Proposition 1
Proof. Define sb as the signal such that the wage of male and females is the same.
                                                                                   s) =
From (2.2) note that sb is independent of the task assignment, and satisfies Φm (q|b
Φf (q|b
      s); sb exists and is unique because the cumulatives of two Normal distributions
with different variance cross only once.52 Under the assumption σf > σm , Φm has
thinner tails than Φf , therefore:

                       1 − 2Φm (q|s) < 1 − 2Φf (q|s) for all            s < sb                  (A.1)
                       1 − 2Φf (q|s) < 1 − 2Φm (q|s) for all            s > sb                  (A.2)

Observe also from (2.2) that either sb ≤ min{sm , sf }, or sb ≥ max{sm , sf }. To
prove it, note that by definition of sg , Φm (q|sm ) = Φf (q|sf ) = 1/2, therefore if
sm < sf we must have Φf (q|s) < 1/2 < Φm (q|s), for all s ∈ (sm , sf ); other-
wise, if sm > sf we must have Φm (q|s) < 1/2 < Φf (q|s) for all s ∈ (sf , sm ).
Hence the crossing of the distributions Φm (q|b
                                              s) and Φ(q|b
                                                         s) must occur outside of
the range (min{sm , sf }, max{sm , sf }), that is either (i) sb < min{sm , sf }, or (ii)
sb > max{sm , sf }. Case (i) is displayed in Figure 1.53 In case (i) both male and female
workers with signal s < sb are employed in the simple job, and w(s; σm ) < w(s; σf )
holds because of (A.1). But then it must also be the case that sm < sf because
Φg (q|b
      sg ) < 1/2. We need to show that w(s; σm ) > w(s; σf ) for s > sb. This is imme-
diate from A.2 if males and females are employed in the same job given s, that is, for
s : sb < s < sm or s > sf . For sm < s < sf , we have (by definition of sm , sf ) male (fe-
male) workers employed in the complex (simple) job. From (A.2) ∨s : sm < s < sf ,
we have l (1 − 2Φf (q|s)) < h (1 − 2Φm (q|s)) hence w(s; σm ) > w(s; σf ) which com-
pletes the proof for case(i). Case (ii) is proved symmetrically: male and females with
s ≥ sb are employed in the complex task and receive wages w(s; σm ) > w(s; σf ).
Therefore, sf < sm , and wages below sm must satisfy w(s; σm ) < w(s; σf ) by an
argument similar to that made for case (i).


   52
      Consider two normal distributions F, G with different variance (σF > σG ). Then, regardless
their mean, there exists a unique x : F (x) > G(x) for all x < x, and F (x) < G(x) for all x > x.
To prove this single crossing property, denote with f, g the densities of distributions F, G. Because
f, g are symmetric around their respective means, and σF > σG , the two densities intersect at
points x1 , x2 with f (x) > g(x) if x < x1 or x < x2 , and f (x) < g(x) for x1 < x < x2 . But then
F (x) > G(x) for all x < x1 and 1 − F (x) > 1 − G(x), or F (x) < G(x) for x > x2 . Hence any
intersection between F and G must occur between x1 and x2 , but in this range f (x) > g(x), that is,
F (x) has derivative greater than the derivative of G(x), therefore there can be only one intersection.
   53
      Case (i) holds whenever q > µ, that is whenever employers without signals would place all
workers in the simple job, hence a more precise signal implies placing more workers in the complex
job.


                                                  39
B     Appendix: Additional Results on Benchmark
      Specification
We report the estimation results for the benchmark specification. Results for all
robustness specifications are available in the online appendix (Flabbi et al. (2016b)).
    All the reported standard errors are computed by a bootstrapping procedure. We
need to compute standard errors by bootstrapping on specifications (a)-(e) because
they include generated regressors (the CEO and worker fixed effects) from the first
step. Standard errors in the first stage can be computed only by bootstrap (AKM.)
We perform the bootstrapping procedure by resampling at the firm level and by
resampling separately firms that never had a female CEO and firms that had a
female CEO at least once. This procedure is meant to produce standard errors that
are clustered at firm level and stratified by female CEO dummy. Since stratification
at the first step may generate samples with zero or very few firms with female
CEOs at the second step, identification of the parameters of interest may not be
attained for some bootstrap runs. Therefore, we computed standard errors using
only bootstraps with more than 10 firms with a female CEO in the second stage.
We run the procedure until we reach 300 valid replications.




                                          40
                              Table A.1: Full set of estimates on female wages, benchmark specification



       Dependent             Standard
                 →                                                           Average wages
        variable             deviation
                                                 Median                 Decile                      Quantiles
                                            Below    Above         1         10         1          2        3          4
      Expl. variable ↓          (1)          (2)      (3)         (4)        (5)       (6)        (7)      (8)        (9)

      Female CEO               0.475        -0.030      0.078     -0.043      0.167    -0.031    -0.026     0.006     0.104
                              (0.122)      (0.022)    (0.028)    (0.037)    (0.063)   (0.029)   (0.022)   (0.030)   (0.035)
      CEO age                  0.076        0.074      0.044      -0.019      0.065    0.059     0.092     0.045     0.043
                              (0.425)      (0.067)    (0.092)    (0.152)    (0.179)   (0.090)   (0.070)   (0.063)   (0.115)
      CEO tenure               0.006        -0.001     -0.000     0.002      0.001     -0.000    -0.002    -0.001    0.000
                              (0.004)      (0.001)    (0.001)    (0.002)    (0.002)   (0.001)   (0.001)   (0.001)   (0.001)
      CEO < 1980               -0.011       0.016      0.012      0.011      0.010     0.014     0.017     0.014     0.014
                              (0.056)      (0.007)    (0.012)    (0.018)    (0.027)   (0.012)   (0.007)   (0.008)   (0.015)
      CEO fixed eff.           0.049        0.013      0.015      -0.005      0.024    0.008     0.016     0.010     0.017




41
                              (0.054)      (0.008)    (0.011)    (0.021)    (0.021)   (0.013)   (0.008)   (0.007)   (0.013)
      Avg. wrk. age            0.097        0.054      0.068      0.084      0.078     0.065     0.050     0.051     0.072
                              (0.067)      (0.035)    (0.042)    (0.058)    (0.048)   (0.043)   (0.032)   (0.033)   (0.045)
      Avg. wrk. tenure         -0.026       -0.002     -0.007     -0.006     -0.011    -0.003    -0.003    -0.003    -0.008
                              (0.017)      (0.003)    (0.004)    (0.009)    (0.007)   (0.005)   (0.003)   (0.003)   (0.005)
      % white collars          0.381        -0.131     -0.014     -0.502      0.092    -0.286    -0.049    -0.038    0.019
                              (0.401)      (0.070)    (0.103)    (0.201)    (0.187)   (0.111)   (0.067)   (0.072)   (0.125)
      Fraction female          0.227        -0.595     -0.577     -0.623     -0.435    -0.661    -0.556    -0.541    -0.572
                              (0.488)      (0.111)    (0.126)    (0.341)    (0.188)   (0.182)   (0.101)   (0.125)   (0.145)
      Avg. wkr. F.E.           1.960        1.250      1.577      1.897      1.764     1.474     1.130     1.181     1.680
                              (0.714)      (0.156)    (0.190)    (0.440)    (0.329)   (0.258)   (0.136)   (0.169)   (0.232)
      Constant                 1.009        4.149      3.993      3.269      3.789     3.763     4.306     4.390     3.893
                              (1.996)      (0.981)    (1.171)    (1.695)    (1.392)   (1.211)   (0.879)   (0.921)   (1.258)
      R2 : Between             0.153        0.222      0.367      0.081      0.263     0.115     0.253     0.298     0.351
      Within                   0.100        0.448      0.500      0.086      0.277     0.270     0.515     0.528     0.443
      Overall                  0.105        0.413      0.486      0.070      0.273     0.222     0.481     0.507     0.432
     Dependent variables are in logs. Boostrapped standard errors in parentheses; see text for details. Additional controls: 15 region dummies, 20 industry
     dummies, 4 firm-size dummies, year dummies, industry-specific trends, and 234 firm fixed effects.
                                Table A.2: Full set of estimates on male wages, benchmark specification



       Dependent             Standard
                 →                                                           Average wages
        variable             deviation
                                                 Median                 Decile                         Quantiles
                                            Below    Above         1         10          1            2        3         4
      Expl. variable ↓          (1)          (2)      (3)         (4)        (5)        (6)          (7)      (8)       (9)

      Female CEO               -0.107       0.021      -0.027     0.029      -0.069    0.031     0.016       0.010     -0.039
                              (0.094)      (0.018)    (0.031)    (0.022)    (0.057)   (0.018)   (0.018)     (0.023)   (0.038)
      CEO age                  1.815        0.046      0.317      0.069       0.787    0.053     0.041       0.056      0.433
                              (0.869)      (0.061)    (0.197)    (0.093)    (0.412)   (0.075)   (0.060)     (0.083)   (0.254)
      CEO tenure               -0.003       -0.001     -0.001     -0.001     -0.002    -0.001    -0.001      -0.001    -0.001
                              (0.002)      (0.000)    (0.001)    (0.001)    (0.001)   (0.001)   (0.000)     (0.001)   (0.001)
      CEO < 1980               0.024        0.007      0.016      0.007       0.026    0.007     0.008       0.007      0.018
                              (0.038)      (0.005)    (0.010)    (0.008)    (0.019)   (0.006)   (0.005)     (0.007)   (0.012)
      CEO fixed eff.           0.328        0.008      0.053      0.019       0.138    0.014     0.005       0.004      0.074




42
                              (0.032)      (0.006)    (0.012)    (0.010)    (0.019)   (0.008)   (0.006)     (0.010)   (0.014)
      Avg. wrk. age            0.074        0.048      0.074      0.048       0.071    0.046     0.049       0.061      0.079
                              (0.056)      (0.037)    (0.047)    (0.040)    (0.046)   (0.037)   (0.038)     (0.044)   (0.049)
      Avg. wrk. tenure         0.003        -0.003     -0.004     -0.000      0.000    -0.002    -0.004      -0.004    -0.004
                              (0.010)      (0.004)    (0.003)    (0.005)    (0.006)   (0.004)   (0.004)     (0.004)   (0.004)
      % white collars          0.120        0.095      0.196      0.012       0.150    0.035     0.127       0.208      0.204
                              (0.196)      (0.090)    (0.089)    (0.103)    (0.131)   (0.092)   (0.092)     (0.097)   (0.103)
      Fraction female          0.219        -0.181      0.063     -0.217      0.212    -0.186    -0.176      -0.083     0.121
                              (0.273)      (0.139)    (0.134)    (0.142)    (0.186)   (0.132)   (0.145)     (0.162)   (0.150)
      Avg. wkr. F.E.           1.968        1.021      1.796      1.008       1.773    0.946     1.051       1.431      1.921
                              (0.467)      (0.364)    (0.190)    (0.397)    (0.240)   (0.368)   (0.369)     (0.364)   (0.179)
      Constant                 2.442        4.334      3.933      4.141       4.410    4.284     4.376       4.068      3.934
                              (2.137)      (1.051)    (1.518)    (1.103)    (1.746)   (1.036)   (1.061)     (1.228)   (1.674)
      R2 : Between             0.246        0.399      0.470      0.223       0.331    0.299     0.410       0.437      0.439
      Within                   0.293        0.522      0.426      0.361       0.265    0.434     0.537       0.507      0.383
      Overall                  0.275        0.509      0.427      0.332       0.264    0.415     0.525       0.502      0.384
     Dependent variables are in logs. Boostrapped standard errors in parentheses; see text for details. Additional controls: 15 region dummies, 20 industry
     dummies, 4 firm-size dummies, year dummies, industry-specific trends, and firm fixed effects.
  Table A.3: Estimates on Firm-Level Performance, benchmark specification



   Dependent                   Sales per              Value added
              →                                                                TFP
    variable                   employee              per employee
 . variable ↓                (1)      (2)            (3)      (4)        (5)         (6)

 Female CEO                 0.033      -0.120        -0.046    -0.245    -0.059    -0.213
                           (0.039)    (0.045)       (0.038)   (0.041)   (0.029)   (0.039)
 Interaction                            0.610                   0.795               0.616
                                      (0.142)                 (0.169)             (0.172)
 CEO age                    0.212       0.209        0.442     0.438     0.320      0.316
                           (0.154)    (0.152)       (0.162)   (0.160)   (0.146)   (0.145)
 CEO tenure                 -0.003     -0.003        -0.002    -0.002    -0.002    -0.001
                           (0.001)    (0.001)       (0.001)   (0.001)   (0.001)   (0.001)
 CEO started <1980          0.028       0.028        0.012     0.011     0.010      0.010
                           (0.014)    (0.014)       (0.015)   (0.015)   (0.015)   (0.015)
 CEO fixed eff.             0.017       0.017        0.065     0.064     0.046      0.045
                           (0.019)    (0.018)       (0.017)   (0.017)   (0.017)   (0.017)
 Avg. Wkr. age              0.028       0.031        0.051     0.055     0.055      0.058
                           (0.027)    (0.028)       (0.031)   (0.033)   (0.029)   (0.029)
 Avg wkr. tenure            0.005       0.004        -0.013    -0.014    -0.030    -0.030
                           (0.008)    (0.008)       (0.007)   (0.007)   (0.007)   (0.007)
 % white collars            0.269       0.254        -0.117    -0.137    -0.082    -0.098
                           (0.135)    (0.136)       (0.154)   (0.155)   (0.154)   (0.154)
 Fraction female            -0.313     -0.390        -0.496    -0.596    -0.478    -0.556
                           (0.234)    (0.242)       (0.157)   (0.158)   (0.164)   (0.161)
 Avg. wkr. F.E.             1.217       1.284        1.636     1.724     1.438      1.506
                           (0.267)    (0.264)       (0.299)   (0.305)   (0.305)   (0.299)
 Constant                   3.089       3.020        2.072     1.983     0.422      0.353
                           (0.640)    (0.653)       (0.830)   (0.868)   (0.697)   (0.708)
 R2 : Between               0.590       0.592        0.218     0.222     0.179      0.182
 Within                     0.013       0.015        0.044     0.055     0.270      0.268
 Overall                    0.070       0.073        0.070     0.081     0.248      0.247
Dependent variables are in logs. Boostrapped standard errors in parentheses; see text for details.
Additional controls: 15 region dummies, 20 industry dummies, 4 firm-size dummies, year dummies,
industry-specific trends, and firm fixed effects.




                                                    43
C     Appendix: construction of the instruments and
      first-year results
The approach we adopted to construct our instruments is in the style of Bartik (1991)
and assumes that there is an exogenous trend in the evolution of female leadership,
summarized, for example, by the average fraction of female managers by year and
region. This trend should be correlated with the fraction of female managers in each
firm in a given year, but not correlated with the time-varying firm-level heterogeneity
that may endogenously affect wages and female leadership in a given firm.
    We construct two instruments, for both the fraction of female managers employed
in firm j at time t (which we denote here with ft,j ) and for the female CEO dummy
(denoted with dt,j .) We assume that their base year values (1988, the first year of
the panel), are exogenous. The endogeneity induced by heterogeneity in the initial
conditions is controlled for by the firm fixed effects we include in all of our regressions.
Using an older base year would strengthen the exogeneity assumption but induces
too many missing values in our sample.
    We then compute, for each firm j, the average value of the fraction of female
executives by year and region over all firms with the exclusion of firm j. Denote
                   r(j)
this average by ft,−j , where r(j) is the geographical regional location of firm j. We
exclude firm j from the average to prevent endogenous factors affecting one firm’s
female leadership contaminating the average. Next, we compute the growth rates
of these averages by year and region relative to the base year. We denote these
                   r(j)    fr .
growth rates as: γ   t,j= r t,−j . Our instrument f˜t,j is constructed multiplying
                             f1988,−j .
these growth rates by the base-year value of the fraction of female managers:

                                                        r(j)
                                     f˜t,j = f1988,j · γt,j .

    The instrument we use for the female CEO dummy is constructed using a slightly
different method. Because the base year value of such variable contains many zeros,
using the same approach would generate an instrument without enough variation
to capture the realized exogenous growth in female leadership. We therefore first
generate a continuous variable by running a probit on the female CEO dummy and
computing its predicted value for firm j in year t:


                                          dc
                                           j,t = Φ(β̂Zt,j )

where Z includes the age of the CEO, the CEO tenure, the CEO fixed effects,
the mean age and tenure of the workforce, the percent of white collar workers, the


                                                 44
  Table A.4: Instrumental variable wage regressions, first stage results

                    (a) Female CEO                  (b) Fraction Fem. Managers
                   CEO age        -0.156              Avg. exec age     -0.003
                                 (0.083)                               (0.002)
                  CEO tenure       0.002            Avg. exec tenure     0.006
                                 (0.001)                               (0.003)
                 CEO < 1980       -0.000
                                 (0.014)
                Avg. wrk. age      0.003             Avg. wrk. age         0.007
                                 (0.004)                                 (0.004)
               Avg. wrk. tenure   -0.002            Avg. wrk. tenure      -0.002
                                 (0.004)                                 (0.003)
                % white collar     0.062             % white collar        0.046
                                 (0.061)                                 (0.040)
                Fraction female   -0.018            Fraction female        0.261
                                 (0.090)                                 (0.099)
                       f˜         -0.951                    f˜            -0.630
                                 (0.206)                                 (0.160)
                       d˜         0.080                     d˜            0.092
                                 (0.238)                                 (0.090)
                  R-squared        0.106                                   0.228
                 F-test (2,233)   10.86                                     8.63
                    Prob>F       0.0000                                  0.0002

Regressors also include the full set of dummies used in the main specification. Standard errors in
parenthesis


fraction of females in the workforce, the CEO fixed effect and the mean value of the
workers’ fixed effects from the two-way fixed effects regression, and three firm-size
dummies. The results of this regression are reported in the online appendix. We
compute the probit only using data from years 1988 through 1990 and extrapolate
the predicted values for the whole sample (ideally we would use only data for the
base year, in support to the assumption of exogeneity of the initial value, but we
added two more years to add power to the estimates).
   Next, we apply to this generated variable, dcj,t , the same procedure adopted
to compute the instrument for the fraction of female managers fj,t . Denote this
                ˜
instrument with d.
    In our IV specifications of the wage equations we instrumented the female lead-
ership variable with both instruments. Table A.4, panel (a) reports the first stage
results from the wage equations where the endogenous variable is the Female CEO
dummy, whereas panel (b) reports the first stage results from the specifications where


                                               45
Table A.5: Instrumental variable performance regressions, first stage re-
sults

                   (a) Female CEO Interaction            (b) Fraction Fem. Managers         Interaction
        CEO age              -0.141        -0.020          Avg. exec age     -0.003             -0.001
                            (0.080)       (0.021)                           (0.002)            (0.001)
        CEO tenure            0.001        -0.000        Avg. exec. tenure   0.006              0.001
                            (0.001)       (0.000)                           (0.003)            (0.001)
       CEO < 1980            -0.000         0.003
                            (0.014)       (0.004)
      Avg. wrk. age           0.003         0.000          Avg. wrk. age           0.007            -0.002
                            (0.004)       (0.001)                                (0.004)           (0.001)
    Avg. wrk. tenure         -0.002         0.000         Avg. wrk. tenure        -0.002            -0.001
                            (0.004)       (0.000)                                (0.003)           (0.001)
      % white collar          0.066         0.015          % white collar          0.046             0.014
                            (0.059)       (0.014)                                (0.040)           (0.013)
     Fraction female         -0.038         0.048          Fraction female         0.260             0.161
                            (0.085)       (0.049)                                (0.097)           (0.064)
             f˜              -0.460         0.124                 f˜              -0.597            -0.016
                            (0.642)       (0.144)                                (0.536)           (0.079)
              d˜             0.074         -0.033                 d˜              0.092              0.020
                            (0.233)       (0.033)                                (0.087)           (0.034)
  f˜ · (Fraction female)     -0.867        -1.108       f˜ · (Fraction female)    -0.057            -0.511
                             (.866)       (0.242)                                (0.678)           (0.093)
         R-squared            0.111         0.301                                  0.223             0.327
       F-test (2,233)         37.74         49.77                                 32.80             47.26
          Prob>F            0.0000          0.000                                0.0000              0.000
 Cragg-Donald Wald F                11.12                                                  41.02

Regressors also include the full set of dummies used in the main specification. Standard errors in
parenthesis


the endogenous variable is the fraction of female managers.
    The instrumental variable regressions of the performance regressions contain an
additional endogenous variable, the interaction of female leadership with the per-
cent of female workers. For these specification, we include an additional instrument
constructed interacting f˜ with the fraction of female workers. Table A.5 contains
the first-stage results for the specifications where the Female CEO is the measure
of female leadership (panel (a)); and where the fraction of female managers is the
measure of female leadership (panel (b)). In each panel, the first column reports the
first stage results of the regression where the dependent variable is the measure of
female leadership, and the second column reports the results where the dependent
variable is the female leadership interacted with the fraction of female workers.


                                               46
References
Abowd, John M., Francis Kramarz, and David N. Margolis, “High wage
  workers and high wage firms,” Econometrica, 1999, 67 (2), 251–333.

  , Robert H. Creecy, and Francis Kramarz, “Computing person and firm
  effects using linked longitudinal employer-employee data,” Center for Economic
  Studies, US Census Bureau, 2002, 06.

Adams, Renee B. and Daniel Ferreira, “Women in the boardroom and their
  impact on governance and performance,” Journal of Financial Economics, 2009,
  94 (2), 291–309.

Ahern, Kenneth R. and Amy K. Dittmar, “The changing of the boards: The
  impact on firm valuation of mandated female board representation,” The Quarterly
  Journal of Economics, 2012, 127 (1), 137–197.

Albanesi, Stefania and Claudia Olivetti, “Home production, market produc-
  tion and the gender wage gap: Incentives and expectations,” Review of Economic
  dynamics, 2009, 12 (1), 80–107.

  ,   , and Maria J. Prados, “Gender and Dynamic Agency: Theory and Evidence
  on the Compensation of Top Executives,” Research in Labor Economics, 2015, 42.

Albrecht, James, Anders Björklund, and Susan Vroman, “Is there a glass
  ceiling in Sweden?,” Journal of Labor Economics, 2003, 21 (1), 145–177.

Angier, Michelle and Beth Axelrod, “Realizing the Power of Talented Women,”
  McKinsey Quarterly, 2014, 3 (107-115).

Arrow, Kenneth, “The Theory of Discrimination,” in Orley Ashenfelter and Albert
  Rees, eds., Discrimination in Labor Markets, Princeton, N.J.: Princeton Univer-
  sity Press, 1973, pp. 3–33.

Athey, Susan, Christopher Avery, and Peter Zemsky, “Mentoring and diver-
  sity,” American Economic Review, September 2000, 90 (4), 765–786.

Bagues, Manuel and Maria J. Perez-Villadoniga, “Why Do I Like People Like
  Me?,” Journal of Economic Theory, May 2013, 148 (3), 1292–9.

Bandiera, Oriana, Andrea Prat, Luigi Guiso, and Raffaella Sadun, “Match-
  ing firms, managers and incentives,” National Bureau of Economic Research Work-
  ing Paper, 2011, 16691.

                                         47
Bartik, Timothy, Who Benefits From State and Local Economic Development Poli-
  cies?, Kalamazoo, MI: W.E. Upjohn Institute for Employment Research, 1991.

Becker, Gary, The economics of discrimination, Chicago: The University of
  Chicago Press (first ed. 1957), 1971.

Bednar, Steven and Dora Gicheva, “Are Female Supervisors More Female-
  Friendly?,” The American Economic Review, 2014, 104 (5), 370–375.

Bell, Linda A., “Women-led firms and the gender gap in top executive jobs,” IZA
  Discussion Papers, 2005.

Bennedsen, Morten, F. Perez-Gonzales, and Daniel Wolfenzon, “Evaluating
  the Impact of The Boss: Evidence from CEO Hospitalization Events,” Unpublished
  Manuscript, 2012.

Bertrand, Marianne and Antoinette Schoar, “Managing with Style: the Effect
  of Managers on Firm Policies,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2003, 118
  (4), 1169–1208.

  and Kevin F. Hallock, “The Gender gap in top corporate jobs,” Industrial and
  Labor Relations Review, October 2001, 55 (1), 3–21.

  , Sandra Black, Sissel Jensen, and Adriana Lleras-Muney, “Breaking the
  Glass Ceiling? The Effect of Board Quotas on Female Labor Market Outcomes in
  Norway,” Unpublished Manuscript, 2014.

Black, Dan, “Discrimination in an Equilibrium Search Model,” Journal of Labor
  Economics, 1995, 13 (2), 309–334.

Blau, Francine D and Lawrence M Kahn, “The US gender pay gap in the 1990s:
  Slowing convergence,” NBER Working Papers, 2004.

Bloom, Nicholas and John Van Reenen, “Measuring and explaining manage-
  ment practices across firms and countries,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics,
  2007, 122 (4), 1351–1408.

  and     , “Why do management practices differ across firms and countries?,” The
  Journal of Economic Perspectives, 2010, 24 (1), 203–224.

Card, David, Jörg Heining, and Patrick Kline, “Workplace Heterogeneity and
  the Rise of West German Wage Inequality,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics,
  August 2013, 128, 967–1015.

                                          48
Cardoso, Ana Rute and Rudolf Winter-Ebmer, “Female-Led Firms and Gen-
  der Wage Policies,” Industrial and Labor Relations Review, 2010, 61 (1), 143–63.

Charles, Kerwin Kofi and Jonathan Guryan, “Prejudice and Wages: An Empir-
  ical Assessment of Becker’s The Economics of Discrimination,” Journal of Political
  Economy, 2008, 116 (5), 773–809.

Cooper-Patrick, Lisa, Joseph J. Gallo, Junius J. Gonzales, Hong Thi Vu,
  Neil R. Powe, Christine Nelson, and Daniel E Ford, “Race, gender, and
  partnership in the patient-physician relationship,” JAMA, 1999, 282 (6), 583–589.

Cornell, Bradford and Ivo Welch, “Culture, information, and screening discrim-
  ination,” Journal of Political Economy, 1996, pp. 542–571.

Dezsö, Cristian L. and David Gaddis Ross, “Does female representation in top
  management improve firm performance? A panel data investigation,” Strategic
  Management Journal, 2012, 33 (9), 1072–1089.

Dindia, Kathryn and Daniel J. Canary, Sex differences and similarities in
  communication, Psychology Press, 2006.

Eaton, Morris L., Multivariate Statistics : A Vector Space Approach Wiley series
  in probability and mathematical statistics, New York : Wiley, 1983.

Eckstein, Zvi and Eva Nagypal, “The evolution of US earnings inequality: 1961-
  2002,” Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis Quarterly Review, 2004, 28 (2), 10–29.

Ellison, Sara Fisher and Wallace P. Mullin, “Diversity, Social Goods Provision,
  and Performance in the Firm,” Journal of Economics & Management Strategy,
  2014, 23 (2), 465–481.

Fadlon, Yariv, “Statistical Discrimination and the Implication of Employer-
  Employee Racial Matches,” Journal of Labor Research, 2015, 36 (2), 232–248.

Fang, Hanming and Andrea Moro, “Theories of Statistical Discrimination and
  Affirmative Action: A Survey,” in Jess Benhabib, Matthew O. Jackson, and Al-
  berto Bisin, eds., Handbook of Social Economics, Vol. 1A, The Netherlands: North
  Holland, 2011, chapter V, pp. 133–200.

Farrell, Kathleen A and Philip L Hersch, “Additions to corporate boards: the
  effect of gender,” Journal of Corporate Finance, 2005, 11 (1), 85–106.




                                        49
Flabbi, Luca, “Prejudice and gender differentials in the US labor market in the last
  twenty years,” Journal of Econometrics, 2010, 156 (1), 190–200.

  , Claudia Piras, and Scott Abrahams, “Female Corporate Leadership in Latin
  America and the Caribbean Region: Representation and Firm-level Outcomes,”
  IDB Working Paper, 2016, 655.

  , Mario Macis, Andrea Moro, and Fabiano Schivardi, “Do Female Execu-
  tives Make a Difference? The Impact of Female Leadership on Gender Gaps and
  Firm Performance. External Appendix,” Unpublished Manuscript, 2016. (down-
  load link).

Gabaix, Xavier and Augustin Landier, “Why has CEO pay increased so much?,”
  The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2008, 123 (1), 49–100.

Gagliarducci, Stefano and M. Daniele Paserman, “Gender Interactions in Firm
  Hierarchies: Evidence from Linked Employer-Employee Data,” Research in Labor
  Economics, 2015, 41, 343–375.

Gayle, George-Levi, Limor Golan, and Robert A. Miller, “Gender Differences
  in Executive Compensation and Job Mobility,” Journal of Labor Economics, 2012,
  30 (4), 829–872.

Iranzo, Susana, Fabiano Schivardi, and Elisa Tosetti, “Skill Dispersion and
  Firm Productivity: An Analysis with Employer-Employee Matched Data,” Journal
  of Labor Economics, 2008, 26 (2), 247–285.

Kaplan, Steven N., Mark M. Klebanov, and Morten Sorensen, “Which
  CEO characteristics and abilities matter?,” The Journal of Finance, 2012, 67 (3),
  973–1007.

Lang, Kevin, “A language theory of discrimination,” The Quarterly Journal of
  Economics, 1986, pp. 363–382.

Lazear, Edward P., Kathryn L. Shaw, and Christopher T. Stanton, “The
  Value of Bosses,” National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper, 2012,
  18317.

Lippi, Francesco and Fabiano Schivardi, “Corporate control and executive se-
  lection,” Quantitative Economics, 2014, 5 (2), 417–456.




                                        50
Lucifora, Claudio and Daria Vigani, “What If Your Boss Is a Woman? Work
  Organization, Work-Life Balance and Gender Discrimination at the Workplace,”
  IZA Discussion Papers, 2016, 9737.

Malmendier, Ulrike and Geoffrey Tate, “CEO overconfidence and corporate
  investment,” The Journal of Finance, 2005, 60 (6), 2661–2700.

Mast, Marianne Schmid, Judith A. Hall, and Debra L. Roter, “Disentan-
  gling physician sex and physician communication style: their effects on patient
  satisfaction in a virtual medical visit,” Patient education and counseling, 2007, 68
  (1), 16–22.

Matsa, David A. and Amalia R. Miller, “A Female Style in Corporate Leader-
  ship? Evidence from Quotas,” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics,
  2013, 5 (3), 136–69.

Morgan, John and Felix Várdy, “Diversity in the Workplace,” The American
  Economic Review, 2009, pp. 472–485.

Olley, G. Steven and Ariel Pakes, “The Dynamics of Productivity in the
  Telecommunications Equipment Industry,” Econometrica, 1996, 64, 1263–1297.

Phelps, Edmund S, “The Statistical Theory of Racism and Sexism,” The American
  Economic Review, 1972, 62 (4), 659–661.

Rathore, Saif S., Jersey Chen, Yongfei Wang, Martha J. Radford, Viola
  Vaccarino, and Harlan M. Krumholz, “Sex differences in cardiac catheteriza-
  tion: the role of physician gender,” Jama, 2001, 286 (22), 2849–2856.

Rose, Caspar, “Does female board representation influence firm performance? The
  Danish evidence,” Corporate Governance: An International Review, 2007, 15 (2),
  404–413.

Rosén, Åsa, “Search, Bargaining, and Employer Discrimination,” Journal of Labor
  Economics, 2003, 21 (4), 807–829.

Scollon, Ron, Suzanne Wong Scollon, and Rodney H. Jones, Intercultural
  communication: A discourse approach, John Wiley & Sons, 2011.

Smith, Nina, Valdemar Smith, and Mette Verner, “Do women in top manage-
  ment affect firm performance? A panel study of 2,500 Danish firms,” International
  Journal of Productivity and Performance Management, 2006, 55 (7), 569–593.


                                         51
Staines, Graham, Carol Tavris, and Toby Jayaratne, “The Queen Bee Syn-
  drome,” Psychology Today, 1974, 7 (8), 63–66.

Tate, Geoffrey and Liu Yang, “Female Leadership and Gender Equity: Evidence
  from Plant Closure,” Journal of Financial Economics, 2015, 117 (1), 77–97.

Tervio, Marko, “The difference that CEOs make: An assignment model approach,”
  The American Economic Review, 2008, 98 (3), 642–668.

Wolfers, Justin, “Diagnosing discrimination: Stock returns and CEO gender,”
  Journal of the European Economic Association, 2006, 4 (2-3), 531–541.




                                       52
