NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE IMPACT OF INCREASED COST-SHARING ON UTILIZATION OF LOW VALUE SERVICES:
EVIDENCE FROM THE STATE OF OREGON
Jonathan Gruber
Johanna Catherine Maclean
Bill J. Wright
Eric S. Wilkinson
Kevin Volpp
Working Paper 22875
http://www.nber.org/papers/w22875

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2016

Research reported in this publication was supported by grant number 72132 from the Robert
Wood Johnson Foundation. The content is solely the responsibility of the author(s) and does not
necessarily represent the official views of the sponsor. We would like to thank Joan Kapowich,
Haizhen Lin, and session participants at the 2015 Academy Health Annual Research Meeting and
the 2016 American Society of Health Economists Biennial Meeting for helpful comments. We
are grateful to Christopher Behrer, Andrew Goodman, Lynn Hanson, Lori Moye, and Leif
Rustvold for outstanding data assistance. All errors are our own. The views expressed herein are
those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w22875.ack
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2016 by Jonathan Gruber, Johanna Catherine Maclean, Bill J. Wright, Eric S. Wilkinson, and
Kevin Volpp. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be
quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the
source.

The Impact of Increased Cost-sharing on Utilization of Low Value Services: Evidence from
the State of Oregon
Jonathan Gruber, Johanna Catherine Maclean, Bill J. Wright, Eric S. Wilkinson, and Kevin
Volpp
NBER Working Paper No. 22875
December 2016
JEL No. I1,I11,I13
ABSTRACT
In this study we examine the impact of a value-based insurance design (V-BID) program
implemented between 2010 and 2013 at a large public employer in the state of Oregon. The
program substantially increased cost-sharing, specifically copayments and coinsurance, for
several healthcare services believed to be of low value and overused (sleep studies, endoscopies,
advanced imaging, and surgeries). Using a differences-in-differences design coupled with
granular, administrative health insurance claims data, we estimate the change in low value
healthcare service utilization among beneficiaries before and after program implementation
relative to a comparison group of beneficiaries who were not exposed to the V-BID. Our findings
suggest that the V-BID significantly reduced utilization of targeted services. These findings have
important implications for both public and private healthcare policies as V-BID principles are
rapidly proliferating in healthcare markets.
Jonathan Gruber
Department of Economics, E52-434
MIT
77 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02139
and NBER
gruberj@mit.edu
Johanna Catherine Maclean
Department of Economics
Temple University
Ritter Annex 869
Philadelphia, PA 19122
and NBER
catherine.maclean@temple.edu
Bill J. Wright
Center for Outcomes Research and Education
Providence Health & Services
bill.wright@providence.org

Eric S. Wilkinson
Temple University
1301 Cecil B. Moore Avenue
Ritter Annex 847
Philadelphia, PA 19122
eric.wilkinson@temple.edu
Kevin Volpp
University of Pennsylvania
120 Blockley Hall
423 Guardian Drive
Philadelphia, PA 19104
volpp70@wharton.upenn.edu

1. Introduction
Healthcare expenditures in the United States are high: in 2014 the U.S. spent $3 trillion
dollars on healthcare, this figure represents 17.5% of the nation’s gross domestic product (GDP)
(National Center for Health Statistics 2016). This high spending does not appear to have
translated into improved health outcomes for Americans. For example, although the U.S. has the
highest per capita healthcare expenditures of any Organization for Economic Co-operation and
Development (OECD) country, the U.S. also has the highest obesity rate among these countries
and ranks 28th out of the 34 OECD member nations in terms of life expectancy (Organization for
Economic Co-operation and Development 2014).
These statistics suggest that value in terms of health given expenditures on healthcare
services in the U.S. is not optimal: expenditures are high while outcomes are poor. Indeed, in
2012 the Academy of Medicine estimated that 30% of annual healthcare expenditures, totaling
roughly $750 billion, were wasteful (Smith, Saunders et al. 2013). Moreover, one half of these
wasteful expenditures were attributable to low value services and inefficient healthcare use
(Smith, Saunders et al. 2013).
In response to the expenditure of large amounts of resources on services that provide little
value in improving health, policy-makers, payers, providers, and employers have displayed great
interest in developing strategies to contain healthcare costs. Many of these strategies involve
increasing cost-sharing for patients. The expectation, based on basic demand theory, is that
increasing out-of-pocket costs to patients will reduce utilization and, in turn, costs. A concern
with such a strategy, however, is that increasing across-the-board patient cost-sharing may
reduce use of both high and low value care since consumers will often have difficulty
differentiating between the two. Recent work on high deductible health insurance plans supports

3

this hypothesis (Beeuwkes, Haviland et al. 2011, Brot-Goldberg, Chandra et al. 2015, Huckfeldt,
Haviland et al. 2015, Haviland, Eisenberg et al. 2016). Importantly, such short-run reductions in
prevention services may increase downstream costs as diseases remain undiagnosed for longer
periods and chronic conditions worsen without appropriate treatment (Fendrick, Smith et al.
2001, Hsu, Price et al. 2006b, Heisler, Choi et al. 2010, Campbell, Allen-Ramey et al. 2011).
In recognition of the need for a nuanced strategy, the concept of value-based insurance
designs (V-BID) emerged in the late 1990s (Fendrick, Smith et al. 2001). V-BID designs are
based on basic economic principles: use out-of-pocket prices (the prices most visible to patients)
to steer patients away from unnecessary or wasteful healthcare and toward beneficial and
necessary healthcare. In the jargon of V-BID, unnecessary or wasteful care is referred to as ‘low
value’ and beneficial or necessary care is referred to as ‘high value’. In practice, a V-BID
program will typically increase patient cost-sharing for low value care, decrease cost-sharing for
high value care, or some combination of these two approaches, although programs have
generally focused on decreasing cost-sharing for high value care (Volpp, Loewenstein et al.
2012). The programs may be applied to all patients or specific patient types.
Due to its conceptual appeal, V-BID principles have gained traction among policy
makers, employers, and providers. Indeed, this concept has been incorporated into the
framework of the Affordable Care Act (ACA) through, for example, co-payment waivers for all
preventive services that receive and ‘A’ or ‘B’ rating by the U.S. Preventive Services Task
Force. 1 Medicare Advantage has explicitly adopted V-BID into its Health Plan Innovations
Initiative. 2 U.S. states have also implemented such principles into employee benefit plans

1

The full list of services can be located at: http://www.uspreventiveservicestaskforce.org/Page/Name/uspstf-a-andb-recommendations/ (accessed September 9th, 2016).
2
The program focuses on reduced cost-sharing for high value services: https://innovation.cms.gov/initiatives/VBID
(accessed September 6th, 2016).

4

(Gibson, Maclean et al. 2015, Hirth, Cliff et al. 2016). A recent survey of large firms
documented that 81% either currently incorporate V-BID principles in their benefit packages or
plan to introduce these principles in the near future (Gibson, Maclean et al. 2015).
Beginning in 2011 the American Board of Internal Medicine Foundation launched the
‘Choosing Wisely’ initiative. 3 The objective of this initiative is for each participating physician
society to identify five specialty-specific low value services and to encourage their physicians to
avoid these services. For example, the American Academy of Family Physicians recommends
against routine screens for prostate cancer using a prostate-specific antigen (PSA) test. Over 60
professional societies have developed such a list, leading to over 300 services listed as low value
(Gawande, Colla et al. 2014). Thus, V-BID principles are likely to become increasingly
prevalent in both benefit designs and clinical practice in the near future.
Unfortunately, despite its conceptual appeal, the empirical basis for many V-BID
strategies is not strong. A number of studies, reviewed below, show that reduced cost-sharing
for high-value services can increase use of these services, but the response has been modest at
best. At the same time, there is much less evidence on the degree to which raising the cost of
low-value services lowers use of these services – despite the conceptual work of Volpp,
Loewenstein et al. (2012) suggesting that increasing cost-sharing for low value care may be more
effective than previous efforts of rewarding the use of high value care.
The contribution of this paper is to provide the first careful empirical evaluation of higher
cost-sharing for a range of low value services. In particular, we study the impact of an
innovative V-BID program implemented by a large public employer in the state of Oregon on
utilization of services deemed by plan administrators to be low value and/or overused by patients
(Kapowich 2010). This program substantially increased patient cost-sharing for sleep studies,
3

http://www.choosingwisely.org/; accessed May 16th, 2016.

5

upper gastrointestinal endoscopies, advanced imaging services, and potentially overused surgery
services (e.g., spinal surgery for pain). For example, co-payments for these services increased by
$100 to $500, which in percentage terms is 46% to 159%.
We use a differences-in-differences design to compare changes in outcomes before and
after V-BID program implementation between beneficiaries at the participating employer and
beneficiaries receiving health insurance through a comparison group of employers. The V-BID
program increased patient cost-sharing (specifically, copayments and coinsurance) beginning in
2010. We leverage granular, administrative claims data between 2008 and 2013 to examine
program effects, allowing us to track effects for three years post-implementation.
Our findings suggest that the V-BID program significantly reduced use of targeted low
value services. Overall, we find that use of the targeted services fell by 11.9% on the extensive
margin due to the program, with an implied price elasticity of -0.12 which suggests that demand
for these services is highly inelastic. There is some variation across services, with reductions of
more than 20% for sleep studies and low-value surgeries, by 7.7% for advanced imaging
services, and by 12% for endoscopies. These results illustrate for the first time that significant
increases in cost sharing on low-value services can greatly reduce their use.
This manuscript is organized as follows: Section 2 briefly describes the literature on VBID effects. The V-BID program examined in this study is outlined in Section 3. Data,
variables, and methods are outlined in Section 4. In Section 5 we present our main findings, and
Section 6 reports robustness checks and extensions to the main analyses. Section 7 offers a
discussion of the findings, limitations, and policy implications.
2. Previous research on V-BID programs and low-value healthcare services

6

In this section we briefly review the V-BID literature, and provide a discussion of efforts
to classify healthcare as low and high value. For more detailed discussions of this literature, we
refer readers to excellent reviews by Gibson, Maclean et al. (2015) and Look (2015).
2.1 Previous research on V-BID programs
A large and growing body of research seeks to estimate the impact of V-BID programs
on healthcare utilization, overall utilization, and patient outcomes. The majority of studies have
examined V-BID programs that reduce cost-sharing for high value services, and in particular
prescription medications. The literature focusing on reduced cost-sharing for high value
medications has shown some evidence that reduced cost-sharing leads to improvement in
adherence (Maciejewski, Farley et al. 2010, Farley, Wansink et al. 2012, Maciejewski, Wansink
et al. 2014, Look 2015). However, the estimated effect sizes are often small. For example, when
Aetna members were randomized to free cardiovascular medication for the year following a
heart attack average adherence increased from 39% to 45%, or 15% (Choudhry, Avorn et al.
2011). Given the serious nature of this health shock and the complete removal of copayments,
this effect size is quite modest. In addition, a recent review of the literature suggests that V-BID
programs can improve medication adherence, on average, by 3 percentage points per year (Lee,
Maciejewski et al. 2013).
Several studies that examine V-BID programs targeting high value services with reduced
cost-sharing suggest that while such programs improve adherence and increase
medication/service use, they may not lead to substantial – or any – reductions in costs (Lee,
Maciejewski et al. 2013, Maciejewski, Wansink et al. 2014, Hirth, Cliff et al. 2016, Sepúlveda,
Roebuck et al. 2016). These studies imply that V-BID programs that reduce cost-sharing for
high value services may not generate the savings that program designers might hope would be

7

achieved through better health and thereby lower rates of adverse events triggering emergency
room visits or hospitalizations.
As noted by Volpp, Loewenstein et al. (2012), reductions in copayments for high value
care potentially have modest effects due to the asymmetry of losses and gains (people are more
adversely affected by a loss than an equivalent dollar gain) and the proverbial ‘dog that didn’t
bark’ problem in which copayment reductions may be less visible to non-adherent plan members
(the target of programs that reduce cost sharing) compared to the impact of a copayment increase
(which largely affects already adherent plan members). In other words, rewarding adherent
patients with reduced cost-sharing likely has less effect than penalizing non-adherent patients or
patients using lower value care with increased cost-sharing. This argument is laid out
conceptually by Volpp, Loewenstein et al. (2012), who state that increasing cost-sharing for low
value care may be more effective than previous efforts of encouraging the use of high value care
through lower cost sharing.
A handful of studies has examined the impact of increasing cost-sharing for low value
healthcare services, specifically emergency department (ED) usage (Nair, Miller et al. 2010,
Choudhry, Fischer et al. 2012, Siddiqui, Roberts et al. 2015). For example, Siddiqui, Roberts et
al. (2015) take advantage of state-level changes in Medicaid cost-sharing for ED usage induced
by the 2008 to 2010 recession. Specifically, the Deficit Reduction Act of 2005 gave states the
authority to impose cost-sharing strategies on healthcare services. During the 2008 to 2010
recession, eight states adopted cost-sharing for non-urgent ED. Using a differences-indifferences design, the authors find no evidence that increases in cost-sharing impacted ED
utilization within the Medicaid population. However, Hsu, Price et al. (2006a) and Hirth, Cliff et
al. (2016) find that increases in cost-sharing do reduce ED usage, although the effects on overall

8

healthcare costs are inconclusive. Thus, the ability of V-BID programs to reduce low value
healthcare service utilization and costs may be context-specific. 4
A necessary condition for V-BID programs to affect utilization and costs is employee
awareness of the program (Baicker and Levy 2015). However, the available evidence suggests
that, in many cases, employees have incomplete knowledge of program existence and the
specific services targeted (Henrikson, Anderson et al. 2014). Thus, lack of knowledge may have
hindered previous efforts to effectively utilize V-BID principles in benefit designs.
In a recent review of the V-BID literature investigating medication adherence and costsharing, Look (2015) documents that many studies suffer from methodical issues. For example,
numerous studies lack a comparison group and instead rely on before-after designs to estimate
effects. Look notes that these study limitations impede our ability to understand V-BID
effectiveness and encourages the use of more credible research designs within the literature.
In summary, the V-BID literature suggests that reducing cost-sharing for high value
medications may increase adherence although the impacts on patient outcomes, overall
utilization, and costs is less clear. Moreover, the literature that studies the impact of increasing
cost-sharing for low value services is nascent and few studies have considered healthcare
services beyond ED usage. Overall, much of the exiting V-BID literature is subject to numerous
methodological flaws. In this study, we aim to address some of these research gaps by using a
credible research design (differences-in-differences) to study the effect of increasing patient costsharing for a set of general healthcare services that are believed to be overused by patients.
2.2 Classification of low value care

4

Although beyond the scope of this study, there is a substantial economic literature that investigates the impact of
cost-sharing on utilization more broadly than within the context of V-BID programs (Baicker and Goldman 2011).

9

Although critical to the study of any V-BID program, there is, to the best of our
knowledge, no official definition of low value care and different studies apply different
definitions (Garner, Docherty et al. 2013). However, most definitions are broadly consistent
with the notion that low value care is care for which there is a lower cost and equally effective
form of care. Thus, the concept of low value care can be applied to a broad set of healthcare
services. Moreover, it be may involve no treatment (‘watchful waiting’) in some cases.
Although there is general agreement on low value care in concept and the need to reduce
it, there is much less agreement in identifying what care is in fact low value (Rosenbaum 2013,
Gawande, Colla et al. 2014). Moreover, a particular service may be low value for some patients,
but not for others. Thus, even if we were able to identify a set of services that were, on average,
low value there are likely numerous patients for whom these services would be of higher clinical
value. As the literature is still nascent in this area, V-BID studies – including our own –
examining low or high value care are vulnerable to the critique that the programs they study are
targeting care that is valuable, or not valuable, for some patients. Our study will not address this
important issue, but we note that more research efforts are critically needed to identify the value
of specific services and for which patient types.
3. The current V-BID program
3.1 Program details
We examine the impact of a V-BID program implemented at a large public employer in
the state of Oregon: the Oregon Educators Benefit Board (OEBB). 5 OEBB provides benefits for
approximately 150,000 current or retired employees of school districts, education service
districts, and community colleges in Oregon and their dependents. These benefits are provided
through two contracted health plans—Kaiser Permanente, which offers HMO plans, and Moda
5

http://www.oregon.gov/oha/OEBB/Pages/index.aspx; Accessed May 17th, 2016,

10

Health, which provides PPO plans. Prior to October 1st, 2012 OEBB also offered PPO plans
through Providence Health Plan. OEBB offers different plan designs to the school districts,
education service districts, and community colleges/charter schools it serves. We are unable to
obtain data on the universe of OEBB plans. Specifically, we have data on all Moda Health plans,
but we do not have access to Kaiser Permanente or Providence Health plans. Moda Health plans
cover 75% of the beneficiary population. Appendix Table A reports the share of the OEBB
population captured in our data in each year of our study period. Although we cannot study
Kaiser Permanente and Providence Health plans, the OEBB V-BID impacted all plans held by
OEBB beneficiaries (thus, impacted plans managed by all three issuers). 6 Hence, we have no
reason ex ante to suspect that beneficiaries switched to a non-Moda Health insurance plan in
response to the V-BID (e.g., to avoid exposure to increases in cost-sharing).
OEBB plan years run October 1st to September 30th. Over our study period, a total of 15
different PPO plans were offered to OEBB beneficiaries. Beginning October 1st, 2012, Moda
Health re-organized its plan offerings. More specifically, several plans were eliminated and new
places were developed to better meet the beneficiary needs. This change has some implications
for our study. In particular, one may be concerned that re-organization of the plans may impact
our ability to estimate causal effects as the re-organization may have induced beneficiaries to
select a new plan. Indeed those holding terminated plans were forced to switch plans, which
could offer lower cost-sharing. However, this plan changed occurred two years after the V-BID
program was implemented, thus we suspect that any induced switching in plan holding due to the

6

However, we note that Kaiser Permanente plans were later in adopt cost-sharing increases and for a smaller set of
services (i.e., advanced imaging services). Our conversations with Kaiser Permanente administrators revealed that
this system relies on provider-side gatekeeping to contain healthcare costs. Thus, administrators do not believe that
they require to implement additional demand-side cost-containment strategies.

11

plan re-organization is small. We more formally address this potential threat to our research
design later in the manuscript.
OEBB implemented its V-BID program on October 1st, 2010. The V-BID program
targeted both pharmaceutical medications (Value Based Pharmacy or ‘VBP’ 7) and healthcare
services (Additional Cost Tier or ‘ACT’). We focus our attention on the ACT in this study; we
will discuss the potential role of the VBP below.
Administrators at OEBB relied on information from the Dartmouth Atlas of Health Care 8
and Oregon Health Evidence Review Commission 9 to classify services as low value. In addition
to these sources, OEBB administrators also utilized information from internal analysis of OEBB
healthcare claims data to classify such services. Kapowich (2010) provides a detailed discussion
of the development of the list of targeted services.
Table 1 outlines the affected services, the date of the cost-sharing increase, and the level
of the cost-sharing increase. The affected services include: sleep studies (home studies and
studies conducted in a healthcare facility); upper gastrointestinal endoscopies; advanced imaging
services including computerized tomography (CT) scan, magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), and

7

The VBP focused on four classes of drugs: generic, value, preferred, and non-preferred. Cost-sharing
(copayments) for generic drugs was eliminated and reduced for value and preferred drugs while cost-sharing for
non-preferred drugs increased. The Moda Health benefit plan books state that value drugs include select commonly
prescribed products used to treat clinical medical conditions and preserve health. Examples of value drugs are
Atenolol which is a beta blocker and Lovastatin which is a statin. Generic drugs on the VBP are determined by
doctors and pharmacists to be therapeutically equivalent to the brand name version. This drug tier may also include
some branded drugs that have been identifiable from a clinical and cost-effective perspective. Generic drugs on the
VBP include Albuterol which opens up airways in the lungs and Clonidine which is used to treat, among other
things, high blood pressure, ADHD, anxiety, and substance use withdrawal symptoms. Preferred drugs include
medications which have limited alternatives available but have been found to be clinically effective and at a
favorable cost relative to non-preferred alternatives, and include select generic drugs that have been identified as
having no more favorable outcomes from a clinical perspective than more cost effective generic drugs. Medications
included in the preferred tier include Abilify which is used to treat schizophrenia and bipolar disorder, and Zomig
which treats migraine headaches. Finally, non-preferred drugs have been reviewed by plan administrators and are
found to have no significant treatment or cost advantage over preferred tier drugs. Non-preferred drugs include
Patanol which is used to treat allergic conjunctivitis and Zovirax which is used to treat herpes.
8
http://www.dartmouthatlas.org/; accessed May 14th, 2016.
9
http://www.oregon.gov/oha/herc/Pages/index.aspx; accessed May 14th, 2016.

12

positron tomography (PET) scans; and potentially overused surgeries including spine surgeries
for pain, knee and shoulder arthoscopies, and hip and knee replacements (we refer to the
potentially overused surgeries as simply ‘surgeries’ henceforth).
Not all of these services are universally low value; for example, home sleep studies
typically are much higher value than facility-based sleep studies, which offer similar testing
often at more than ten times the price. Upper gastrointestinal endoscopies can be life-saving
when preformed for gastrointestinal bleeding while advanced imaging can be necessary for
diagnosis, and spinal surgery can also be clinically indicated. However, many of these
procedures may be over-utilized and in any given proportion the ratio of these services that are
high vs. low value is likely quite low. Since we cannot judge appropriateness of the service use
in our data we simply evaluate here the impact of increased cost sharing on service utilization.
We note that healthcare providers are permitted some degree of discretion in the
application of the increased cost-sharing, and that the V-BID program was developed to exclude
emergency (e.g., trauma) healthcare use and care related to life-threatening health conditions
(e.g., cancer) from the increased cost-sharing. Therefore, it seems reasonable to assume that
when an ACT service would be of high value for a patient (e.g., an upper gastrointestinal
endoscopy when a patient is experiencing gastrointestinal bleeding) a provider may apply such
discretion or the service classification system would reflect the potential value of the service to a
patient facing a life-threatening health condition. 10
ACT copayments and coinsurance must be paid in addition to a beneficiary’s plan
deductible, regular copayment, or coinsurance. Moreover, the increased cost-sharing does not
accrue to the plan out-of-pocket maximum. OEBB administrators intended the increased cost-

10

Our conversations with OEBB health plan administrators are consistent with this hypothesis. More details are
available from the corresponding author.

13

sharing to act as an incentive for beneficiaries to learn about potential cost-effective alternatives
and discuss these alternatives with their providers.
Before the implementation of the ACT, there were no copayments for these services, and
there were coinsurance rates ranging from 10% (sleep studies and advanced imaging) to 30%
(endoscopy and surgery). Copayments were increased for all services we study on October 1st,
2010. 11 The copayment increases are as follows: $100 for sleep studies, $500 for endoscopies
(copayments for this service were reduced to $100 on October 1st 2011; OEBB administrators
state that the reduction was implemented to better align costs with beneficiary needs), $100 for
advanced imaging services, and $500 for surgeries considered here. Coinsurance was increased
by 10 percentage points on October 1st 2010 for endoscopy and surgery (taking each to 40%
coinsurance), and by 10 percentage points on October 1st 2011 for sleep studies and advanced
imaging (taking each to 20% coinsurance). 12 Thus, these changes in cost-sharing arguably
represent a substantial increase in the out-of-pocket payments faced by beneficiaries.
As noted earlier in the manuscript, a concern with analysis of any V-BID program is the
extent to which beneficiaries are aware of the program. If beneficiaries are not aware of the
program, it is unlikely that the program will lead to substantial changes in utilization. Kapowich
(2010) provides a detailed review of the extensive efforts OEBB administrators applied to ensure
good knowledge of the V-BID program among beneficiaries.
To support effective messaging of the program to beneficiaries, OEBB administrators
contracted with a media consulting firm to craft a communication plan. Prior to the October 1st,
11

OEBB also changed cost-sharing for several other services. For example, cost-sharing was increased for bariatric
surgery on October 1st 2012. However, these services are very infrequently used by OEBB beneficiaries. We
attempted to explore the impact of the V-BID on utilization of these services, but small sample sizes prevented us
from examining these outcomes with confidence. Details are available on request from the corresponding author.
12
In our analysis of the OEBB data, we do see some non-zero copayments in the data in the pre-treatment period.
However, these copayments are small in magnitude and we suspect that they are an artifact of data entry errors
rather than true cost-sharing for these services. More details are available from the corresponding author.

14

2010 launch date, administrators provided information through the OEBB website, e-mail,
pamphlets, and in-person meetings in their efforts to inform beneficiaries. Indeed, our
conversations with OEBB administrators suggest that beneficiaries were well aware of the
program. For example, OEBB administrators indicated that their benefits office received an
increase in emails and telephone calls from beneficiaries in reference to the V-BID program,
further suggesting that the beneficiaries were aware of the V-BID. However, we note that we
lack an objective measure of the effectiveness of these communication efforts and it is possible
that communication regarding the V-BID to beneficiaries was sub-optimal.
One concern with our analysis is that we may not be able to isolate the effect of the ACT
on outcomes from any VBP that went in at the same time. However, we suspect that because the
ACT and VBP targeted different services (overused and lower value procedures vs. both high
and low value medications), any cross-program spillover effects are likely small. Our review of
the medications targeted by the VBP suggests that they are not obviously directly linked with
most of the healthcare outcomes we study here. For example, we study a set of general
healthcare procedures (i.e., sleep studies, endoscopies, advanced imaging services, and
potentially overused surgeries) for which most medications targeted by the VBP do not appear to
be a direct complement. Indeed, our review of the medications suggests that very few of the
targeted medications would be used directly in conjunction with the procedures we study here.
In unreported analyses, we explored the impact of the VBP on use of targeted medications and
found no evidence that the program reduced utilization of targeted medications. 13

13

Indeed, our regression coefficient estimates were ‘wrong-signed’ or imprecise. We suspect that the complexity of
the VBP program may have confused some patients, leading to the difficult to understand results. Overall, we
interpret our analysis of the VBP program to suggest that this program did not have the expected impact on
medication use (i.e., reduce use of low value medications and increase use of high value medications). Thus, we do
not suspect substantial spillovers from the VBP to the ACT program we study here.

15

However, we do note that for some services we study some of the VBP medications may
be substitutes (e.g., pain management medications such as Fentanyl may substitute for spinal
surgeries to address pain). Thus, we acknowledge that we cannot definitively rule out the
possibility of spillover effects from the VBP program to the services we study as the ACT and
VBP programs were implemented simultaneously. Indeed, one way to interpret our results is as
the combined impact of the ACT which increased cost-sharing for low value general healthcare
services and the VBP which applied increases and decreases in cost-sharing for high and low
value medications. Our hypothesis is that the vast majority of any treatment effects we estimate
in our study are attributable to the ACT and not the VBP. We formulate this hypothesis based on
the fact that direct and substantial adjustments in cost-sharing for the targeted procedures is
likely to have a far greater effect on service utilization for these conditions than indirect effects
through modifying cost-sharing for medications.
4. Data and methods
4.1. Comparison group
In this study, our objective is to estimate the causal effect of the OEBB V-BID program
on healthcare utilization using differences-in-differences (DD) models. Thus, we require a valid
comparison group for OEBB. To this end, we obtained comparable health insurance claims data
on three additional public employers in the state of Oregon that did not implement V-BID
programs before or during our study period (2008 to 2013): Portland General Electric (PGE)
employees, Washington County employees, and Clackamas County employees. 14
PGE is an electrical utility company based in Portland that employed 2,603 employees in
2011. Washington County and Clackamas County are the second and third largest counties in
the state of Oregon with 529,000 and 376,000 residents respectively in 2010. PGE and both
14

We received these data from Providence Health.

16

counties are located in the northwest corner of Oregon. The three employers in our comparison
group offer one contracted point of service plan to beneficiaries through Providence Health, and
these plans did not change throughout our study period. Plan years at the comparison companies
run January 1st to December 31st. 15
A critical assumption for the DD model to uncover causal effects is that OEBB and the
comparison group (PGE, Washington County, and Clackamas County) would have trended
similarly in terms of the outcome variables had OEBB not implemented the V-BID program.
This assumption is inherently untestable, but we provide suggestive evidence on this assumption
later in the manuscript by testing parallel trends in outcome variables in the pre-treatment period.
4.2 Data
To study the impact of the OEBB V-BID program, we use granular, line-by-line
healthcare claims data on all four companies; we obtained these data through data use
agreements with Moda Health (OEBB data) and Providence Health (PGE, Washington County,
and Clackamas County data). These data include all healthcare encounters for which Moda
Health and Providence Health insurance plans were used for payment of OEBB, PGE,
Washington County, and Clackamas County beneficiaries over this time period.
We make several exclusions to the claims data to form our analysis sample. First, we
exclude all beneficiaries under age 19 and over age 64; we exclude such beneficiaries as they
potentially have access to public health insurance (e.g., Medicaid, Medicare) and therefore may
be somewhat insulated from the V-BID attributable increases in cost-sharing.
Second, we retain only beneficiaries who are continuously enrolled for the duration of
our study period (we report later in the manuscript that our results are robust to loosening this

15

Although the comparison company plan years run January to December, we use data on comparison companies to
match the OEBB plan years (October to September).

17

restriction). Thus, we have a balanced panel of beneficiaries. We chose to exclude noncontinuously enrolled beneficiaries to minimize concerns regarding compositional change within
the analysis sample. It is possible that continuously enrolled beneficiaries capture a select subset of all OEBB and comparison company beneficiaries.
Appendix Table B reports demographics for the continuously enrolled sample and noncontinuously enrolled sample (we exclude beneficiaries who are not enrolled for 12 months in
each plan year to form this latter group as we wish to consider only those beneficiaries likely to
be meaningfully exposed to the V-BID program). Although there are statistically significant
differences across these two groups, in general the differences are practically small. Thus, we
interpret this analysis to imply that focusing on the continuously enrolled sample does not lead to
substantial sample selection. However, we return to this issue later in the manuscript.
These exclusions leave us with 2,391,780 beneficiary/year observations in our analysis
sample, 2,159,520 at OEBB; 53,340 at PGE; 91,359 at Washington County; and 87,561 at
Clackamas County. In all analyses, we collapse the data to the beneficiary-month-year level.
Thus, observations capture per beneficiary per month cost-sharing and service utilization. Our
study period includes 60 months of data, 24 months pre-V-BID and 36 months post-V-BID.
We obtained the specific procedure and diagnosis codes (CPT, HCPCS, and ICD-9) used
by OEBB billers to determine if a particular service was subject to increased cost-sharing. 16 A
limitation of our analysis is that the OEBB codes change across plan year. Administrators at
OEBB report that these changes were made to better meet the needs of beneficiaries and to more
accurately reflect low value services relevant to the beneficiary population. Certain health
conditions (e.g., cancer, trauma) exempt beneficiaries from the ACT increased cost-sharing; we
incorporate these exemptions into the coding of our outcome variables (described later in the
16

Details on specific codes are available from the corresponding author.

18

manuscript). 17 In our main analyses we examine services that were ever listed as an ACT
service, but in a robustness check reported later we examine services that were listed as an ACT
service in all years of the program. Our results are not sensitive to this change in coding.
4.3 Outcome variables
To test whether the V-BID cost-sharing increases were in fact passed through to
beneficiaries, we measure the sum of copayments and coinsurance for each service targeted by
the program: sleep studies, endoscopies, advanced imaging services, and surgeries.
To examine the impact of the V-BID on health care utilization, we create several
measures. The first is an indicator for whether the beneficiary utilized each of the targeted
services. The second is a count of the number of episodes of care that involve a targeted
service. 18 We also construct comparable payment, any utilization, and service count for overall
ACT service use (that is use of any of the ACT services).
4.4 Control variables
We include demographic information available in our claims data in regression models.
Specifically, we include age in years, sex (male, with female as the omitted category), and
dependent status (spouse and child, with employee as the omitted category).
4.5 Empirical model
We estimate the impact of our V-BID programs on cost-sharing and utilization with the
following differences-in-differences regression model:
(1)

𝑌𝑖𝑒𝑡 = 𝛼0 + 𝛼1 𝐷𝐷𝑒𝑡 + 𝛼2′ 𝑋𝑖𝑒𝑡 + 𝐸𝑒 + 𝑚𝑚 + 𝜏𝑡 +𝜀𝑖𝑒𝑡

𝑌𝑖𝑒𝑡 is an outcome measure for beneficiary i at employer e in period t. 𝐷𝐷𝑒𝑡 is the

differences-in-differences estimate, it is the interaction between the treatment group (OEBB) and
17

More specifically, if diagnoses codes indicate that a patient suffers from a health condition that would exempt him
from the ACT cost-sharing, we do not code that service as an ACT service.
18
We define a care episode as a set of services that have the same member ID, start date, and billing provider.

19

the post period (October 1st, 2010 and onward). 19 𝑋𝑖𝑒𝑡 is a vector of beneficiary characteristics.

𝐸𝑒 is a vector of employer fixed effects, 𝑚𝑚 is a vector of month-of-year fixed effects to capture
any seasonality in healthcare use, and 𝜏𝑡 is a vector of period fixed effects. We do not include

plan fixed effects in our core regression model as Moda Health implemented a major re-

organization of its plans during our study period. However, in sensitivity checking we show that
our results are robust to including plan fixed effects. Inclusion of month fixed effects allows us
to control for any seasonality in healthcare outcomes. Period fixed effects control for trends in
outcomes that are experienced by all employers. Lastly, 𝜀𝑖𝑒𝑡 is the error term.

We calculate robust standard errors in our main analyses. However, such standard errors

may overstate the precision of our estimates as we have just two clusters. In unreported
analyses, we calculate estimates of precision using the wild cluster bootstrap which is more
suitable when the number of clusters is small (Cameron and Miller 2015). Results are
comparable to those reported in the manuscript and are available on request. We use OLS
regression when the outcome is continuous. We use linear probability models (LPM) to estimate
regressions in which the outcome variable is binary, although findings are not appreciably
changed if we instead use a probit model (Ai and Norton 2003, Norton, Wang et al. 2004).
5. Results
5.1 Summary statistics
Table 2 reports summary statistics in the pre-treatment period for OEBB and the
comparison group of companies. The average out-of-pocket (OOP) payments impacted by the
V-BID faced by patients at OEBB (comparison companies), i.e., the sum of copayments and
coinsurance, are: $285 ($104) for sleep studies, $160 ($98) for endoscopies, $195 ($65) for

19

Employer and year/month fixed effects subsume the treatment and post indicator in a simple DD model.

20

advanced imaging services, $339 ($203) for surgeries, and $211 ($88) for any ACT. Thus, in the
pre-treatment period, cost-sharing is higher at OEBB than at the comparison companies.
Unreported analyses shows that copayments at OEBB were generally zero and the OEBB OOP
payments predominately reflect coinsurance.
The services we study are not commonly provided: only 1.7% (2.0%) of the OEBB
(comparison companies) sample report using any of these services in the pre-treatment period. 20
The most frequently provided service is advanced imaging (1.2% in the OEBB sample and 1.5%
in the comparison group sample), and the least common services are sleep studies (0.1% in both
the OEBB and comparison group samples) and endoscopies (0.1% in the OEBB sample and
0.2% in the comparison group sample). In general, the share of beneficiaries using these services
is higher at the comparison companies than at OEBB in the pre-treatment period while the
pattern of results is more mixed in terms of service episodes. Differences across groups are
generally statistically distinguishable from zero given our large sample sizes.
The demographics of our sample are broadly comparable to an employed, prime working
age population. On average OEBB beneficiaries are older than comparison company
beneficiaries (46 years vs. 45 years) and are more likely to be female (58% vs. 53%). There are
also differences across the distribution of employees, spouses, and children between the groups.
5.2 Validity of the research design
Our research design is DD. A critical assumption of this model is that the treatment and
comparison groups would have trended similarly in terms of the outcome variables in the post-

20

Recall that our unit of observation is the beneficiary-month-year. Thus, these numbers reflect monthly service
use. To estimate annual service use, interested readers can multiply the numbers presented here by 12. An estimate
of the annual ACT propensity to use an ACT service is therefore 20.4% among OEBB beneficiaries and 24% among
comparison group beneficiaries.

21

treatment period, had the treatment group not been treated. To explore whether our data support
this assumption, we illustrate the pattern in both cost sharing and utilization.
More specifically, Figures 1 to 3 present graphical analyses of unadjusted trends in the
outcome variables in the treatment and comparison groups for our study period (October 2010 to
September 2013), for any ACT service, both the indicator for any use and the count of the
number of episodes (results for specific ACT services are available on request). We include a
vertical line to indicate the period in which the V-BID was implemented at OEBB (October
2010). Although our analysis is conducted at the individual-month level, we aggregate these
data to the treatment/quarter level to smooth out noise in the estimates.
Figure 1 shows that OOP payments for ACT services (conditional on the use of an ACT
service) are on a parallel trend before the policy change, and then jump up for OEBB while
remaining flat for the comparison group. This pattern provides reassuring evidence that our
policy change was independent of other key cost sharing changes in the comparison sample.
Figures 2 and 3 show that both any use of an ACT service, and the number of episodes of
ACT utilization, are also on parallel trends before the policy change, with OEBB utilization
above that for the comparison sample. At the time of the policy change, there is a sharp reversal,
with OEBB utilization falling before the comparison sample – corresponding to the rise in cost
sharing. The timing is once again suggestive of a policy impact as opposed to some pre-existing
trend. Given that the unadjusted trends in our outcomes strongly support that the treatment and
comparison moved in parallel in the pre-treatment period, we proceed to the main analysis.
5.3 Effect of the OEBB V-BID on ACT service cost-sharing and service utilization
Table 3 reports selected regression results from our analysis of the V-BID program on
OOP payments (conditional on service use), any utilization, and number of service episodes. In

22

terms of cost-sharing (panel A), our results are as expected in terms of sign and are precisely
estimated: cost-sharing increases post-V-BID at OEBB relative to comparison companies. More
specifically, the cost-sharing increases in OOP payments are as follows (% increase given in
parentheses): $130 (46%) for sleep studies, $245 (153%) for endoscopies, $143 (73%) for
advanced imaging services, $541 (159%) for surgeries, and $212 (100%) for any ACT services
(percent changes are calculated by comparing the estimated beta with the mean value in the pretreatment period at OEBB, all tables report the same calculation).
Our decision to condition these OOP payment regressions on use of ACT services has
potential implications for interpreting our estimated regression coefficients. If the V-BID
impacted the propensity to use services, and if that changed the nature of the patient cost sharing
among users, that can lead to sample selection bias. To explore this possibility, we re-estimate
the OOP payment regressions on the unconditional sample. Coefficient estimates, reported in
Appendix Table C, are comparable in direction and statistical significance to estimates generated
in our conditional samples, although the unconditional results are of course much smaller in
magnitude since use of these services is rare. We interpret these unconditional OOP payment
results to imply that our decision to select on service use does not lead to substantial bias.
Our estimates of the effect of the OEBB V-BID program on utilization of ACT services
are reported in panel B. The results suggest that the V-BID reduces utilization of each of the
services studied here, but with some variation in the level of statistical significance. Along the
extensive margin (any service use), the reduction in utilization from increased cost-sharing is
significant for sleep studies, advanced imaging services, and surgeries but not endoscopies. We
find that following implementation of the V-BID, OEBB patients are 0.033 percentage points
(24%) less likely to use sleep studies, 0.017 percentage points (12%) less likely to have

23

endoscopies, 0.092 percentage points (8%) less likely to use any advanced imaging services, and
0.061 percentage points (24%) less likely to use any of the potentially overused surgery services
relative to beneficiaries in the comparison group. For overall ACT services, the propensity of
any use declines by 0.20 percentage points or, 12%. The implied price elasticities across
services vary from a low of -0.08 (endoscopies) to a high of -0.52 (sleep studies) and across all
ACT services the extensive margin elasticity is -0.12.
The pattern of results is comparable when we turn to our measures of service episodes
that involve ACT services in the third panel of Table 3. Following implementation of the V-BID
program, the number of sleep studies, endoscopies, imaging, and surgeries decline by 32%, 11%,
6%, and 26%, respectively (the coefficient estimate in the endoscopy regression is again
imprecise). The decline in overall episodes of ACT service use is 13%. The implied elasticities
across the various services vary from a low of -0.07 (endoscopy) to a high of -0.70 (sleep
studies), and the overall elasticity for ACT episodes is -0.13.
The similar magnitudes for the use of any services and the total number of services used
implies that most of the response that we observe is on the extensive margin; indeed, if we
estimate a model of conditional utilization of ACT services, we get a zero coefficient for overall
service use. This finding is of course not dispositive because models of conditional utilization
are subject to potential selection bias, but it is suggestive
Overall, these findings suggest that the V-BID was effective in reducing use of low value
services. The response is largest for sleep studies, but very inelastic for other ACT services.
The response appears to arise from the extensive margin, not the amount of services
received, which makes sense since patients typically only receive one or two of each of these
services. For brevity, we have reported results for the DD estimate only. We report a full set of

24

regression coefficients for OOPs in Appendix Table D1, any utilization in Appendix Table D2,
and service episodes in Appendix Table D3.
5.4 Allowing for dynamics in program effects: Event study
In our core regression model, Equation (1), we implicitly impose that the effects of the
OEBB V-BID occurred immediately following program implementation and remain constant in
the post-program period. Moreover, we do not account for the fact that there may be some
anticipatory behavior on either the part of providers or patients in the pre-V-BID period, or other
trends in the outcome variables. Failure to consider these dynamics can lead to inaccurate
conclusions (Wolfers 2006). We next relax these assumptions to some extent. Specifically, we
estimate a variant of Equation (1) which includes leads and lags around the implementation date.
More specifically, we include indicators for two years pre-program, the program implementation
year, one year post-program implementation, and two years post-program implementation, with
two years pre-program as the omitted category. Results are reported in Table 4.
The findings from this analysis are qualitatively similar to our core findings.
Importantly, we find no evidence of anticipatory behavior or differential trends between the
treatment and comparison groups in the pre-treatment period: the coefficient estimates on the
indicator for 2 years pre-V-BID are statistically indistinguishable from zero in all 15 regressions.
In the cost-sharing regression (panel A), we find evidence that patient cost sharing
increases substantially in the implementation year, but that patient’s exposure to the full costs of
the targeted services may decline over time (coefficient estimates decrease monotonically with
each year post-V-BID). While we cannot state definitively why patient price exposure declines,
it may be driven by price shopping, plan switching, or changes in service classification.

25

Our findings for any utilization of the targeted services (panel B) imply dynamics in
program effects. First, for surgeries, we see that the reductions in use do not emerge until 1 year
post-V-BID (although the coefficient on the indicator for the implementation year is negative, it
is imprecise). Interestingly, our dynamic models show that advanced imaging services effects
become statistically indistinguishable from zero two years post-V-BID. As in the basic DD
regression, coefficient estimates in the endoscopy regressions are not statistically different from
zero although they are negative.
6. Robustness checks
We next describe several robustness checks we conduct to assess the sensitivity of our
findings to alternative modeling approaches. For brevity, we report cost-sharing and any
utilization regressions, regressions for episodes are available on request.
6.1 Unbalanced panel
Our analyses so far have relied on the panel of beneficiaries who are continuously
enrolled throughout our study period. This sample may be selected and therefore our findings
may not be generalizable to the broader beneficiary population. A comparison of demographics
of the balanced and unbalanced samples (Appendix Table B) reveals some modest differences in
terms of demographics between these two groups.
The results of this exercise are reported in Appendix Table E. The coefficient estimates
are similar in sign and statistical significance as in the core regressions, but some of the
magnitudes are larger. While continuously enrolled beneficiaries may be a selected group, our
focus on this group does not appear to fully explain our V-BID findings.
6.2 Plan switching

26

Thus far in the analysis we have not explicitly accounted for, or explored the extent of,
any plan switching. If individuals, in response to the V-BID, decide to switch to a different plan,
this compensatory behavior may bias our coefficient estimates. To explore this behavior, we reestimate Equation (1) with plan fixed effects. The results of this are shown in Appendix Table F.
The coefficient estimates are not appreciably different from those generated in our basic DD
models, although the estimated effects and applied price elasticities are somewhat smaller in
magnitude. 21 One possible explanation for the difference in magnitudes between estimates
generated in these regressions and our core models is that some beneficiaries switched plans to
avoid the increases in cost-sharing attributable to the ACT.
6.3 Alternative coding for ACT services
In the core analysis we examine services that listed as an ACT service in any plan year
between 2010 and 2013. We next re-estimate our regression models using only those services
that were ever listed as an ACT service in all years of the program (i.e., in each year between
2010 and 2013). Results are reported in Appendix Table G and are not appreciably different
than our main findings.
6.4 Other changes in cost-sharing at OEBB
Unfortunately, for our study, OEBB implemented other changes in cost-sharing during
our study period. In particular, OEBB increased deductibles, out of pocket maximums, office
visits, and urgent care visits, and the extent of the changes varied across plans (more details on
the specific change by plan are available on request). These changes occur at the same time as

21

As noted earlier in the manuscript, Moda Health implemented a re-organization of their health plans between
2012 and 2013. This effort lead to the termination of some plans and introduction of new plans. Although the plan
re-organization of the plans occurred several years after the V-BID implementation, we are concerned that the plan
changes may have led to additional plan switching on the part of beneficiaries. Hence, we have re-estimated our
regressions that control for plan fixed effects excluding plan year 2012-13 (i.e., October 2012 to September 2013).
The results are not different and are available on request.

27

some of the increases in cost-sharing for low value services: October 1st, 2010 or October 1st,
2011. A concern with our analysis is that the effects we estimate in our regressions reflect the
impact of the above-noted changes in general cost-sharing rather than the increases in costsharing for low value services (i.e., sleep studies, upper GI endoscopies, advanced imaging
services, and potentially overused surgeries). To explore this possibility, we leverage differences
in the increases in general cost-sharing that occurred across OEBB plans.
More specifically, three plans (named ‘ODS Plan 3’, ‘ODS Plan 4’, and ‘ODS Plan 5’)
experienced larger increases in general cost-sharing than the remaining plans (named ‘ODS Plan
6’, ‘ODS Plan 7’, and ‘ODS Plan 8’). In the first set of plans, the copay was significantly
increased for specialist office visits, and the deductible was raised by 50% to 200%. In the latter
set of plans, there was no change for specialist office visits, and deductibles rose only at most by
33%. To provide suggestive evidence that the effects we estimate in our main regressions are
predominantly driven by the increases in cost-sharing for low value services rather than general
changes in cost-sharing we estimate separate regressions in which our treatment group includes
i) ODS Plans 3 to 5 and ii) ODS Plans 6 to 8. If we find that the effects we estimate in these two
sets of regressions are qualitatively similar, then it is a plausible assumption that the increased
cost-sharing for low value services drives our findings. 22
Results from this analysis are reported in Appendix Table H. For brevity, we report only
the cost-sharing and any utilization for the any ACT regressions, but regressions for specific
services are available on request. The results are comparable across both groups of plans. For
example, utilization of any ACT service declined by 13% in ODS Plans 3 to 5 following
implementation of the V-BID relative to the comparison companies while the decline was 10%
22

As noted in earlier in the manuscript, between 2012 and 2013 Moda Health re-organized its plan offerings. Some
of the ODS Plans were dropped and others were altered to some extent and re-named. Due to these changes in the
ODS plans, we estimate the separate regressions on the October 1st, 2008 to September 30th, 2012 period only.

28

in ODS Plans 6 to 8. The implied elasticities are -0.09 using ODS Plans 3 to 5 as the treatment
group and -0.15 using ODS Plans 6 to 8 as the comparison group. Thus, these findings provide
suggestive evidence that our main results are driven by increase in cost-sharing for low value
services and not other general cost-sharing changes at OEBB.
6.5 Other robustness checks
We have conducted a number of additional sensitivity checks to further probe the
robustness of our findings. More specifically, we have added employer-specific linear time
trends (i.e., interact each employer fixed effects with a linear time trend, where we measure time
from the beginning of the study period), assigned false start dates for the V-BID program, tested
the parallel trends assumption using regression methods (i.e., we interacted a treatment dummy
with the linear time trend, and regressed each of our outcomes on this indicator, demographics,
employer fixed effects, and year fixed effects using pre-treatment data), and examined the impact
of the V-BID on a set of falsification outcomes (i.e., emergency appendectomy, tonsillitis). 23
Finally, a concern with our analysis is that our treatment group is quite large relative to our
comparison group. To explore the impact of this difference in group size, we drew a 10%
random sample of OEBB beneficiaries (to create more equally sized treatment and comparison
groups) and re-estimated our regressions. Overall, our findings from these additional checks
strongly support the validity of our research design. Additional details are available on request.
7. Discussion
In this study, we explore the effect of a value-based insurance design (V-BID) that
substantially increased patient cost-sharing for sleep studies, endoscopies, advanced imaging
services, and potentially overused surgeries. To the best of our knowledge, we are the first to

23

We chose these services because they reflect medical emergencies; that is a situation in which there is little to no
discretion on the part of the consumer whether or not to receive treatment.

29

study the effect of a V-BID design using increased cost sharing for low value services such as
these using a quasi-experimental design. Thus, we offer new insight to the large and growing
literature on V-BID programs. This information is timely as V-BID principles are embedded
within the Affordable Care Act and are being incorporated into major public insurance systems
(e.g., Medicare Advantage); most large employers currently apply V-BID principles, or plan to
include these principles, in the near future; and healthcare providers themselves are attempting to
reduce the delivery of low value care. Moreover, we contribute to the economic literature that
examines the impact of cost-sharing more broadly.
We exploit a novel V-BID implemented by a large public employer in the state of
Oregon. We apply a differences-in-differences design to study program impacts, thus our
findings have a causal interpretation. A concern with the V-BID literature is that many studies
lack a suitable comparison group and therefore it is difficult to disentangle V-BID effects from
contemporaneous trends in healthcare use (Look 2015). Moreover, we have access to three years
of post-V-BID data which allows us to better track program dynamics than previous studies
which rely on shorter study periods. Thus, our analysis represents an important step forward in
understanding the potential of V-BIDs to address the high and rising healthcare costs in the U.S.
Our findings suggest that this program did indeed increase patient cost-sharing and, in turn,
reduced the use of some, but not all, targeted services.
Our study, although novel in many ways, is not without limitations. First, we rely on just
one program and four public companies in the state of Oregon. Thus, the generalizability of our
findings to other settings is not clear. Second, although we conducted numerous robustness
checks to assess the validity of our research design, we cannot definitively rule out the possibility
that our findings are driven by some other cost-containment or provider-level changes. Third, it

30

is plausible that beneficiaries, in response to the V-BID, simply terminated their employer-based
coverage. Fourth, although the OEBB administrators went to great lengths to select low value
services, some the services targeted by the V-BID program may be of high value for some
patients (e.g., upper gastrointestinal endoscopies can be life-saving when preformed for
gastrointestinal bleeding). Thus, we note that the selection of services for increases in costsharing may not be sufficiently nuanced. The lack of a standardized and validated set of services
that are lower and higher value is an important barrier for both the research field, and healthcare
providers and payers. We encourage future studies to rigorously test healthcare service value to
facilitate better research and policy decisions.
The question of how to address high healthcare costs, without undermining patient
outcomes, is critical for maintaining the financial stability of governments at the Federal, state,
and local level; insurers; and patients and the health of the U.S. population. We provide new
insight on this question. Future research could explore the effect of V-BID programs on
utilization of a broader set of healthcare services and in different patient populations.

31

Table 1: Additional Cost Tier (ACT) services and cost-sharing increases
Copayment
Copayment
Coinsurance
Coinsurance
Variable
Services
change date
increase
change date
increase
Sleep
Home sleep studies;
October 1st, 2010
$100
October 1st, 2011
10-20 ppts*
studies
facility sleep studies
Upper GI
Upper GI endoscopies
October 1st, 2010;
$500;
October 1st, 2010
10-40 ppts*
st
endoscopy
October 1 , 2011
$100
Advanced
CT, MRI, PET
October 1st, 2010
$100
October 1st, 2011
10-20 ppts*
imaging
services
Potentially
Spine surgeries for
October 1st, 2010
$500
October 1st, 2010
10-40 ppts*
overused
pain; knee and
surgeries
shoulder arthoscopies;
hip and knee
replacements
Notes: OEBB plan year October 1st-September 30th. Comparison company plan year January 1st-December 31st.
ppts=percentage points.
*Coinsurance increase depends on plan.

32

Table 2. Summary statistics: Pre-treatment period (October 1st, 2008 to September 31st, 2010)
Difference††
Comparison
Sample:
OEBB
companies†
(p-value)
ACT services: OOP payments*
Sleep study
284.764
104.382
0.0000
Endoscopy
160.412
98.4644
0.0000
Advanced imaging
195.244
64.9788
0.0000
Potentially overused surgeries†††
339.480
202.632
0.0000
Any ACT
210.959
87.5820
0.0000
ACT services: Any use
Sleep study
0.0014170
0.0014531
0.7811
Endoscopy
0.0013626
0.0017222
0.0053
Advanced imaging
0.011989
0.014682
0.0000
Potentially overused surgeries†††
0.0024577
0.0031430
0.0001
Any ACT
0.016685
0.020247
0.0000
ACT services: Episodes
Sleep study
0.0023385
0.0017545
0.0108
Endoscopy
0.0024855
0.0032830
0.0010
Advanced imaging
0.020250
0.026565
0.0000
Potentially overused surgeries†††
0.0051215
0.0056295
0.1741
Any ACT
0.042102
0.057210
0.0000
Demographics
Age
46.3610
44.9315
0.0000
Male
0.42062
0.47145
0.0000
Female
0.57938
0.52855
0.0000
Employee
0.60675
0.61069
0.0192
Spouse
0.32857
0.34229
0.0000
Child
0.064681
0.047016
0.0000
Observations (total)
863808
92904
-Notes: The unit of observation is a beneficiary/month/year.
*OOP=copayments +coinsurance. Conditional on using the specific service.
†Comparison companies include Portland General Electric, Washington County, and Clackamas County.
††Difference between OEBB and comparison companies calculated with a t-test for continuous variables and a chisquared test for binary variables.
††† Potentially overused surgeries = Spine surgeries for pain; knee and shoulder arthoscopies; and hip and knee
replacements.

33

Table 3. Effect of VIBD on ACT service OOP payments conditional on service use, any utilization of ACT
services, and the number of ACT services
Potentially
Sleep
Advanced
overused
Outcome:
studies
Endoscopy
imaging
surgeries†
Any ACT
Panel A:OOP
284.7639
160.4122
195.2439
339.4799
210.9595
payments
OEBB proportion,
284.7639
160.4122
195.2439
339.4799
210.9595
pre-treatment
DD
129.62145***
244.75335***
142.82070***
540.59854***
211.66962***
(19.62929)
(17.39088)
(5.59717)
(27.74835)
(7.10371)
Observations
3172
3127
29126
6337
40440
Panel B: Any
utilization
OEBB proportion,
0.0014
0.0014
0.0120
0.0025
0.0167
pre-treatment
DD
-0.00033***
-0.00017
-0.00092***
-0.00061***
-0.00199***
(0.00012)
(0.00011)
(0.00034)
(0.00017)
(0.00041)
Observations
2391780
2391780
2391780
2391780
2391780
𝜀††
-0.5178
-0.0796
-0.1048
-0.1532
-0.1188
Panel C: Number of
services
OEBB mean, pre0.0023
0.0025
0.0202
0.0051
0.0421
treatment
DD
-0.00073***
-0.00027
-0.00127**
-0.00135***
-0.00548***
(0.00019)
(0.00021)
(0.00063)
(0.00034)
(0.00141)
Observations
2391780
2391780
2391780
2391780
2391780
𝜀††
-0.6973
-0.0708
-0.0859
-0.1662
-0.1297
Notes: All models estimated with OLS and control for beneficiary characteristics reported in Table 2, and employer,
month, and year fixed effects. Robust standard errors reported in parentheses. The study period is October 1st, 2008
to September 30th, 2013. The unit of observation is a beneficiary/month/year. See Table 1 for cost-sharing
increases. OOP=copayment+coinsurance.
†Potentially overused surgeries=Spine surgeries for pain; knee and shoulder arthoscopies; and hip and knee
replacements.
††𝜀= (percent change quantity)/(percent change price)=(𝛽𝑄 /mean in service use in pre-treatment period at
OEBB)/(𝛽𝑂𝑂𝑃 /mean OOP payment in pre-treatment period at OEBB). 𝛽𝑂𝑂𝑃 reported in Panel A.
***;**=statistically different from zero at the 1%; 5% level.

34

Table 4. Effect of VIBD on ACT service OOP payments conditional on service use, any utilization of ACT
services, and the number of ACT services: Allowing for program dynamics
Potentially
Sleep
Advanced
overused
Outcome:
studies
Endoscopy
imaging
surgeries†
Any ACT
Panel A:OOP
payments
OEBB mean, pre284.7639
160.4122
195.2439
339.4799
210.9595
treatment
2 years pre V-BID
-1.27081
17.25940
13.08937
6.67340
8.19912
(33.22246)
(29.15299)
(7.65846)
(43.52239)
(9.16980)
V-BID
100.48071***
269.07538***
136.36382***
482.53135***
198.75756***
implementation year
(34.06320)
(33.05739)
(8.07614)
(49.07449)
(10.99591)
1 years post V-BID
86.53260***
121.10513***
125.49575***
451.47530***
175.45673***
(31.89076)
(33.41409)
(7.65844)
(44.10162)
(10.68414)
2 years post V-BID
12.66015
73.28946**
100.22736***
413.15973***
145.34314***
(34.82620)
(30.01159)
(7.92333)
(47.44504)
(11.26655)
Observations
3172
3127
29126
6337
40440
Panel B: Any
utilization
OEBB mean, pre0.0014
0.0014
0.0120
0.0025
0.0167
treatment
2 years pre V-BID
-0.00036
-0.00027
0.00002
-0.00010
-0.00046
(0.00026)
(0.00028)
(0.00082)
(0.00038)
(0.00096)
V-BID
-0.00052**
-0.00021
-0.00165**
-0.00042
-0.00268***
implementation year
(0.00026)
(0.00027)
(0.00083)
(0.00040)
(0.00097)
1 years post V-BID
-0.00101***
0.00019
-0.00198**
-0.00182***
-0.00440***
(0.00028)
(0.00027)
(0.00084)
(0.00044)
(0.00100)
2 years post V-BID
-0.00083***
-0.00020
-0.00074
-0.00110***
-0.00266***
(0.00027)
(0.00028)
(0.00083)
(0.00042)
(0.00099)
Observations
2391780
2391780
2391780
2391780
2391780
Panel C: Number of
services
OEBB mean, pre0.0023
0.0025
0.0202
0.0051
0.0421
treatment
2 years pre V-BID
-0.00045
-0.00050
-0.00069
-0.00026
-0.00329
(0.00035)
(0.00055)
(0.00158)
(0.00073)
(0.00347)
V-BID
-0.00086**
-0.00041
-0.00285
-0.00140
-0.01068***
implementation year
(0.00035)
(0.00053)
(0.00156)
(0.00077)
(0.00396)
1 years post V-BID
-0.00190***
0.00042
-0.00311**
-0.00416***
-0.01756***
(0.00041)
(0.00051)
(0.00157)
(0.00085)
(0.00405)
2 years post V-BID
-0.00182***
-0.00036
-0.00027
-0.00272***
-0.00898**
(0.00041)
(0.00054)
(0.00155)
(0.00081)
(0.00361)
Observations
2391780
2391780
2391780
2391780
2391780
Notes: All models estimated with OLS and control for beneficiary characteristics reported in Table 2, and employer,
month, and year fixed effects. Robust standard errors reported in parentheses. The study period is October 1st, 2008
to September 30th, 2013. The unit of observation is a beneficiary/month/year. See Table 1 for cost-sharing
increases. OOP=copayment+coinsurance.
†Potentially overused surgeries=Spine surgeries for pain; knee and shoulder arthoscopies; and hip and knee
replacements.
***;**=statistically different from zero at the 1%; 5% level.

35

Appendix Table A. Share of OEBB beneficiaries covered by Moda Health
Plan year
Share
2008
0.682
2009
0.725
2010
0.767
2011
0.790
2012
0.802
Full period
0.753
Notes: OEBB beneficiaries were covered by three different insurers: OEBB (for which we have data), Kaiser
Permanente, Providence Health. We have access to all Moda Health data. The source of these data are OEBB
annual reports. More details available on request from the corresponding author.

Appendix Table B. Comparison of the balanced and unbalanced panels
Difference†
Balanced
Unbalanced
Sample:
panel
panel
(p-value)
Demographics
Age
47.7222
44.7506
0.0000
Male
0.42556
0.44374
0.0000
Female
0.57444
0.55626
0.0000
Employee
0.60713
0.52416
0.0000
Spouse
0.32990
0.31453
0.0000
Child
0.062966
0.16131
0.0000
Observations
2391780
4672864
-Notes: The unit of observation is a beneficiary/month/year.
*OOP=copayments +coinsurance. Conditional on using the specific service.
†Difference between OEBB and comparison companies calculated with a t-test for continuous variables and a chisquared test for binary variables.

Appendix Table C. Effect of VIBD on ACT service unconditional OOP payments
Potentially
Sleep
Advanced
overused
Outcome:
studies
Endoscopy
imaging
surgeries†
Any ACT
OEBB proportion,
0.4224
0.3157
2.9148
1.6392
5.1028
pre-treatment
DD
0.11271**
0.25321***
1.55348***
1.28953***
3.10041***
(0.04515)
(0.03655)
(0.10451)
(0.13250)
(0.17106)
Observations
2391780
2391780
2391780
2391780
2391780
Notes: All models estimated with OLS and control for beneficiary characteristics reported in Table 2, and employer,
month, plan, and year fixed effects. Robust standard errors reported in parentheses. The study period is October 1st,
2008 to September 30th, 2013. The unit of observation is a beneficiary/month/year. See Table 1 for cost-sharing
increases. OOP=copayment+coinsurance.
†Potentially overused surgeries=Spine surgeries for pain; knee and shoulder arthoscopies; and hip and knee
replacements.
***;**=statistically different from zero at the 1%; 5% level.

36

Appendix Table D1. Effect of VIBD on ACT service OOP payments conditional on service use: Full set of
coefficient estimates
Potentially
Sleep
Advanced
overused
Outcome:
studies
Endoscopy
imaging
surgeries†
Any ACT
OEBB proportion,
284.7639
160.4122
195.2439
339.4799
210.9595
pre-treatment
DD
129.62145***
244.75335***
142.82070***
540.59854***
211.66962***
(19.62929)
(17.39088)
(5.59717)
(27.74835)
(7.10371)
Age
-1.17757**
-0.87479**
-0.30258
-2.15158**
0.15682
(0.56640)
(0.41000)
(0.15583)
(0.89883)
(0.20002)
Female
-4.43928
21.44824***
-0.81504
-52.92452***
-25.72340***
(9.42465)
(7.55054)
(2.74027)
(13.73458)
(3.50479)
Spouse
-7.55369
-1.50049
-1.53799
-22.26688
-7.16585**
(9.93557)
(7.76253)
(2.84518)
(14.33850)
(3.61972)
Child
-21.02143
5.95448
-4.09508
-4.98086
-17.81481
(46.69283)
(23.32105)
(9.62118)
(51.79300)
(10.89919)
2009
1.98606
-21.73485
-9.28022
53.79539
-0.74603
(23.22963)
(16.95807)
(6.66981)
(29.74836)
(6.90900)
2010
-20.45794
-3.80032
-13.82754**
57.52737
1.02540
(23.64047)
(18.21414)
(6.89932)
(30.50199)
(7.29417)
2011
18.29272
21.23830
-31.20398***
90.12082**
-1.86080
(30.13531)
(24.38408)
(8.56659)
(41.72693)
(10.12951)
2012
-19.33808
-145.1135***
-34.72265***
49.26046
-11.38911
(29.85878)
(24.06675)
(8.52983)
(41.38945)
(10.20645)
2013
-89.48896***
-142.7563***
-51.19993***
83.99680
-25.45109**
(32.76456)
(25.38749)
(9.10100)
(45.53722)
(11.06644)
February
25.16468
-16.23868
-11.82881
-38.09287
-11.45951
(23.43574)
(17.63998)
(6.57639)
(32.10652)
(8.23108)
March
1.24322
-48.12820***
-17.55753***
-61.15385
-22.23695***
(21.00357)
(16.12436)
(6.36398)
(31.90285)
(7.97904)
April
2.99932
-11.05947
-16.61506**
-92.11341***
-25.57896***
(20.96103)
(17.57518)
(6.50234)
(33.19739)
(8.09477)
May
-42.20496
-29.92143
-21.81998***
-83.34243**
-27.66129***
(22.38354)
(16.57424)
(6.38206)
(33.23898)
(8.19184)
June
-13.42005
-41.95525**
-27.17208***
-1.18e+02***
-35.49104***
(22.25227)
(17.07620)
(6.21003)
(30.71899)
(7.84621)
July
0.13001
-29.67478
-24.60718***
-1.15e+02***
-27.42087***
(21.91400)
(16.32409)
(6.61926)
(31.50945)
(8.14907)
August
-22.67075
-47.34005***
-36.11367***
-1.26e+02***
-42.06062***
(20.16237)
(16.65532)
(6.20240)
(31.17390)
(7.83654)
September
-25.31747
-66.26329***
-29.69990***
-1.75e+02***
-48.07220***
(19.67963)
(16.44578)
(6.40130)
(31.39272)
(7.75405)
October
8.43610
-67.75516***
-13.02620
-55.52498
-28.91398***
(23.57300)
(19.46572)
(7.39542)
(42.24872)
(9.24279)
November
19.64731
-39.02285**
-9.54187
39.25203
-6.49585
(22.97677)
(18.42423)
(7.17485)
(37.00749)
(8.99796)
December
30.47927
-54.52918***
-10.48986
10.45729
10.43231
(25.13474)
(18.22065)
(6.99550)
(32.55854)
(8.96157)
PGE
-13.89477
64.85213***
-8.05056**
191.59170***
29.19174***
(19.88659)
(24.13668)
(3.74775)
(27.73687)
(6.45004)
Washington
177.49616***
85.20547***
106.45654***
230.75160***
125.61171***
County
(25.96387)
(23.94961)
(5.56253)
(31.83716)
(7.18786)
Clackamas
206.91946***
67.77068***
149.50307***
252.18760***
156.78005***
County
(20.54002)
(20.46473)
(4.90643)
(26.02328)
(6.19019)
Constant
152.64080***
173.36178***
90.15545***
252.92535***
87.01199***

37

(44.03282)
(35.88039)
(12.33868)
(63.35368)
(15.17717)
Observations
3172
3127
29126
6337
40440
Notes: All models estimated with OLS. Robust standard errors reported in parentheses. The study period is October
1st, 2008 to September 30th, 2013. The unit of observation is a beneficiary/month/year. See Table 1 for cost-sharing
increases. OOP=copayment+coinsurance.
†Potentially overused surgeries=Spine surgeries for pain; knee and shoulder arthoscopies; and hip and knee
replacements.
***;**=statistically different from zero at the 1%; 5% level.

38

Appendix Table D2. Effect of VIBD on any utilization of ACT services: Full set of coefficient estimates
Potentially
Sleep
Advanced
overused
Outcome:
studies
Endoscopy
imaging
surgeries†
Any ACT
OEBB proportion,
0.0014
0.0014
0.0120
0.0025
0.0167
pre-treatment
DD
-0.00033***
-0.00017
-0.00092***
-0.00061***
-0.00199***
(0.00012)
(0.00011)
(0.00034)
(0.00017)
(0.00041)
Age
0.00004***
0.00004***
0.00027***
0.00010***
0.00042***
(0.00000)
(0.00000)
(0.00001)
(0.00000)
(0.00001)
Female
-0.00054***
0.00033***
0.00127***
-0.00052***
0.00067***
(0.00005)
(0.00005)
(0.00015)
(0.00007)
(0.00018)
Spouse
-0.00003
0.00024***
0.00122***
0.00020**
0.00155***
(0.00006)
(0.00005)
(0.00016)
(0.00008)
(0.00019)
Child
-0.00024***
0.00052***
0.00163***
0.00063***
0.00236***
(0.00008)
(0.00009)
(0.00029)
(0.00012)
(0.00033)
2009
0.00002
-0.00020
-0.00089**
0.00008
-0.00093**
(0.00012)
(0.00013)
(0.00037)
(0.00017)
(0.00044)
2010
0.00014
-0.00015
-0.00088**
0.00051***
-0.00036
(0.00013)
(0.00013)
(0.00040)
(0.00018)
(0.00047)
2011
0.00004
-0.00033
-0.00102
0.00061**
-0.00056
(0.00018)
(0.00017)
(0.00053)
(0.00025)
(0.00062)
2012
0.00021
-0.00021
-0.00073
0.00086***
0.00012
(0.00018)
(0.00017)
(0.00053)
(0.00025)
(0.00062)
2013
-0.00003
-0.00017
-0.00053
0.00070***
0.00007
(0.00019)
(0.00019)
(0.00057)
(0.00027)
(0.00067)
February
-0.00013
-0.00009
-0.00083**
0.00002
-0.00087**
(0.00011)
(0.00011)
(0.00035)
(0.00016)
(0.00040)
March
-0.00006
0.00004
0.00017
0.00013
0.00033
(0.00011)
(0.00012)
(0.00035)
(0.00016)
(0.00041)
April
0.00019
-0.00000
-0.00027
-0.00004
-0.00011
(0.00011)
(0.00012)
(0.00035)
(0.00016)
(0.00041)
May
-0.00005
0.00003
-0.00011
0.00021
0.00008
(0.00011)
(0.00012)
(0.00035)
(0.00016)
(0.00041)
June
-0.00002
-0.00003
0.00032
0.00044***
0.00077
(0.00011)
(0.00012)
(0.00035)
(0.00017)
(0.00041)
July
0.00016
0.00014
0.00013
0.00049***
0.00088**
(0.00011)
(0.00012)
(0.00035)
(0.00017)
(0.00041)
August
0.00057***
0.00005
0.00060
0.00044***
0.00165***
(0.00012)
(0.00012)
(0.00036)
(0.00016)
(0.00042)
September
0.00076***
0.00005
0.00073**
0.00038**
0.00192***
(0.00013)
(0.00012)
(0.00036)
(0.00016)
(0.00042)
October
-0.00012
-0.00030***
-0.00202***
-0.00048***
-0.00266***
(0.00011)
(0.00012)
(0.00035)
(0.00016)
(0.00041)
November
-0.00001
-0.00013
-0.00087**
-0.00000
-0.00083**
(0.00012)
(0.00012)
(0.00036)
(0.00016)
(0.00042)
December
0.00002
-0.00030***
-0.00083**
0.00088***
-0.00021
(0.00012)
(0.00012)
(0.00036)
(0.00018)
(0.00043)
PGE
0.00053**
0.00022
0.00111
-0.00058
0.00118
(0.00022)
(0.00020)
(0.00067)
(0.00036)
(0.00080)
Washington
0.00026
0.00064***
0.00011
-0.00138***
-0.00026
County
(0.00021)
(0.00022)
(0.00067)
(0.00035)
(0.00080)
Clackamas
0.00009
0.00002
-0.00300***
-0.00182***
-0.00447***
County
(0.00018)
(0.00017)
(0.00057)
(0.00030)
(0.00068)
Constant
-0.00015
-0.00069***
0.00236***
-0.00044
0.00101
(0.00026)
(0.00025)
(0.00080)
(0.00039)
(0.00094)

39

Observations
2391780
2391780
2391780
2391780
2391780
Notes: All models estimated with OLS. Robust standard errors reported in parentheses. The study period is October
1st, 2008 to September 30th, 2013. The unit of observation is a beneficiary/month/year.
†Potentially overused surgeries=Spine surgeries for pain; knee and shoulder arthoscopies; and hip and knee
replacements.
***;**=statistically different from zero at the 1%; 5% level.

40

Appendix Table D3. Effect of VIBD on the number of ACT services: Full set of coefficient estimates
Potentially
Sleep
Advanced
overused
Outcome:
studies
Endoscopy
imaging
surgeries†
Any ACT
OEBB mean, pre0.0023
0.0025
0.0202
0.0051
0.0421
treatment
DD
-0.00073***
-0.00027
-0.00127**
-0.00135***
-0.00548***
(0.00019)
(0.00021)
(0.00063)
(0.00034)
(0.00141)
Age
0.00006***
0.00007***
0.00047***
0.00018***
0.00111***
(0.00000)
(0.00000)
(0.00001)
(0.00001)
(0.00003)
Female
-0.00074***
0.00071***
0.00222***
-0.00109***
0.00067
(0.00009)
(0.00009)
(0.00027)
(0.00015)
(0.00056)
Spouse
-0.00004
0.00039***
0.00201***
0.00027
0.00437***
(0.00009)
(0.00010)
(0.00030)
(0.00016)
(0.00062)
Child
-0.00034**
0.00087***
0.00327***
0.00114***
0.00845***
(0.00013)
(0.00018)
(0.00053)
(0.00025)
(0.00100)
2009
0.00002
-0.00037
-0.00134
0.00005
-0.00249
(0.00021)
(0.00024)
(0.00069)
(0.00036)
(0.00141)
2010
0.00015
-0.00028
-0.00137
0.00082**
-0.00096
(0.00023)
(0.00025)
(0.00074)
(0.00039)
(0.00153)
2011
0.00018
-0.00062
-0.00207**
0.00106**
-0.00493**
(0.00029)
(0.00033)
(0.00098)
(0.00051)
(0.00209)
2012
0.00034
-0.00043
-0.00132
0.00142***
-0.00301
(0.00029)
(0.00033)
(0.00098)
(0.00052)
(0.00211)
2013
-0.00006
-0.00039
-0.00126
0.00093
-0.00429
(0.00031)
(0.00036)
(0.00105)
(0.00055)
(0.00221)
February
-0.00013
-0.00022
-0.00188***
0.00021
-0.00186
(0.00019)
(0.00021)
(0.00063)
(0.00033)
(0.00127)
March
-0.00001
0.00003
-0.00019
0.00033
0.00107
(0.00019)
(0.00022)
(0.00064)
(0.00033)
(0.00128)
April
0.00037
-0.00001
-0.00068
0.00012
-0.00054
(0.00020)
(0.00022)
(0.00065)
(0.00033)
(0.00123)
May
-0.00014
0.00003
-0.00044
0.00053
0.00016
(0.00018)
(0.00022)
(0.00065)
(0.00033)
(0.00125)
June
-0.00005
-0.00011
0.00055
0.00091***
0.00233
(0.00019)
(0.00022)
(0.00065)
(0.00034)
(0.00127)
July
0.00026
0.00026
0.00011
0.00083**
0.00193
(0.00019)
(0.00023)
(0.00065)
(0.00033)
(0.00126)
August
0.00081***
0.00001
0.00092
0.00107***
0.00349***
(0.00020)
(0.00022)
(0.00066)
(0.00034)
(0.00129)
September
0.00128***
0.00005
0.00126
0.00097***
0.00477***
(0.00022)
(0.00022)
(0.00066)
(0.00034)
(0.00133)
October
-0.00026
-0.00059***
-0.00403***
-0.00103***
-0.00783***
(0.00019)
(0.00022)
(0.00064)
(0.00032)
(0.00125)
November
0.00000
-0.00022
-0.00202***
0.00006
-0.00268**
(0.00020)
(0.00023)
(0.00066)
(0.00034)
(0.00128)
December
0.00011
-0.00060***
-0.00174***
0.00199***
0.00215
(0.00020)
(0.00022)
(0.00067)
(0.00037)
(0.00139)
PGE
0.00061**
0.00045
0.00397***
-0.00112
0.00465
(0.00029)
(0.00039)
(0.00126)
(0.00073)
(0.00349)
Washington
0.00081***
0.00117***
0.00058
-0.00305***
-0.00426
County
(0.00031)
(0.00041)
(0.00123)
(0.00069)
(0.00326)
Clackamas
0.00076***
-0.00009
-0.00562***
-0.00309***
-0.01976***
County
(0.00025)
(0.00033)
(0.00104)
(0.00061)
(0.00285)
Constant
-0.00083**
-0.00096**
0.00396***
-0.00069
0.00945***
(0.00041)
(0.00048)
(0.00145)
(0.00080)
(0.00344)

41

Observations
2391780
2391780
2391780
2391780
2391780
Notes: All models estimated with OLS. Robust standard errors reported in parentheses. The study period is October
1st, 2008 to September 30th, 2013. The unit of observation is a beneficiary/month/year.
†Potentially overused surgeries=Spine surgeries for pain; knee and shoulder arthoscopies; and hip and knee
replacements.
***;**=statistically different from zero at the 1%; 5% level.

42

Appendix Table E. Effect of VIBD on ACT service OOP payments conditional on service use, any utilization
of ACT services, and the number of ACT services: Unbalanced panel of beneficiaries
Potentially
Sleep
Advanced
overused
Outcome:
studies
Endoscopy
imaging
surgeries†
Any ACT
Panel A:OOP
payments
OEBB proportion,
284.7639
160.4122
195.2439
339.4799
210.9595
pre-treatment
DD
120.53745***
257.88801***
143.11983***
563.67289***
211.09267***
(15.44707)
(13.58119)
(4.26278)
(21.62901)
(5.43956)
Observations
5666
5897
55911
11451
76448
Panel B: Any
utilization
OEBB proportion,
0.0014
0.0014
0.0120
0.0025
0.0167
pre-treatment
DD
-0.00027***
-0.00011
-0.00055**
-0.00040***
-0.00126***
(0.00008)
(0.00008)
(0.00025)
(0.00012)
(0.00029)
Observations
4672864
4672864
4672864
4672864
4672864
𝜀††
-0.4556
-0.0489
-0.0625
-0.0964
-0.0754
Notes: All models estimated with OLS (continuous outcome) or an LPM (binary outcome), and control for
beneficiary characteristics reported in Table 2, and employer, month, and year fixed effects. Robust standard errors
reported in parentheses. The study period is October 1st, 2008 to September 30th, 2013. The unit of observation is a
beneficiary/month/year. See Table 1 for cost-sharing increases. OOP=copayment+coinsurance.
†Potentially overused surgeries=Spine surgeries for pain; knee and shoulder arthoscopies; and hip and knee
replacements.
††𝜀= (percent change quantity)/(percent change price)=(𝛽𝑄 /mean in service use in pre-treatment period at
OEBB)/(𝛽𝑂𝑂𝑃 /mean OOP payment in pre-treatment period at OEBB). 𝛽𝑂𝑂𝑃 reported in Panel A.
***;**=statistically different from zero at the 1%; 5% level.

43

Appendix Table F. Effect of VIBD on ACT service OOP payments conditional on service use including plan
fixed effects as covariates
Potentially
Sleep
Advanced
overused
Outcome:
studies
Endoscopy
imaging
surgeries†
Any ACT
Panel A:OOP
payments
OEBB proportion,
284.7639
160.4122
195.2439
339.4799
210.9595
pre-treatment
DD
127.70412***
244.05400***
134.19976***
519.93184***
203.45926***
(20.33611)
(18.39418)
(5.89089)
(29.16953)
(7.51284)
Observations
3172
3127
29126
6337
40440
Panel B: Any
utilization
OEBB proportion,
0.0014
0.0014
0.0120
0.0025
0.0167
pre-treatment
DD
-0.00027**
-0.00006
-0.00014
-0.00044***
-0.00096**
(0.00012)
(0.00011)
(0.00035)
(0.00017)
(0.00041)
Observations
2391780
2391780
2391780
2391780
2391780
𝜀††
-0.4300
-0.0282
-0.0170
-0.1149
-0.0596
Notes: All models estimated with OLS (continuous outcome) or an LPM (binary outcome), and control for
beneficiary characteristics reported in Table 2, and employer, month, and year fixed effects. Robust standard errors
reported in parentheses. The study period is October 1st, 2008 to September 30th, 2013. The unit of observation is a
beneficiary/month/year. See Table 1 for cost-sharing increases. OOP=copayment+coinsurance.
†Potentially overused surgeries=Spine surgeries for pain; knee and shoulder arthoscopies; and hip and knee
replacements.
††𝜀= (percent change quantity)/(percent change price)=(𝛽𝑄 /mean in service use in pre-treatment period at
OEBB)/(𝛽𝑂𝑂𝑃 /mean OOP payment in pre-treatment period at OEBB). 𝛽𝑂𝑂𝑃 reported in Panel A.
***;**=statistically different from zero at the 1%; 5% level

44

Appendix Table G. Effect of VIBD on ACT service OOP payments conditional on service use including only
ACT services that are always listed as an ACT service
Potentially
Sleep
Advanced
overused
Outcome:
studies
Endoscopy
imaging
surgeries†
Any ACT
Panel A:OOP
payments
OEBB proportion,
383.5885
289.1243
303.8359
911.5765
378.8394
pre-treatment
DD
111.66988***
265.59549***
142.56743***
511.32130***
199.92128***
(24.65274)
(20.06006)
(8.03078)
(40.33713)
(10.48086)
Observations
2634
2612
21958
3812
30316
Panel B: Any
utilization
OEBB proportion,
0.0013
0.0013
0.0115
0.0019
0.0156
pre-treatment
DD
-0.00033***
-0.00017
-0.00088***
-0.00023
-0.00163***
(0.00012)
(0.00011)
(0.00033)
(0.00014)
(0.00039)
Observations
2391780
2391780
2391780
2391780
2391780
𝜀††
-0.8720
-0.1424
-0.1631
-0.2158
-0.1980
Notes: All models estimated with OLS (continuous outcome) or an LPM (binary outcome), and control for
beneficiary characteristics reported in Table 2, and employer, month, and year fixed effects. Robust standard errors
reported in parentheses. The study period is October 1st, 2008 to September 30th, 2013. The unit of observation is a
beneficiary/month/year. See Table 1 for cost-sharing increases. OOP=copayment+coinsurance.
†Potentially overused surgeries=Spine surgeries for pain; knee and shoulder arthoscopies; and hip and knee
replacements.
††𝜀= (percent change quantity)/(percent change price)=(𝛽𝑄 /mean in service use in pre-treatment period at
OEBB)/(𝛽𝑂𝑂𝑃 /mean OOP payment in pre-treatment period at OEBB). 𝛽𝑂𝑂𝑃 reported in Panel A.
***;**=statistically different from zero at the 1%; 5% level.

45

Appendix Table H. Effect of VIBD on use of any ACT service: Separate analysis by Moda Health plans with
different levels of changes in general cost-sharing
High general
Low general
cost-sharing changes
cost-sharing changes
Outcome:
(ODS Plans 3-5)
(ODS Plans 6-8)
Panel A:OOP payments
OEBB proportion, pre-treatment
174.6535
262.0892
DD
234.88531***
173.28725***
(9.00525)
(9.08917)
Observations
16316
18871
Panel B: Any utilization
OEBB proportion, pre-treatment
0.0185
0.0147
DD
-0.00236***
-0.00147***
(0.00062)
(0.00051)
Observations
854640
1161957
-0.0946
-0.1510
𝜀†
Notes: All models estimated with OLS (continuous outcome) or an LPM (binary outcome), and control for
beneficiary characteristics reported in Table 2, and employer, month, and year fixed effects. Robust standard errors
reported in parentheses. The study period is October 1st, 2008 to September 30th, 2013. The unit of observation is a
beneficiary/month/year. See Table 1 for cost-sharing increases. OOP=copayment+coinsurance.
†𝜀= (percent change quantity)/(percent change price)=(𝛽𝑄 /mean in service use in pre-treatment period at
OEBB)/(𝛽𝑂𝑂𝑃 /mean OOP payment in pre-treatment period at OEBB). 𝛽𝑂𝑂𝑃 reported in Panel A.
***;**=statistically different from zero at the 1%; 5% level.

46

0

100

OOP
200
300

400

500

Figure 1. Unadjusted trends in any ACT OOP payments conditional on service use

0

5
10
15
Quarters, October 2008 to September 2013
Treatment

20

Comparison

Notes: Data aggregated to the treatment/quarter level. The study period is October 1st, 2008 to September 31st 2013.
Vertical line indicates V-BID effective date at OEBB (October 1st, 2010).

.015

Any use
.02

.025

Figure 2. Unadjusted trends in any ACT utilization

0

5
10
15
Quarters, October 2008 to September 2013
Treatment

20

Comparison

Notes: Data aggregated to the treatment/quarter level. The study period is October 1st, 2008 to September 31st 2013.
Vertical line indicates V-BID effective date at OEBB (October 1st, 2010).

47

.03

.04

Episodes
.05
.06

.07

.08

Figure 3. Unadjusted trends in the number of ACT services

0

5
10
15
Quarters, October 2008 to September 2013
Treatment

20

Comparison

Notes: Data aggregated to the treatment/quarter level. The study period is October 1st, 2008 to September 31st 2013.
Vertical line indicates V-BID effective date at OEBB (October 1st, 2010).

48

References
Ai, C. and E. C. Norton (2003). "Interaction terms in logit and probit models." Economics letters
80(1): 123-129.
Baicker, K. and D. Goldman (2011). "Patient cost-sharing and healthcare spending growth." The
Journal of Economic Perspectives: 47-68.
Baicker, K. and H. Levy (2015). "Cost sharing as a tool to drive higher-value care." JAMA
Internal Medicine 175(3): 399-400.
Beeuwkes, B. M., A. M. Haviland, R. McDevitt and N. Sood (2011). "Healthcare spending and
preventive care in high-deductible and consumer-directed health plans." The American journal of
managed care 17(3): 222-230.
Brot-Goldberg, Z. C., A. Chandra, B. R. Handel and J. T. Kolstad (2015). What Does a
Deductible Do? The Impact of Cost-Sharing on Health Care Prices, Quantities, and Spending
Dynamics, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Cameron, A. C. and D. L. Miller (2015). "A Practitioner's Guide to Cluster-Robust Inference."
Journal of Human Resources 50(2): 317-372.
Campbell, J. D., F. Allen-Ramey, S. G. Sajjan, E. M. Maiese and S. D. Sullivan (2011).
"Increasing pharmaceutical copayments: impact on asthma medication utilization and outcomes."
Am J Manag Care 17(10): 703-710.
Choudhry, N. K., J. Avorn, R. J. Glynn, E. M. Antman, S. Schneeweiss, M. Toscano, L.
Reisman, J. Fernandes, C. Spettell and J. L. Lee (2011). "Full coverage for preventive
medications after myocardial infarction." New England Journal of Medicine 365(22): 20882097.
Choudhry, N. K., M. A. Fischer, J. L. Avorn, J. L. Lee, S. Schneeweiss, D. H. Solomon, C.
Berman, S. Jan, J. Lii, J. J. Mahoney and W. H. Shrank (2012). "The impact of reducing
cardiovascular medication copayments on health spending and resource utilization." J Am Coll
Cardiol 60(18): 1817-1824.
Farley, J. F., D. Wansink, J. H. Lindquist, J. C. Parker and M. L. Maciejewski (2012).
"Medication adherence changes following value-based insurance design." The American journal
of managed care 18(5): 265-274.
Fendrick, A. M., D. G. Smith, M. E. Chernew and S. N. Shah (2001). "A benefit-based copay for
prescription drugs: patient contribution based on total benefits, not drug acquisition cost." Am J
Manag Care 7(9): 861-867.
Garner, S., M. Docherty, J. Somner, T. Sharma, M. Choudhury, M. Clarke and P. Littlejohns
(2013). "Reducing ineffective practice: challenges in identifying low-value health care using
Cochrane systematic reviews." Journal of Health Services Research & Policy 18(1): 6-12.
Gawande, A. A., C. H. Colla, S. D. Halpern and B. E. Landon (2014). "Avoiding Low-Value
Care." New England Journal of Medicine 370(14): e21.
Gibson, T. B., R. J. Maclean, M. E. Chernew, A. M. Fendrick and C. Baigel (2015). "Valuebased insurance design: benefits beyond cost and utilization." Am J Manag Care 21(1): 32-35.
Haviland, A. M., M. D. Eisenberg, A. Mehrotra, P. J. Huckfeldt and N. Sood (2016). "Do
“Consumer-Directed” health plans bend the cost curve over time?" Journal of Health Economics
46: 33-51.
Heisler, M., H. Choi, A. B. Rosen, S. Vijan, M. Kabeto, K. M. Langa and J. D. Piette (2010).
"Hospitalizations and Deaths Among Adults With Cardiovascular Disease Who Underuse
Medications Because of Cost A Longitudinal Analysis." Medical Care 48(2): 87-94.

49

Henrikson, N. B., M. L. Anderson, R. A. Hubbard, P. Fishman and D. C. Grossman (2014).
"Employee knowledge of value-based insurance design benefits." Am J Prev Med 47(2): 115122.
Hirth, R. A., E. Q. Cliff, T. B. Gibson, M. R. McKellar and A. M. Fendrick (2016).
"Connecticut’s Value-Based Insurance Plan Increased The Use Of Targeted Services And
Medication Adherence." Health Affairs 35(4): 637-646.
Hsu, J., M. Price, R. Brand, G. T. Ray, B. Fireman, J. P. Newhouse and J. V. Selby (2006a).
"Cost-Sharing for Emergency Care and Unfavorable Clinical Events: Findings from the Safety
and Financial Ramifications of ED Copayments Study." Health Services Research 41(5): 18011820.
Hsu, J., M. Price, J. Huang, R. Brand, V. Fung, R. Hui, B. Fireman, J. P. Newhouse and J. V.
Selby (2006b). "Unintended consequences of caps on Medicare drug benefits." N Engl J Med
354(22): 2349-2359.
Huckfeldt, P. J., A. Haviland, A. Mehrotra, Z. Wagner and N. Sood (2015). Patient Responses to
Incentives in Consumer-directed Health Plans: Evidence from Pharmaceuticals, National Bureau
of Economic Research.
Kapowich, J. M. (2010). "Oregon’s test of value-based insurance design in coverage for state
workers." Health Affairs 29(11): 2028-2032.
Lee, J. L., M. L. Maciejewski, S. S. Raju, W. H. Shrank and N. K. Choudhry (2013). "Valuebased insurance design: quality improvement but no cost savings." Health Affairs 32(7): 12511257.
Look, K. A. (2015). "Value-based insurance design and medication adherence: opportunities and
challenges." Am J Manag Care 21(1): e78-90.
Maciejewski, M. L., J. F. Farley, J. Parker and D. Wansink (2010). "Copayment reductions
generate greater medication adherence in targeted patients." Health Affairs 29(11): 2002-2008.
Maciejewski, M. L., D. Wansink, J. H. Lindquist, J. C. Parker and J. F. Farley (2014). "ValueBased Insurance Design Program In North Carolina Increased Medication Adherence But Was
Not Cost Neutral." Health Affairs 33(2): 300-308.
Nair, K. V., K. Miller, J. Park, R. R. Allen, J. J. Saseen and V. Biddle (2010). "Prescription copay reduction program for diabetic employees." Popul Health Manag 13(5): 235-245.
National Center for Health Statistics (2016). Health, United States, 2015 with a special feature
on racial and ethnic health disparities. Hyattsville, MD.
Norton, E. C., H. Wang and C. Ai (2004). "Computing interaction effects and standard errors in
logit and probit models." Stata Journal 4: 154-167.
Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development (2014). OECD Health Statistics 2014
How does the United States compare? OECD Health Statistics. O. f. E. C.-o. a. Development,
Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development.
Rosenbaum, L. (2013). "The Whole Ball Game — Overcoming the Blind Spots in Health Care
Reform." New England Journal of Medicine 368(10): 959-962.
Sepúlveda, M.-J., M. C. Roebuck, P. Fronstin, P. Vidales-Calderon, A. Parikh and K. Rhee
(2016). "Elimination of the Out-of-Pocket Charge for Children's Primary Care Visits: An
Application of Value-Based Insurance Design." The Journal of Pediatrics 175: 195-200.
Siddiqui, M., E. T. Roberts and C. E. Pollack (2015). "The effect of emergency department
copayments for Medicaid beneficiaries following the Deficit Reduction Act of 2005." JAMA
Intern Med 175(3): 393-398.

50

Smith, M., R. Saunders, L. Stuckhardt and J. M. McGinnis (2013). Best Care at Lower Cost: The
Path to Continuously Learning Health Care in America, National Academies Press.
Volpp, K. G., G. Loewenstein and D. A. Asch (2012). "Choosing wisely: low-value services,
utilization, and patient cost sharing." JAMA 308(16): 1635-1636.
Wolfers, J. (2006). "Did unilateral divorce laws raise divorce rates? A reconciliation and new
results." American Economic Review 96(5): 1802-1820.

51

