                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




     DOES HEALTH IT ADOPTION LEAD TO BETTER INFORMATION OR WORSE
                              INCENTIVES?

                                   Gautam Gowrisankaran
                                      Keith A. Joiner
                                        Jianjing Lin

                                     Working Paper 22873
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w22873


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                  December 2016




We have received helpful comments from Sebastian Fleitas, Ben Handel, Jeff McCullough,
Jessamyn Schaller, Bob Town, and seminar participants at several institutions. This paper was
previously distributed and presented under the title “Does Hospital Electronic Medical Record
Adoption Lead to Upcoding or More Accurate Coding?” The views expressed herein are those of
the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2016 by Gautam Gowrisankaran, Keith A. Joiner, and Jianjing Lin. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Does Health IT Adoption Lead to Better Information or Worse Incentives?
Gautam Gowrisankaran, Keith A. Joiner, and Jianjing Lin
NBER Working Paper No. 22873
December 2016
JEL No. H51,I11,I13,O33

                                            ABSTRACT

We evaluate whether hospital adoption of electronic medical records (EMRs) leads to increases in
billing where financial gains are large or where hassle costs of complete coding are low. The
2007 Medicare payment reform varied both financial incentives and hassle costs of coding. We
find no significant impact of financial incentives on billing levels, inconsistent with bill inflation.
However, the reform led to increases in reported severity for medical relative to surgical patients
at EMR hospitals, consistent with EMRs decreasing coding costs for medical patients. Greater
post-reform completeness of coding with EMRs may increase Medicare costs by $689.6 million
annually.

Gautam Gowrisankaran                               Jianjing Lin
Department of Economics                            Tulane University
University of Arizona                              302 Richardson Hall
P.O. Box 210108                                    6823 St. Charles Avenue
Tucson, AZ 85721-0108                              New Orleans, LA 70118
and HEC Montreal                                   jlin7@tulane.edu
and also NBER
gowrisankaran@eller.arizona.edu

Keith A. Joiner
Center for Management Innovations in Healthcare
PO Box 210108
Tucson, AZ 85721
kjoiner@email.arizona.edu
1         Introduction
Over the past decade, many hospitals in the U.S. have adopted electronic medical records
(EMRs), spurred in part by the HITECH Act of 2009, which provided $27 billion to promote
health information technology. On one hand, researchers found that EMRs led to higher
patient quality (Miller and Tucker, 2011; Parente and McCullough, 2009), higher productivity
(Lee et al., 2013), and in some cases, lower costs (Dranove et al., 2014). On the other hand,
there is concern that EMRs may lead hospitals to inflate their bills, in order to seek a higher
rate of reimbursement than justified—a practice that is called upcoding —by lowering the
cost to physicians of adding inadequately-documented diagnoses to patient records.1 To the
extent that EMRs cause upcoding, this is a hidden cost of EMRs that limits both their
benefits and the value of government policies that encourage EMR adoption.
        This paper has three goals. First, to evaluate whether EMR adoption leads to increases
in billing for hospitalized Medicare patients. Second, to evaluate if any increases in billing
stem from upcoding (caused by worse incentives), more complete coding (caused by better
information), or other explanations.2 Third, to provide general evidence on the extent to
which reimbursement systems and health IT change incentives in the health care sector.
While we examine only hospitalized Medicare patients, our results may be more broadly
applicable, as other payors use similar payment mechanisms.
        We consider four different potential explanations for how EMR adoption might increase
billing. First, EMRs might facilitate upcoding by hospitals, where hospitals inflate bills in re-
sponse to financial incentives. Second, EMRs might lead hospitals to code more completely—
a practice that is sometimes called “charge capture”— by lowering the hassle costs of complete
coding. Third, EMR hospitals might provide more services.3 Finally, hospitals with EMRs
might select different patients. For instance, patients may perceive a hospital with EMRs as
    1
     The     popular    press     has    also    highlighted    that  EMRs      may      lead   to    outpa-
tient    upcoding.           See,     for    instance,     http://www.nytimes.com/2012/09/22/business/
medicare-billing-rises-at-hospitals-with-electronic-records.html?_r=0
   2
     Coding is the process of transforming patient diagnoses and procedures into billing codes.
   3
     For instance, Clemens and Gottlieb (2014) show that physicians respond to increased financial incentives
by providing more care.




                                                     2
being higher quality and hence the hospital may attract a more severely ill patient mix upon
adopting EMRs.
      Both the upcoding and complete coding explanations imply that EMRs would increase
hospital billing. Yet, the two explanations have different implications in other dimensions. If
hospitals upcode based on financial incentives, we would expect to see hospitals report more
severe illnesses when the relative reimbursement for reporting a high severity illness increases.
Furthermore, if EMR adoption helps with upcoding, then this effect should generally be larger
for EMR hospitals. Thus, we can detect upcoding based on financial incentives by evaluating
whether hospitals change reported severity in response to changes in incentives, and further
detect upcoding by EMR hospitals by examining whether the reaction to incentive changes
is larger for EMR hospitals than for other hospitals. In contrast, if EMRs lower the hassle
costs of complete coding then, following a change in hassle costs, billing for EMR hospitals
should increase the most where the hassle costs drop the most. Thus, variation in financial
incentives and in hassle costs can help separate upcoding from complete coding.
      To further understand our identification, it will be useful to first explain the mechanics of
Medicare inpatient hospital reimbursement. Medicare reimburses hospitals a single amount
for each admission. This amount is based on the diagnostic related group (DRG) and specif-
ically, is a linear function of the DRG weight. CMS divides DRGs into the categories of
“medical” and “surgical.” A surgical DRG is for a procedure while a medical DRG is for the
management of a disease or alternately put, a medical condition. DRGs are grouped into
base DRGs based on the patient’s primary diagnosis (for medical DRGs) or primary pro-
cedure (for surgical DRGs).4 CMS issues lists of secondary conditions that, when present,
would allow a patient to qualify for a “with complications/comorbid conditions (CC)” or
“with major complications/comorbid conditions (MCC)” DRG, which have higher weights
and hence higher reimbursements. Qualifying for a CC or MCC is costly, requiring both
specifying the secondary condition and documenting the supporting medical evidence in the
patient chart. The different DRGs within a base DRG are called severity subclasses.5 We
  4
     For example, “mouth procedures” is an example of a base DRG. Each base DRG contains between 1 and
3 DRGs, which differ in the patient’s secondary diagnoses.
   5
     For example, the mouth procedures base DRG contains two severity subclasses, “mouth procedures


                                                  3
refer to the highest weight DRG in a base DRG as the top code.
   In 2007, Medicare reformed the DRG classification system. The major intent of the
reform was to better align reimbursements with the costs of treatment, accomplished through
changes in reimbursements across DRGs and by revising the list of CCs and MCCs.6 The
reform altered the extra reimbursements for CCs and MCCs differently across base DRGs.
It also significantly reduced the fraction of patients with secondary conditions that would
qualify for CCs or MCCs by eliminating many common diagnoses from the list.
   Around the same time, many hospitals implemented EMRs, due in part to federal sub-
sidies. EMRs help accurately translate conditions into bills. But, EMRs can only code
conditions to the extent that physicians document them. “Medical” physicians (i.e., those
that treat medical DRGs) are largely trained to document conditions in detail, which by
definition include CCs and MCCs. Surgeons are trained to document procedures in detail.
If surgeons are not fully documenting secondary conditions (none of which are procedures),
EMRs cannot help document them more completely. Hence, CCs and MCCs may not be
fully captured for surgical patients, even with EMRs.
   The reform created variation in both the financial incentives and the hassle costs of
complete coding. First, by changing the incremental DRG weights for CCs and MCCs
differently across base DRGs, the reform created variation in the extra reimbursements for
top coding. Under an upcoding story, following the reform, EMR hospitals should increase
their top coding disproportionately for base DRGs with higher incremental DRG weights for
CCs and MCCs. Second, the reform created variation in the hassle costs of complete coding.
To see this, note first that the costs of complete coding are lowered by the complement of
EMRs and medical admissions, since medical physicians document conditions in more detail
and EMRs better translate these conditions to billing codes. The reform increased this
complementarity by increasing the hassle costs of qualifying for top codes. Specifically, while
the number of diagnoses on the CC/MCC list actually increased with the reform—going from
3,326 to 4,922 unique conditions—the percent of patients who qualified for CCs or MCCs
without CC/MCC” and “mouth procedures with CC/MCC.”
   6
     Prior to the reform, MCCs were not a separate category from CCs.



                                                   4
dropped from 78% to 40% (Office of the Federal Register and National Archives and Records
Service, 2007, p. 47,153, 47,162). This implies that the reform replaced broader conditions
with more narrowly-defined ones. While these conditions are likely harder to code, EMRs,
particularly for medical physicians, might mitigate this additional cost. Thus, under a hassle
cost story, the interaction of the reform, EMR hospitals, and medical DRGs should predict
more top coding.

      We investigate the impact of the reform on top coding using a panel of data from 2006
to 2010. We use the universe (100% sample) of Medicare inpatient hospital claims data.7
We link our data with hospital characteristics data from the American Hospital Association
(AHA) annual survey and with EMR adoption data from the Healthcare Information and
Management Systems Society (HIMSS) Analytics Database, among other sources.
      Each observation is a unique combination of base DRG, hospital, and year. From our
universe of claims, we keep all patients with base DRGs that have two or more severity
subclasses and have an identical description before and after the reform. This comprises
19.4% of the patients in the overall Medicare sample. Our main dependent variable is the
fraction of top codes among patients in a base DRG at a hospital and year. A simple
difference-in-difference shows that EMR hospitals have 1.6 percentage points more top codes
following the 2007 payment reform than other hospitals.
      To separate the explanations for greater top coding, our main analysis then separates
the sample into medical and surgical DRGs and regresses the fraction of top codes on fixed
effects at the hospital/base DRG and year levels, EMR adoption interacted with the payment
reform, and early EMR adoption (2006 or prior) interacted with the payment reform. We
cluster standard errors at the hospital and base DRG levels with two-way clustering.
      We find an increase in top codes for medical DRG following the reform for hospitals that
adopted EMRs, an effect that is bigger for early EMR adopters. In contrast, we find no
significant change in top codes for surgical DRGs. We also find no evidence that top coding
  7
    The data do not include Medicare Advantage claims. Medicare Advantage is the privately-provided
option to Medicare. During our sample period, 16-24% of Medicare enrollees were in Medicare Advantage
plans.



                                                 5
increased for base DRGs where the financial incentives to top code increased, either overall
or for EMR hospitals relative to others. The fact that there is an increase in top codes
for medical DRGs at EMRs following the payment reform, but no significant change for
surgical admissions, is consistent with EMRs lowering the hassle costs of complete coding for
medical admissions. The fact that the changes in coding do not follow financial incentives is
inconsistent with upcoding by hospitals based on financial incentives. The magnitude of our
results suggests that the 2007 reform led to 0.47 percent, or $689.6 million, more in Medicare
hospital claims costs in 2016 from greater charge capture by EMR hospitals.
   We also consider the third and fourth explanations noted above for increases in billing
following EMR adoption. We examine whether EMRs might cause hospitals to provide more
services to patients, by estimating whether the length-of-stay of patients or the number of
procedures changes in the post-reform period, for EMR hospitals. We find little that is
significant here. We also examine whether EMRs might cause hospitals to select different
patients post-reform. Though there is no significant evidence on patient distance traveled or
number of diagnoses per patient, we do find that EMR hospitals select patients with more
severe base DRGs (based on the lowest weight for the base DRG) in the post-reform period.

   Our paper builds on a literature that examines upcoding based on whether the proportion
of top-code DRGs changes in response to financial incentives (Dafny, 2005; Silverman and
Skinner, 2004). Dafny (2005) examines upcoding by considering a Medicare reimbursement
change that occurred in 1988. Prior to the change, patients age 70 or older were automati-
cally top coded, while younger patients, 65-69, had to have a CC to qualify for a top code.
Following the change, the older patients were also only top coded based on CCs. Using a
difference-in-difference design, Dafny finds that coding responded to hospital incentives, with
a relative increase in top codes for the age 70 or older patients when the spread was higher
between the DRG weight with and without CCs. Hence, she finds that top coding responds
to hospital incentives. In contrast, our results show no such response, perhaps because coding
systems are quite different today than during the time of these studies, for instance effectively
including much more severe penalties for fraud.


                                               6
    Our paper also builds on a recent literature on coding and EMRs (Qi et al., 2015; Li, 2014;
Ganju et al., 2015; Adler-Milstein and Jha, 2014). Papers in this literature have also used
a difference-in-difference design, evaluating the change in reported codes for hospitals after
they adopt EMR. Two of the papers (Li, 2014; Qi et al., 2015) use the percent of top-coded
DRGs, similarly to us. We argue above that a higher percent top-coded may be indicative
that either upcoding or more complete coding is occurring, and thus propose explanations to
separate upcoding from complete coding. The other two (Ganju et al., 2015; Adler-Milstein
and Jha, 2014) use the patient-weighted mean DRG weight at the hospital, also called the
“case-mix index.” A change in case-mix index following EMR adoption does not necessarily
separately identify the four different explanations that we noted above. Moreover, three of
the four studies use data from before and after the 2007 payment reform. Since the payment
reform drastically changed the nature of top codes and was contemporaneous to a huge
increase in EMR adoption, their results may, in part, be driven by changes induced by the
payment reform rather than by EMR adoption.
    Few papers explicitly consider the hassle cost of complete coding. Most closely related is
Sacarny (2014), who find that hospitals sometimes use an unspecified code for heart failure
even when any specified code would yield a higher reimbursement, implying that there is a
hassle cost of complete coding.
    The remainder of the paper is structured as follows. Section 2 provides a background on
the market. Section 3 discusses our data. Section 4 discusses our analytic framework and
testable hypotheses. Section 5 provides our results. Section 6 concludes.



2     Background

2.1    Medicare Payments and the 2007 Payment Reform

In 1983, the Health Care Financing Administration (now CMS, the Centers for Medicare
and Medicaid Services), developed a flat-rate payment system based on DRGs, known as the
“Prospective Payment System” (PPS). Under PPS, a hospital assigns a single DRG for each


                                               7
patient stay using the primary diagnosis, additional diagnoses, primary procedure, additional
procedures, and discharge status. Each DRG has a weight, which is set by CMS to reflect the
average resources used to treat Medicare patients in that DRG. Medicare then reimburses
the hospital a flat rate for the admission, calculated as the hospital’s base rate multiplied by
the DRG weight. A hospital’s base rate varies based on the costs in the area. For instance, in
2008, a hospital may receive anywhere from $2,807 to $8,218 for treating a patient with DRG
weight 1, depending on its area cost factor.8 By reimbursing hospitals a flat rate instead of
a cost-based amount, PPS aimed to reward efficiency and lower expenditure growth.
      DRGs can be either medical or surgical. A patient who underwent a surgical procedure
can qualify for either a medical DRG, based on her primary diagnosis on admission, or a
surgical DRG, based on her primary procedure. Patients who did not have surgery can
only qualify for medical DRGs. Surgical DRGs almost always have a higher weight (and
hence payment) than the DRG for the diagnosis for which the surgery is indicated and hence
hospitals will generally choose the surgical DRG when a surgery is performed. Essentially
then, medical DRGs are for patients who did not undergo surgery.
      The coding of an inpatient admission into a DRG uses the following logic. Diagnoses are
identified by ICD-9 diagnosis codes. Surgical procedures are identified by ICD-9 procedure
codes.9 Hospitals report to Medicare up to 10 diagnosis and 6 procedure codes per pa-
tient. Each hospital stay is characterized by one primary diagnosis and at most one primary
procedure.
      Using the ICD-9 codes, an admission is first coded into the base DRG using the primary
diagnosis code (for medical base DRGs) or the primary procedure code (for surgical base
DRGs). An example of a medical base DRG is “Heart Failure and Shock” while “Spinal
Fusion Except Cervical” is an example of a surgical base DRG. Subsequently, the admis-
sion is coded to an exact DRG, based exclusively on the presence or absence of complicat-
ing/comorbid conditions (CCs) and major CCs (MCCs). Each base DRG has one to three
associated DRGs (also called severity subclasses), which differ only in the presence of CCs
  8
      Authors’ calculations based on FY2008 data.
  9
      Starting in October, 2015, both diagnoses and procedures are identified with ICD-10 codes.



                                                      8
and MCCs. CCs and MCCs all indicate the presence of secondary conditions.
      With a few exceptions, the lists of CCs and MCCs are always based on diagnoses and
never on procedures—even if the DRG is surgical—and are the same across base DRGs.
However, there is variation across base DRGs in the severity subclasses. Specifically, there
are four types of base DRGs. The first type of base DRG type has three severity subclasses:
without CCs, with CCs, and with MCCs; the second type has two severity subclasses: without
CC/MCCs and with either CCs or MCCs; the third type also has two severity subclasses but
separates admissions with MCCs from all others; and the fourth type has a single severity
subclass. There is also substantial variation across base DRGs in the additional weights (and
hence payments) from higher severity subclasses.
      As an example of the role of CCs and MCCs, consider patient A admitted for poorly
controlled diabetes, and patient B admitted for coronary bypass surgery. If either patient
suffers from kidney stones, then the hospital can claim a CC. If either patient suffers end-stage
renal disease, then the hospital can claim an MCC. For coronary bypass surgery, the DRG
weights are (approximately) 6.45 and 4.92, for w/ MCC and w/o MCC respectively, while for
diabetes, they are 1.09, 0.8, and 0.67 for w/ MCC, w/CC and w/o CC/MCC respectively.10
Thus, the presence of end-stage renal disease does not add to the reimbursement for patient
B relative to kidney stones but it does for patient A.
      Figure A1 in the Appendix lists the most common CCs and MCCs. The CCs and MCCs
are categorized by organ system and/or by general physiologic functions and are all condi-
tions. They represent a small subset of the post-reform total of 4,922 CCs and MCCs. An
example of a dysfunction of an organ system is heart failure, which, as noted in Figure A1, is
part of the cardiovascular system. An example of a physiologic MCC is diabetic ketoacidosis,
which refers to poorly controlled diabetes resulting in acidic blood that contains ketones.
Either one was evaluated as making hospital treatment more complex.
      The exact DRG system described above, with up to three severity subclasses, was imple-
mented by CMS starting in Q4:2007, and is known as Medicare Severity DRGs (MS-DRGs).
Prior to the reform, base DRGs had a maximum of two DRGS, w/ CCs and w/o CCs. The
 10
      These weights are for FY2008.


                                               9
reform replaced the 538 pre-reform DRGs with 745 MS-DRGs. CMS started planning for the
reform based on the recommendations made by the Medicare Payment Advisory Commission
(MedPAC) in its “Report to the Congress, Physician-Owned Specialty Hospitals” in March
2005 and announced the final rule in August, 2007. CMS implemented this 2007 reform in
order to better align payments with the resources used by a hospital. A realignment was
deemed necessary because many conditions that previously needed costly and lengthy hos-
pitalizations could now be managed in an outpatient setting using drug or other therapies.
The reform also added MCCs, to address the fact that tertiary care hospitals were not being
compensated adequately for treating very ill patients.
       Prior to the reform, the presence of a chronic disease was sufficient to justify a CC.
Following the reform, a new acute manifestation of a chronic disease or a new acute disease—
both of which reflect a more severe illness—generally became necessary to justify a CC or
MCC.11 Overall, the intent of the 2007 reform was to lower the fraction of admissions that
would qualify for a CC or MCC code. Using the universe of 2006 patients, 77.7% of admissions
had at least one CC present under the pre-reform criteria, while only 40.3% had a CC or
MCC under the post-reform criteria.12 As noted in Section 1, the number of conditions that
qualified for a CC or MCC actually increased, confirming that, post reform, CCs or MCCs
were for much narrowly-defined conditions.
       Table 1 quantifies the effects of the reform on EMR and non-EMR hospitals by comparing
the percent top codes between these two types of hospitals before and after the reform,
using our main estimation sample. 72.3% of patients were coded into top tiers among EMR
hospitals before the reform while the number dropped to 29.4% after the reform. The decrease
is larger for hospitals without EMRs in 2006. A simple difference-in-difference calculation
suggests that EMR hospitals see 1.6 percentage points more top codes after the reform than
non-EMR hospitals. Since EMRs appear to help achieve top codes following the reform, this
suggests the presence of either upcoding or more complete coding.
  11
    There are exceptions to this rule including, most prominently, for heart failure. See Office of the Federal
Register and National Archives and Records Service (2007) p. 47,153 and Sacarny (2014).
 12
    See Office of the Federal Register and National Archives and Records Service (2007), p. 47,153-4.




                                                      10
                    Table 1: Mean percent top codes by 2006 EMR status
                                             With EMR in 2006 Without EMR in 2006
 Pre-reform (2006) top codes                       72.3%               72.5%
 Post-reform (2008-10) top codes                   29.4%                28%
 Difference                                       −42.9%               −44.5%
 Difference-in-difference
 between hospitals                                            1.6%
 with and without EMR
 Note: calculations based on in-sample hospitals as described in Section 3, for the years 2006 and 2008-10, and for all matched
 base DRGs with 2 severity subclasses before the 2007 payment reform and 2 or 3 severity subclasses after the reform.



2.2      Medical and Surgical Admissions

There are well-understand differences in culture between the physicians of record for med-
ical and surgical DRGs (King et al., 1975). “Medical” physicians are likely to be internal
medicine specialists or hospitalists. Admission to medical services is typically associated with
a substantial attention to documenting the reason for admission, i.e. the primary diagnosis.
In some cases, the primary diagnosis may be unclear, given uncertainty from the history,
physical examination, and test results. In this case, the admitting note will include a list of
potential primary diagnoses. During the course of the admission, as additional information is
accumulated, the primary diagnosis will usually become clear. Patient progress notes, which
are updated throughout the admission, list the various underlying and complicating condi-
tions that will impact the care of the patient. Patient care includes pharmaceutical therapy
and other non-surgical management. For medical admissions, more so than for surgical ad-
missions, the physician must make a continuous series of decisions regarding patient care
and management, which evolve during different points in the hospital stay, and are heavily
influenced by the comorbid conditions of the patient. Thus, medical physicians will likely
spend a lot of effort to learn and document complications and comorbid conditions.
   Admission to surgical services is based on the need for, or the recovery from, a surgi-
cal procedure. Substantial and appropriate attention is placed on accurate and thorough
documentation of the surgical procedure. Less attention is paid to documenting underlying
complications or comorbid conditions, particularly in those situations where the surgical pro-
cedure provides a definitive solution to the primary surgical indication. One reflection of this

                                                              11
mindset is the saying “a chance to cut is a chance to cure.” While overly dismissive of the
appropriate pre-operative and post-operative care needed for optimal outcomes, it nonethe-
less is reflective of the surgical mindset. Since the surgeon is relatively likely to focus on the
details of the procedure performed, she may not code comoborbidities as completely.
       To address the fact that surgical training has not typically focused on the complete cod-
ing of comorbidities, a number of documentation and coding interventions seek to improve
coding for resident physicians. The results of such interventions, which are most commonly
conducted on resident physicians specializing in surgical services, are mixed.13 Some stud-
ies show improvements in documentation and coding accuracy following the intervention,
and some show no effect. Overall, the interventions demonstrate that complete coding of
comorbidities is not one of the primary focuses of surgeons.
       Table A1 in the Appendix provides the ten most common medical and surgical base DRGs
in 2010, along with the highest weight for that base DRG. With the exception of rehabilita-
tion, the most common medical DRGs represent acute medical problems that require urgent
admission, such as heart failure, pneumonia, and septicemia (bloodstream infection). Because
of the acute nature, often with concurrent underlying disease, management requires atten-
tion to the full range of functional abnormalities. Most commonly, surgical DRGs represent
elective or semi-elective procedures, such as hip replacements, cardiac pacemaker implants,
and spinal fusions. The admissions are very targeted, and organized around the procedure,
with the expectation of rapid recovery. Less attention is generally needed or paid to the other
functional disabilities or abnormalities.


2.3       EMRs, Coding, and Hassle Costs

The coding of a DRG for an inpatient admission derives from the patient chart. The patient
chart starts with the admission note, which describes the status of the patient and the diag-
noses that are known upon admission. The chart also includes patient progress notes, which
are made on a daily basis. These list the patient’s course, test results, changes in medication,
  13
    See Marco and Buchman (2003); Tinsley (2004); As-Sanie et al. (2005); Novitsky et al. (2005); Fakhry
et al. (2007).


                                                  12
and other relevant information. Finally, the chart includes the discharge summary, which
provides a brief synopsis of the patient’s stay and disposition.
   In the absence of EMRs, the patient chart will be on paper. In this case, the attending
physician or resident preparing progress notes must refer back to previous notes to ensure
that diagnoses are carried through the record so that they ultimately end up in the discharge
summary. Progress notes for medical services are typically much more detailed than progress
notes for surgical services. The most comprehensive progress notes will address, on a daily
basis, the status of each of the diagnoses listed in the admission note. Less comprehensive
notes will summarize progress on the most active subset of the admitting diagnoses. The
least comprehensive notes will provide only cursory information on the status of the primary
diagnosis. Figure A2 in the Appendix provides an example of a progress note for a medical
patient while Figure A3 in the Appendix provides an example of a progress note for a surgical
patient. These examples show how medical and surgical progress notes may differ in their
level of detail.
   Figure A4 in the Appendix provides an example of a blank discharge summary. Usually
dictated after discharge by the attending physician or by a resident who was involved in the
care of the patient, the discharge summary is mostly based on the patient progress notes.
The discharge summary lists the primary and secondary diagnoses, summarizes the status
of the patent on admission, the hospital course and the disposition, including medications,
pertinent laboratory data, and plans for follow-up care. The discharge summary provides
information to providers seeing the patient in outpatient settings as well as for any subsequent
hospital admissions. In the absence of EMRs, the ideal is for the discharge summary to be
sent as a hard copy or fax to other providers, including the patient’s primary care provider.
In reality, transmittal of this information without EMRs is hit-or-miss, and often delayed.
   For surgical admissions, an operative note is also prepared. This note documents in
significant detail the procedure(s) that were performed. Figure A5 in the Appendix provides
an example of an operative note. While a discharge summary is also prepared for a surgical
admission, the focus, particularly for elective or semi-elective procedures, is mostly on the
operative note. The operative note lists precise details of the surgery performed.

                                              13
   EMRs have changed hospital treatment and billing in several ways. According to the
Healthcare Information and Management Systems Society (HIMSS), the following compo-
nents are key to perform the meaningful use of EMR: Clinical Data Repository (CDR),
Clinical Decision Support Capabilities (CDS), and Computerized Physician/Provider Order
Entry (CPOE) (McCullough et al., 2010). CDR is a centralized database that collects, stores,
accesses, and reports health information, including demographics, lab results, radiology im-
ages, admissions, transfers, and diagnoses. Its goal is to provide a full picture of the care that
is received by a patient. Typically, physicians do not interact with CDR, but instead interact
with CDS and CPOE. CDS assists clinicians in decision-making tasks, namely determin-
ing the diagnosis or setting treatment plans. It combines computable biomedical knowledge
and individual data to recommend specific interventions and assessments and provide other
forms of guidance to clinicians. CPOE is a more advanced type of electronic prescribing.
It is generally connected with CDS to offer more sophisticated drug safety features such as
checking for drug allergies, cross-drug interactions, or dosage adjustments. Both CDS and
CPOE require physician involvement to provide real-time support on a range of diagnosis-
and treatment-related information.
   An EMR system will typically record the hospital course, providing templates to aid the
physician in documentation. At the time of admission, assuming the patient being admitted
has previously been seen in the system, a list of pre-existing diagnoses populates a window in
the EMR. The admitting physician, or resident entering information on her behalf, can choose
any or all of those diagnoses, along with any new diagnoses prompting the admission. The
latter are chosen from a pop-up list organized by organ system or functional abnormality,
which appears after text is entered by the physician. In some cases, the pop-up list will
contain the precisely correct diagnosis, reflecting one of many ICD codes. Because of the
precise lexicon reflected in these codes, the appropriate choice may not appear in the pop-up
window, and different text terms must be chosen, to generate a new pop-up window. The
EMR can also be used to “clone” information, including diagnoses and patient status, from
one note to another for a given patient, so that the physician does not need to reenter the
information. With EMRs, the patient chart still exists. However, the EMR records diagnoses

                                               14
in particular fields on the (now electronic) patient chart.
   Figure A6 in the Appendix shows a picture from one of the leading EMR vendors. It shows
that the general illness of angina may correspond to multiple ICD diagnosis codes depending
on the specific disease. In the absence of EMRs, it is likely that the physician would not
always write down the words that correspond to the precise ICD code, simply noting instead
that a patient suffers from angina. Figure A7 in the Appendix shows another picture from
the EMR vendor. In this case, the well-understood medical term of aortic stenosis does not
show up as a potential diagnosis.

   Regardless of the presence of EMRs, the coding of a discharge from the patient chart
to a DRG is done by a hospital’s coding staff or outsourced to a separate health analyt-
ics firm. The staff will rely principally on the discharge summary and operative note. In
general, coding staff will not communicate with physicians except for clarification requests.
CMS requires documentation in the chart (whether paper or electronic) to substantiate each
billed CC or MCC. The criteria specified by CMS typically include a combination of results
from the patient history, physical examination, laboratory tests, medical imaging, specialty
consultations, hospital course, and more. A central role of the coding staff is to verify the
substantiation of every ICD code used in billing, and to not bill based on unsubstantiated
codes. Even in the absence of EMRs, since roughly the 1990s, the coders then feed the sub-
stantiated codes and other information into grouper software, which outputs the appropriate
DRG for Medicare billing purposes.
   Overall, it is costly to obtain and record accurate information on secondary diagnoses
with or without EMRs. Sometimes, the admitting physician can learn about comorbidities
from previous medical encounters, but this information is not always available. Consultations
from specialty services, often related to comorbidities, are included in the body of the patient
chart, but may or may not be entered into the patient’s list of diagnoses. Even if the physician
knows of a secondary diagnosis, the substantiation of this diagnosis in a way that conforms
to CMS guidelines can require substantial effort.
   Importantly, EMRs may disproportionately lower the hassle costs of complete coding for


                                              15
medical admissions relative to surgical ones because of the different role of conditions across
these two types of admissions. As discussed in Section 2.2, documentation of secondary
conditions is generally considered more integral to care for medical patients than for surgi-
cal patients. Because EMRs force medical physicians to choose diagnoses from drop-down
menus that correspond directly to billing codes, this will then help ensure that the chosen
diagnoses are most likely interpretable by the coding staff. In addition, with EMRs, accu-
rate specification of secondary conditions may be necessary to justify appropriate treatments
for medical admissions. Typically, medical admissions are associated with more prescribed
medications, imaging procedures, and laboratory testing. The reason for this is that the
treatment of medical admissions most commonly consists of medications (whereas the treat-
ment of a surgical admission may be the surgery itself). Determining which medications to
use for medical admissions commonly involves imaging procedures and laboratory testing.
With EMRs, placing an order for a specialized procedure, test, or medication may require
the entry of a diagnosis justifying the order. If the ordering physician had not previously
entered the justifying diagnosis, she will be prompted to do so when placing the order. Fi-
nally, because EMRs will be available to a patient post-discharge, a physician may have a
greater incentive to accurately code diagnoses with EMRs, in order to help patients in their
post-discharge treatments.
   Another difference in hassle costs is the physician’s time cost of entering secondary diag-
noses, which may differ across medical and surgical physicians. Specifically, as noted above,
a typical limitation of EMR systems is a unique lexicon that does not always correspond to
common medical terminologies. Thus, EMRs may also disproportionately lower the hassle
costs of complete coding for medical physicians because these physicians would generally
have more knowledge of the appropriate terminologies, since all CCs and MCCs are condi-
tions rather than procedures. While a medical physician might be likely here to search for
related terms that would generate a match in the EMR system, a surgeon might be relatively
more likely to simply skip reporting this diagnosis. Indeed, we are aware of many physicians,
often surgeons, who have admitted to being frustrated enough in trying to find the terminol-
ogy used by their EMR system to describe a condition of their patient, that they have simply

                                              16
given up trying to code this condition. Finally, since surgeons, unlike medical physicians, can
generate more revenue by performing additional surgeries, it is likely that their incentives
from hospital management are to spend more time doing surgeries rather than coding.



3     Data
Our primary dataset is the Medicare Provider Analysis and Review (MedPAR) File. For our
purposes, this dataset contains information on all inpatient hospital stays for Medicare bene-
ficiaries. Each observation in these data represents one patient stay and contains information
on the hospital, the beneficiary’s home zip code, age, gender, dates of service, reimbursement
amount, dates of admission and discharge, Diagnostic Related Group (DRG), and principal
and secondary diagnosis and procedure codes. We drop admissions to Critical Access Hospi-
tals (CAHs) as these hospitals receive cost-based reimbursement from Medicare, instead of
prospective DRG-based payments. Our main dependent variable is the percent of patients
with documented CCs or MCCs within a particular base DRG, hospital, and year. We focus
on the years 2006, and 2008-10, omitting 2007 since the reform occurred in Q4:2007. We also
construct other dependent variables using these data, including the distance traveled, length
of stay, case mix index, and numbers of diagnoses and procedures. The distance between
each patient and the hospital is calculated based on the latitude and longitude of the zip
code where the patient and hospital are located.
    We merge two datasets on hospitals to our main analysis data. First, we merge technology
adoption data from the Healthcare Information and Management Systems Society (HIMSS)
Analytics Database, which is the most comprehensive national source of hospital IT adoption
data. We use the Medicare provider number as a crosswalk to the claims data. The database
covers the demographic and automation information of the majority of U.S. hospitals, and
includes purchasing plan details for over 90 software applications and technologies. It is the
most complete, detailed, and longest-running survey recording the choice and evolution of a
hospital’s IT capacities.
    There are several components of EMRs and no uniform definition across studies of which


                                              17
components constitute a functional EMR system. For instance, Jha et al. (2009) divide EMR
systems into 32 functionalities, of which they view eight (including some parts of CPOE) as
necessary for “basic” EMR operation. Miller and Tucker (2009) measure EMR adoption by
whether a hospital has installed an “enterprise EMR” system, which they state is a “basic”
system that underlies CDR, CDS, and CPOE. Recent studies defined EMR capabilities by
either enterprise EMR or CPOE (Lee et al., 2013; McCullough et al., 2016; Ganju et al.,
2015). We define a hospital to have adopted EMRs if either CPOE or CDS is live and
operational within the organization. CPOE is generally paired up with CDS14 to improve
medication safety. Both of these key components require physician training and involvement.
We chose these components because physicians typically interact with them, and hence they
are most relevant for our models, which regard physician behavior.
       Second, we merge the American Hospital Association (AHA) Annual Survey data, using
the Medicare provider number as the primary crosswalk. In cases where the Medicare provider
number was missing, we merge the databases using the hospital’s name and exact address.
We match approximately 3,300 non-CAH hospitals across the three datasets. The AHA data
include a rich set of hospital-specific features such as number of beds, system affiliation, and
profit status.
       Finally, we merge a number of other smaller datasets. We use data that map diagnosis
codes into CCs and MCCs. These data are derived from the CC and MCC lists published
by CMS.15 We use these data to identify patients with CCs and MCCs for base DRGs which
do not record these severity subclasses. These data allow us to understand whether the
coding of diagnoses (and not just of DRGs) changes after the payment reform. We also use
information on DRGs, including the type and weights, from the Centers for Medicare and
Medicaid Services (CMS).
       In order to assess hospital financial status, we merge our data with the Medicare Cost
Reports, using the Medicare Provider Number field. Following the literature (Dafny, 2005;
  14
    See https://psnet.ahrq.gov/primers/primer/6/computerized-provider-order-entry
  15
    The codes are provided at https://www.cms.gov/Medicare/Medicare-Fee-for-Service-Payment/
AcuteInpatientPPS/Acute-Inpatient-Files-for-Download-Items/CMS1247844.html. We thank Adam
Sacarny for providing us with these data.



                                               18
Li, 2014), we use the debt-to-asset ratio as a measure of financial health. We construct this
measure by dividing current liabilities by total assets, both of which are listed in the cost
reports. We define a hospital as financially distressed if its debt-to-asset ratio is above 75th
percentile and as financially healthy if this ratio is below 25 percentile.

                     Table 2: Summary statistics on patient sample
  Variable                    2006       2008         2009        2010
                           Panel 1: Overall Medicare patients
  Number of discharges        15,935,018 17,237,514 17,387,460 17,793,107
  Mean age                    74.1       74.1         73.9        73.8
  Case mix index              1.34       1.41         1.46        1.46
  (mean DRG weight)

    Panel 2: Patients in base DRGs with 2 DRGs pre-reform and 2 DRGs post-reform
                            (w/o CC/MCC and w/ CC/MCC)
  Number of discharges        219,735    216,054     214,306    204,114
  % top-code patients         49.2       32.8        33.4       33.7

    Panel 3: Patients in base DRGs with 2 DRGs pre-reform and 2 DRGs post-reform
                                (w/o MCC and w/ MCC)
  Number of discharges        984,484    970,779     968,304    970,215
  % top-code patients         61         21.8        24.2       24.6

    Panel 4: Patients in base   DRGs with   2 DRGs pre-reform and 3 DRGs post-reform
  Number of discharges          1,983,485    2,162,007 2,218,236 2,259,083
  % top-code patients           80.6         30          32         31.7
  % middle-code patients        -            38.1        37.8       38.9

  Panel 5: Patients in base DRGs with 2 DRGs pre-reform and 2 or 3 DRGs post-reform
  Number of discharges        3,187,704 3,348,840 3,400,846 3,433,412
  % top-code patients         72.4       27.8        29.9        29.8

         Panel 6: Patients in base DRGs with 1 DRG pre-reform and post-reform
  Number of discharges         1,038,983 1,060,897 1,038,651 1,054,228
  % patients with secondary 67.2         21.1       19.4        20.1
  diagnoses as MCC


   Table 2 provides summary statistics on our patient sample. The first panel in Table 2
shows there were more than 15 million Medicare discharges in each of the four years in our


                                               19
data. The mean age of a Medicare patient discharged from a hospital was about 74 years
during our sample and the mean DRG weight (or case-mix index) was rising over time, from
1.34 in 2006 to 1.46 in 2010. This rise suggests an increase in top coding, a phenomenon we
will explore in more detail below. Panels 2-6 of Table 2 split these data into the different
subsamples used in our estimation. Panel 2 lists statistics on base DRGs which represent the
same primary diagnosis or procedure before and after the reform, which have two severity
subclasses before, and which combine CCs with MCCs in one severity subclass after the
reform. For this group, the number of discharges was about 219,735 in 2006 and 204,114
in 2010. The percent top codes decreased from 49.2% in 2006 to 33.7% in 2010, due to the
different and more stringent set of diagnoses that generate top codes. Panels 3 and 4 consider
base DRGs for which only MCCs generate a top code following the reform. Not surprisingly,
they show a greater reduction in the percent top codes than Panel 2. Panel 4 considers base
DRGs with three severity subclasses. Similar to Panel 2, the sum of the percent of top codes
(MCCs in this case) and middle codes (CCs) is smaller post-reform than the percent top
codes pre-reform. Panel 5 combines Panels 2-4 and Panel 6 reports data on matched base
DRGs with one severity subclass pre- and post-reform.
   From the universe of Medicare discharges, our main sample keeps the observations in
Panel 5, which represent base DRGs for which there was an exact match before and after
the reform and for which there were at least two severity subclasses prior to and after the
reform. Our main sample does not use base DRGs with one severity subclass prior to or after
the reform because one cannot identify the reform effect separately from hospital/base DRG
fixed effects for these base DRGs. Among the DRGs we consider, the number of discharges
ranges from 1,345 to 416,821 in each base DRG. For our main sample, the percent of top
code patients declined from 72.4% in 2006 to 27.8% in 2008, following the reform.
   Table 3 reports EMR adoption rates of hospitals in our sample during 2006-2010. Only
54.1% of hospitals had adopted EMRs in 2006, a figure that had increased to 92.4% by the end
of our sample. The significant expansion of EMRs mainly arose from the strong push from
the federal government, through the HITECH Act of 2009, which was part of the American
Reinvestment and Recovery Act (ARRA), also known as the stimulus bill. Well in advance

                                             20
of the passage of the HITECH Act in 2009, President George W. Bush outlined a plan in
2004 under which most Americans would have electronic health records within 10 years.
The president’s FY2005 budget proposal included funding of $100 million for demonstrative
projects to test the effectiveness of health IT. The Office of the National Coordinator for
Health Information Technology (ONC) and the American Health Information Community
(AHIC) were established after this proposal and organized a number of meetings with the
public and private sectors in 2006-2007 to discuss the prototypes of the Nationwide Health
Information Network (NHIN) and strategies to support health IT. Thus, the increase in EMR
adoption starting in 2007 may be caused in part by the expectation of future subsidies.

                   Table 3: Summary statistics on EMR adoption rates
                     Variable                      Obs   Mean
                     % hospitals with EMR, 2006 3,465 54.1
                     % hospitals with EMR, 2008 3,318 75.7
                     % hospitals with EMR, 2009 3,337 90.4
                     % hospitals with EMR, 2010 3,306 92.4


   Table 4 provides summary statistics for the main hospital characteristics according to
EMR adoption status. Hospitals that adopted EMRs in 2006 or earlier are on average larger
and more likely to be teaching and not-for-profit hospitals. For instance, the bed size of
early adopters is 36% larger than that of hospitals adopting EMRs between 2007 and 2010,
and more than one and a half times that of hospitals adopting EMRs later than 2010. The
numbers of outpatient visits and inpatient admissions are more than three times those of
hospitals without adoption through 2010. Early EMR adopters also had a lower debt-to-
asset ratio than without adoption through 2010. The fact that early EMR adopters have
very different observables from later EMR adopters suggests that separating the treatment
effects of EMRs by early and later adopters may be helpful.
   Table 5 shows the mean DRG weights for all DRGs and the changes in spread for the base
DRGs considered in this paper. Spread is defined to be the difference between the weight of
the top and bottom codes. For base DRGs with three severity subclasses, Spread measures
the difference in weight between the highest and lowest tier. While it became harder to


                                            21
            Table 4: Summary statistics on hospital characteristics by EMR use
                                                 Hospital characteristics
                                 EMR adopters EMR adopters EMR non-adopters
                                 ≤2006             2007-10           through 2010
    Bed size                     252               186               100
    Total outpatient visits      202,066           139,984           57,971
    Total admissions             11,794            8,321             3,707
    FTE physicians and dentists 29                 16                6
    Total number of births       1,328             957               356
    % teaching hospital          12.1              5.29              1.24
    % Medicare discharge         44.6              46.5              49.8
    % Medicaid discharge         18.9              18.4              17
    % for-profit                 19.5              20.4              44.8
    % not-for-profit             67.5              61.6              31.6
    % public hospitals           13                18                23.6
    Debt-asset ratio             0.659             0.647             0.83
    Number of hospitals          1,771             1,186             242
    Note: For each set of hospitals, table reports the mean value of statistic over years in our data.


obtain a top code after the reform, the mean DRG weight increased from before the reform
to after the reform.

                   Table 5: Summary statistics on the payment reform
         Variable                      Obs Mean              Std. Dev.
         DRG weight, 2006              559 1.47                  1.86
         DRG weight, 2008              743 1.99                  1.93
         DRG weight, 2009              744 2.02                    2
         DRG weight, 2010              744 2.02                  2.01
         ∆Spread, 2 to 2, 2006 to 2008 27     0.03              0.143
         ∆Spread, 2 to 2, 2008 to 2009 27 0.346                 0.279
         ∆Spread, 2 to 2, 2009 to 2010 27 0.017                 0.102
         ∆Spread, 2 to 3, 2006 to 2008 59 0.248                 0.291
         ∆Spread, 2 to 3, 2008 to 2009 59 0.626                 0.302
         ∆Spread, 2 to 3, 2009 to 2010 59 0.021                 0.123
         Note: Spread measures the difference between the weight in the top and bottom codes.



   The mean spread for DRGs with two severity subclasses before and after the reform
increased by 0.03 in 2008 and 0.346 in 2009, indicating that the reform had varied impacts
throughout the time period of our sample. Similarly, the mean spread for DRGs transitioning


                                                     22
from 2 to 3 severity subclasses increased 0.248 in 2008 and 0.626 in 2009. There is also a
large standard deviation in the change in weights between years. These changes are useful in
creating variation to detect the impact of financial incentives on hospitals’ coding behavior.



4       Analytic Framework

4.1       Model

We model the decision of a hospital regarding the top coding of a given patient stay. Let
EM Rjt be an indicator for whether hospital j had adopted EMRs at time t and let Spreaddt
denote the spread between top and bottom codes for base DRG d at time t.16
      We first consider a model of upcoding. Why might hospitals upcode? Physicians may
have financial incentives to list comorbidities that are not adequately documented, since this
would increase hospital bills, which hospitals could potentially pass on to their employed
or contracted physicians, through explicit or implicit arrangements. Hospital coding staff
may have similar incentives and may coordinate with physicians. For instance, Dafny (2005)
interviewed a medical resident who was asked by coding personnel “to reconsider her diagnosis
of ‘urinary tract infection’ and replace it with ‘septicemia’ ... as the hospital is ‘underpaid’
and ‘needs’ the funds to provide care for the uninsured.”
      However, these parties may also have incentives to not list comorbidities in the absence
of appropriate documentation. If identified through an an audit, they and the hospitals may
face high criminal and civil penalties from bill inflation. Overall, since upcoding is about
financial incentives, if hospitals are upcoding, we would expect that they would be more
likely to do so when the incremental reimbursements from upcoding increase.
      EMRs may also potentially increase upcoding. They may make it easier for physicians to
report diagnoses for which no justification is provided. For instance, EMRs allow physicians
to clone diagnoses across records. They also allow physicians to enter a diagnosis by clicking
on a button, rather than writing down the diagnosis, which may lower the perceived cost of
 16
      For ease of exposition, our model only considers base DRGs with two severity subclasses.



                                                     23
diagnosis inflation. Importantly, the upcoding caused by EMRs should be based on financial
incentives rather than being biased towards either medical or surgical DRGs.
   Recall that the 2007 payment reform varied the incremental reimbursement Spreaddt
significantly across base DRGs, thus providing identifying power for the upcoding model. To
formalize, we consider a patient i being treated by hospital j for base DRG d at time t, who
does not merit a top code for base DRG d given her diagnoses. The net utility to the hospital
from upcoding this patient is:


       uupcode
        ijdt   = FinBenefits(Spreaddt , EM Rjt , d, Xjt ) − Costs(EM Rjt , d, Xjt ) + eijdt .   (1)


From (1), the mean benefits from upcoding, FinBenefits, are a function of the spread between
top and bottom codes at time t, EMR adoption, the base DRG d, and hospital characteristics
Xjt . The mean costs from upcoding, Costs, which reflect the potential penalties from audits
among other factors, are a function of EMR adoption, d, and Xjt . The hospital will upcode
this patient if and only if uupcode
                             ijdt   > 0.
   Importantly, we assume that the costs of upcoding are not a function of Spread. If
enforcement increases when Spread increases, then this assumption may not be accurate.
However, while enforcement may indeed be higher for base DRGs with higher Spread, we
would not expect enforcement to change quickly or completely in response to changes in
Spread. So long as the magnitude of the cost increase from a change in Spread is less than
the gain in financial benefits from the change, the overall implications of our model would
not change.
   We make two further assumptions regarding the payoffs, consistent with the roles of
financial incentives and EMRs in upcoding. First, we assume that FinBenefits is increasing
in Spreaddt . This assumption stems from the fact that the spread is proportional to the
additional financial benefits which accrue to the hospital from upcoding. Second, we assume
that the costs of upcoding are lowered by EMRs, conditional on the base DRG.
   Given these assumptions, the utility that a hospital obtains from upcoding a given patient
will be higher if Spread is higher or if the hospital adopts EMRs. This implies that, with


                                                24
upcoding, we should see an increase in the probability of top-coding if Spread increases for
a patient, holding all else equal. The payment reform provides within-hospital/base DRG
variation in Spread that we can use to test for upcoding in this way.
       Under further regularity conditions, there will be a complementarity between upcoding
and EMR adoption. In other words, in response to an increase in Spread, the probability of
upcoding a given patient increases more for a hospital which has adopted EMRs than for a
hospital which has not. To see this, suppose that eijdt is distributed type 1 extreme value
and that the probability of upcoding a patient (based on equation (1)) is always less than
50%, which seems probable given the magnitudes of upcoding found in other studies. Finally,
suppose that FinBenefits(Spreaddt , EM Rjt , d, Xjt ) = α1 Spread + α2 EM Rjt + α3 Xjt , so it is
linear in its components. In this case, the increase in utility from EMR adoption will lead
to an increased baseline upcoding probability, which will imply that the hospital will react
more strongly to an increase in Spread.17 Thus, we further test for whether EMR hospitals
respond more strongly to changes in Spread than other hospitals.
       Finally, note that FinBenefits(Spreaddt , d, Xjt ) may vary with observable hospital charac-
teristics. For instance, hospitals in financial distress or for-profit hospitals may have a more
immediate use for extra resources, which may magnify their implicit financial incentives from
a high Spread. In these cases, we would expect that these hospitals would also respond more
strongly to changes in Spread than other hospitals.

       We now turn to the role of EMRs on the hassle costs of complete coding. As noted in
Section 2.3, there are a variety of reasons that suggests that EMRs will reduce the hassle
costs of complete coding for medical patients more than for surgical patients. Thus, we
assume that the complement of EMR and MED (i.e., medical DRGs) reduces hassle costs.
In addition, comparing the set of diagnoses that were top codes after the reform to those that
were top codes before the reform, the conditions after the reform were much less common
and more specific in their coding, e.g., requiring an acute exacerbation of a chronic disease.
  17
     Specifically, if the probability of upcoding increases from p1 to p2 with EMR adoption for a given level
of Spread, a marginal increase in Spread would change the upcoding probability from α1 p1 (1 − p1 ) to
α1 p2 (1 − p2 ) given EMR adoption. So long as p1 < p2 < 12 , this change will be positive.



                                                     25
Thus, we further assume that the complement of EMR and MED lower the hassle costs for
the diagnoses that generate top codes after the reform relative to the diagnoses that generate
top codes before the reform.
   Although we believe that the hassle costs of coding top codes after the reform are higher
than before the reform, even if the codes were no more stringent, if there were a sunk cost
of coding completely, the same model would apply. In particular suppose that before the
reform, a surgeon had learned how to code completely over time. Following the reform, she
would then have to learn how to code the new codes completely. So the hassle cost would be
higher in this case by virtue of the codes being new rather than them being more complex.
   To formalize our model of complete coding based on hassle costs, consider a patient
i being treated by hospital j for base DRG d at time t who merits a top code code for
base DRG d given her diagnoses. Suppose further that the hospital is not making its coding
decisions based on financial incentives. The net utility to the hospital from completely coding
comorbidities for this patient is:


      ucomplete
       ijdt     = Benefits(EM Rjt , d, Xjt ) − HassleCosts(EM Rjt , d, Xjt , P ostt ) + eijdt ,   (2)


where P ostt is an indicator for being in the post-reform period.
   The model is very similar to the model of upcoding specified in equation (1). We assume
that HassleCosts are a function of EMR adoption, conditional on a base DRG. However, we
assume that the benefits from complete coding, Benefits, are not a function of the financial
incentives and hence do not vary with financial incentives. Also, we assume that the costs
of top-coding are due to the hassle costs of complete coding and are a function of P ostt
interacted with d. Our main testable assumption is that the reform lowered hassle costs for
the complement of MED, EM R, and P ost. Hence, EMR hospitals should have relatively
more top codes after the reform for MED than for SURG (i.e., surgical DRGs) compared to
non-EMR hospitals.
   Note that our model of hassle costs does not allow for firms to strategically invest resources
in more complete coding based on changes in financial incentives over time. If firms do invest


                                                 26
resources in this manner, we would find upcoding rather than complete coding. However,
this explanation would be somewhat different than from our model: our model of upcoding
specifies that the strategic investment is for patients who do not merit top codes while this
model assumes that the strategic investment is for people who do merit top codes. Thus,
to the extent that we find evidence of upcoding, this does not necessarily imply that there
is unjustified bill inflation, but could also be due to firms strategically top-coding based on
financial incentives. In contrast, our model of complete coding specifies top coding based on
hassle costs, which are not systematically related to the financial benefits from top coding.

   EMRs may also have at least two other impacts which we examine. First, they may lead
to different procedures being performed and/or may change the selection of patients. For
instance, the Clinical Decision Support capabilities may lead hospitals to perform procedures
that are useful but which they otherwise would not have thought of performing, or conversely,
to not perform procedures that are of little use. Patients with severe illnesses may also be
more likely to seek care at a hospital with EMRs, perceiving that the quality of care will be
higher due to the ability to more accurately record and interpret diagnoses and suggest “best
practice” treatments. Note also that hospitals which seek to upgrade their quality in other
ways may simultaneously invest in EMRs, thus implying that any finding here regarding the
causal impact of EMRs in affecting patient demand should be interpreted with caution.


4.2    Testable Hypotheses

The model described above leads to several testable hypotheses. We now enumerate these
hypotheses.

  1. Complete coding:

      (a) If EMRs lead to more complete coding, then for medical DRGs, there will be a
           post-reform increase in top codes for EMR hospitals relative to non-EMR hospi-
           tals.



                                              27
       (b) For surgical DRGs, if this interaction effect is positive, it will be smaller than for
           medical DRGs.

       (c) The increase in top codes for the interaction of EMRs and MED should be due,
           at least in part, to a change in diagnoses coded.

  2. Upcoding:

       (a) If upcoding exists, then the probability of a top code should increase when the
           spread in the DRG weight between the bottom and top codes increases.

       (b) If EMRs lead to upcoding, then EMR hospitals should increase their top code
           probability more than other hospitals when the spread increases.

       (c) If upcoding exists, then hospitals in financial distress and for-profit hospitals
           should increase their top code probabilities more than other hospitals when the
           spread increases.

  3. Service mix:

      If EMRs leads to different procedures being performed, hospitals should change their
      patient lengths-of-stay and numbers of procedures following EMR adoption.

  4. Patient selection:

      If EMRs lead to the selection of more severely ill patients, patients will travel further,
      have more secondary diagnoses, and have higher DRG weights (using the lowest DRG
      weight of the base DRG to eliminate coding effects) upon EMR adoption.


4.3    Estimation and Identification

Our regression specifications for Hypotheses 1a and 1b considers the percent of patients within
a base DRG coded to the top severity subclass of a base DRG. Our estimation approach is
built on the following base specification:


      Yjdt = β1 EM Rjt × P ostt + β2 EarlyEM Rjt × P ostt + β3 Xjt + F Et + F Ejd + εjdt

                                               28
where Yjdt denotes the percent of patients coded to the top severity subclass of base DRG
d in hospital j in year t; P ostt is an indicator, equal to 1 when t is after the 2007 reform;
EM Rjt is an indicator for whether hospital j had adopted EMR at period t; EarlyEM Rjt is
an indicator for whether hospital j had adopted EMR at or before 2006; Xjt includes hospital
characteristics, specifically bed size, total outpatient visits, total admissions, total number
of births, the number of full-time physicians and dentists, percentage Medicare, percentage
Medicaid, profit status, and a teaching hospital indicator; F E denotes fixed effects at different
levels; and εjdt is an unobservable.
   The main variables of interest are EM Rjt × P ostt and EarlyEM Rjt × P ostt ; β1 and β2
measure the marginal effects of using EMRs on coding behavior following the 2007 reform.
We allow the effect of the reform to vary for early and later EMR adopters. Early adopters,
which installed the technology at least two years prior to the reform, may have accumulated
a greater knowledge base and hence behave differently in response to the reform than new
users. They may also interact differently with their EMR system due to their differences in
observable characteristics (Table 4).
   We also include both hospital/base DRG fixed effects and year fixed effects, in order to
control for time-invariant unobservable heterogeneity in these dimensions. Specifically, the
inclusion of hospital/base DRG fixed effects allows for the possibility that hospitals have
different case-mix indices and also that hospital case-mix indices vary across base DRGs.
For instance, we allow for the possibility that a hospital treats a relatively high fraction of
bypass surgery patients with CCs or MCCs but a relatively low fraction of mouth procedure
patients with CCs or MCCs. Our inclusion of year fixed effects allows for different baseline
effects of the reform across year.
   Given the inclusion of both these fixed effects, our identification is purely within a base
DRG: we will identify positive effects on EM Rjt × P ostt if the fraction of top codes at
individual hospitals within base DRGs rises post-reform. In some specifications, we interact
EM Rjt with each post-reform year, which allows us to separate the effect of the reform by
year.
   Our sample for Hypotheses 1a and 1b includes patients with base DRGs with exact

                                               29
matches before and after the reform, and that had two severity subclasses before the reform
and two or three severity subclasses after the reform. The reason that we exclude base DRGs
that had only one severity subclass before or after the reform is that we cannot identify the
within-base-DRG change in top-coding that occurred with the reform for these base DRGs.
       Note also that our specifications here and later do not directly include terms for the base
effects of EMR adoption or the reform. This is because these effects are subsumed by the
other fixed effects in the model. The reform effect is subsumed by the year dummies. The
EMR adoption effect is also subsumed by the other fixed effects, because we only have one
year of data pre-reform. Specifically, a potential indicator variable EM Rjt is exactly equal
to the sum of the hospital/base DRG fixed effects for all hospitals which are early adopters,
plus EM Rjt × P ostt minus EarlyEM Rjt × P ostt .
       Finally, note that we cluster the standard errors at both the hospital and base DRG
levels (Cameron et al., 2012; Thompson, 2011). This allows for dependence in the residuals
for different base DRGs across the same hospital and for different hospitals across the same
base DRG.
       Our regression specification for Hypothesis 1c employs a different dependent variable to
Hypothesis 1. Specifically, we can partition patients into one of four sets. Set A contains
patients who would qualify for top codes both before and after the reform, set B contains
patients who would qualify for top codes before only, set C contains patients who would
qualify for top codes after only, and set D contains patients who would never qualify for top
codes. We code patients into these categories based on their reported secondary diagnoses.
Our dependent variables are the percents of patients in each set A, B, and C (with D ex-
cluded).18 This hypothesis allows us to examine whether the payment reform caused EMR
hospitals to disproportionately shift people between these four sets—consistent with changes
in coding due to hassle costs—or whether the different types of hospitals simply had different
proportions in the different sets ex ante.
       Our regression specifications for Hypothesis 2a and 2b employs the same dependent vari-
  18
    For 13 base DRGs, top coding is determined by slightly different criteria, e.g., “complicating diagnoses”
rather than “complicating conditions.” We exclude patients with these base DRGs for this hypothesis.



                                                     30
able as does Hypothesis 1. However, here, we also include a variable called Spreaddt and
interactions of Spreaddt with EM Rjt and EarlyEM Rjt . Spreaddt measures the difference
between the DRG weight for the highest and lowest severity subclass within the base DRG.
Because we employ hospital/base DRG fixed effects, the coefficient on Spreaddt will identify
how the change in spread affects top coding.
   Our regression specification for Hypothesis 2c are similar to our specification for Hypothe-
ses 2a but we interact Spreaddt with measures of financial health—Distressed (bottom 25%)
and F inHealthy (top 25 %)—or with whether the hospital is for-profit or not-for-profit, with
the omitted category being public hospitals.
   Our regression specifications for Hypothesis 3 examine whether hospitals keep patients
longer or perform more procedures following EMR implementation. The unit of observation
is the same as for the previous hypotheses. The specification is very similar except that,
instead of percent top code, we use the average length of stay or number of procedures
within the hospital/base DRG as the dependent variables.
   Finally, our regression specifications for Hypothesis 4 examine whether there is a change
in the composition of patients following EMR adoption. Specifically, we use the average
patient-to-hospital distance and the number of diagnoses as the outcome measures within a
base DRG. We also use the mean DRG weight of the lowest severity subclass within a base
DRG as a measure of the patient case mix in a hospital. For this third outcome measure,
the unit of observation is the hospital/year, since we are looking at substitution across base
DRGs. We do not use the actual reported DRG weight because we would like this effect to
be robust to misreporting of severity subclasses. The main regressors are the same as those
in the previous specifications except that we only include hospital and year fixed effects for
the last outcome measure, given the unit of observation.




                                               31
         Table 6: Base results on complete coding (Hypotheses 1a and 1b)
                         Dependent variable: percent top code within a base DRG
                         2 to 2               2 to 3                 Combined
                   MED        SURG      MED        SURG       MED           SURG
EM R×Post           .329       −.495     .259        .144      .278         −.367
                   (.315)      (.309)   (.196)      (.257)    (.202)        (.268)

EarlyEM R×Post           1.78∗∗∗      −.394∗∗       .803∗∗      −.0707       1.01∗∗∗           −.0874
                         (.453)        (.19)        (.317)      (.313)       (.334)            (.316)

Year 2008               −54.8∗∗∗     −25.7∗∗∗     −52.2∗∗∗     −49.1∗∗∗     −52.8∗∗∗          −36.6∗∗∗
                         (7.65)       (4.08)       (4.17)       (1.4)        (3.63)            (3.45)

Year 2009                −52∗∗∗      −23.8∗∗∗     −49.6∗∗∗     −48.1∗∗∗     −50.2∗∗∗          −35.1∗∗∗
                         (7.66)       (4.12)       (4.3)        (1.34)       (3.72)            (3.6)

Year 2010               −51.7∗∗∗     −23.2∗∗∗      −50∗∗∗      −48.2∗∗∗     −50.4∗∗∗          −34.9∗∗∗
                         (7.69)       (4.15)        (4.29)      (1.36)       (3.73)            (3.72)
Observations            105,456       91,932       241,831     265,286      347,287           357,218
Note: unit of observation is hospital/base DRG/year. Standard errors are clustered at both hospital and
base DRG levels. Other regressors are bed size, total outpatient visits, teaching hospital, total admissions,
full-time physicians and dentists, percentage Medicare, percentage Medicaid, profit status, total number of
births, and hospital/base DRG fixed effects.




                                                    32
5     Results

5.1    Hypothesis 1: Evidence on Complete Coding

Table 6 considers Hypotheses 1a and 1b. Our base specification here examines the impact of
EMR adoption status, the payment reform, and the type of base DRG, medical or surgical,
on the percent top codes. Each column of numbers reports the results from one regression,
with the samples varying across regressions. Considering the columns that pertain to medical
DRGs, there is a significant and positive effect on top-coding for hospitals that adopted EMRs
early on. For instance, for the base DRGs with 2 severity subclasses pre- and post-reform,
there is a 1.78 percentage point increase in patients in medical DRGs classified into top codes
following the reform for hospitals adopting EMRs in 2006 or earlier. However, this impact
is smaller and not statistically significant for late adopters who installed the system later
than 2007. The year dummies indicate a significant a drop in the percentage of top-code
percents following the reform, reflecting the more stringent criteria for qualifying for a top
code post-reform. These results are robust across the sample of base DRGs with 2 subclasses
pre-reform and 3 subclasses post-reform, and the combined sample.
    In contrast, the coefficients on top-coding for surgical DRGs are generally not significant.
In one case, the coefficient for early adopters in the post-reform period is significantly nega-
tive, consistent with the explanation that surgeons may be coding fewer comorbidities with
EMRs than without EMRs post-reform due to the time cost of doing so. The coefficients on
top-coding for surgical DRGs are also much smaller in magnitude than the coefficients on
medical DRGs.
    Table A2 in the Appendix presents robustness checks to Table 6, by including additional
regressors that interact adoption status with indicators for the post-reform years 2009 and
2010. Consistent with the findings in the base specification, there is a higher fraction of
medical patients top-coded post-reform at EMR hospitals. Also, early adopters consistently
saw such an increase throughout the post-reform period while hospitals adopting EMRs in
2008 or later experienced the increase only since 2009. The results suggest that new adopters
faced roughly a year-long lag in successfully integrating EMRs into their coding systems.

                                               33
The results on surgical DRGs continue to be mostly statistically insignificant and smaller in
magnitude.
   The fact that we find effects of greater top-coding by EMR hospitals post-reform suggests
that there is either upcoding or more complete coding. The fact that the effects are only for
medical DRGs suggests that this is due to more complete coding rather than upcoding: if
the results were due to bill inflation, hospitals would likely do this for surgical DRGs as well.
In the case of upcoding, we would not have seen such an asymmetric difference in the effect
between medical and surgical diagnoses.

    Table 7: Evidence of coded diagnoses changing following reform (Hypothesis 1c)
                         Dependent variable: percent of patients with diagnoses qualifying
                                for MCCs in different time frame, within a base DRG
                               Set A                 Set B                  Set C
                         MED        SURG      MED         SURG      MED         SURG
                                                     ∗
 EM R×Post               .279         .139   −.375         .225    −.0111       −.00138
                         (.189)      (.218)    (.21)      (.237)   (.0102)      (.0133)

 EarlyEM R×Post                  .296         −.0379         −.311       −.279        .0104           .0171∗
                                 (.218)       (.215)         (.269)      (.344)      (.0132)         (.00984)

 Year 2008                       6.3∗∗∗       3.79∗∗∗     −8.22∗∗∗     −6.52∗∗∗      .103∗∗∗         .0578∗∗∗
                                 (.538)       (.577)       (.477)       (.49)        (.0205)          (.0202)

 Year 2009                       9.85∗∗∗      5.74∗∗∗        −11∗∗∗    −8.53∗∗∗      .138∗∗∗          .134∗
                                 (.649)       (.944)         (.518)     (.854)       (.0381)         (.0781)

 Year 2010                       11.3∗∗∗     6.44∗∗∗      −11.9∗∗∗     −8.79∗∗∗     .152∗∗∗            .14∗
                                 (.755)       (.993)       (.592)       (.891)      (.0516)          (.0743)
 Observations                    325,328     265,927      325,328      265,927      325,328          265,927
 Note: set A are patients with diagnoses that qualify for top codes before and after the reform, set B qualify
 for top codes only before the reform, and set C only after the reform. Unit of observation is hospital/base
 DRG/year. Standard errors are clustered at both hospital and base DRG levels. Other regressors are bed
 size, total outpatient visits, teaching hospital, total admissions, full-time physicians and dentists, percentage
 Medicare, percentage Medicaid, profit status, total number of births, and hospital/base DRG fixed effects.
 Sample is patients in base DRGs with 2 severity subclasses before the reform and 2 or 3 severity subclasses
 after the reform for base DRGs for which the base CC and MCC lists determine severity subclasses.


   Table 7 considers Hypothesis 1c. Here, we are interested in understanding whether the
positive interaction term on EM R ×P ost×M ED is due to EMR hospitals having a different

                                                        34
selection of patients all along or to changes in coding practices consistent with hassle costs.
We examine as dependent variables the percent of patients with codes that would have
qualified for top codes before and after the reform (set A), before the reform only (set B),
and after the reform only (set C). We find that EMR hospitals code fewer MED patients in
set B after the reform. Though not statistically significant, it appears that they code more
MED patients in set A after the reform. In contrast, the interaction terms for set C for MED
patients are small and not statistically significant. This implies that our findings in Tables 6
and A2 are not due to EMR hospitals simply having more MED patients in set C but are
instead due to changes in coding practices.
       Relatedly, the base year effects are all large and statistically significant. While not the
focus of our paper, these results imply that, for both MED and SURG patients, coding
practices change following the reform irrespective of EMR status.19


5.2       Hypothesis 2: Evidence on Upcoding


                         Table 8: Base results on upcoding (Hypothesis 2a)
                                                     Dependent variable: Percent top code
                                                     within a base DRG, 2 to 2
                                                         MED                 SURG
 Spread                                               9.07 (31.5) −26.2∗∗∗         (9.26)

 Spread × EM R                                                27.5     (22.8)      5.39            (6.88)

 Spread × EarlyEM R                                          −2.02     (1.51)      .597            (.887)

 EM R× Post                                                   −11      (7.71)     −5.34            (6.16)

 EarlyEM R× Post                                              9.39 (5.83)          3.39          (4.81)
 Observations                                                    105,456                    91,932
 Note: unit of observation is hospital/base DRG/year. Standard errors are clustered at both hospital and
 base DRG levels. Other regressors are bed size, total outpatient visits, teaching hospital, total admissions,
 full-time physicians and dentists, percentage Medicare, percentage Medicaid, profit status, total number
 of births, hospital/base DRG fixed effects, and year fixed effects.
  19
     This result is also consistent with Sacarny (2014), who finds changes in coding practices for heart failures
following the reform.


                                                       35
   Table 8 considers Hypothesis 2, by examining the role of financial incentives induced by
changes in the reimbursement spread on top coding across base DRGs. Following Dafny
(2005), we consider whether top coding is occurring with greater frequency when there is a
greater financial incentive to top code. Because the variable Spread captures the variation
in reimbursement over time, we do not separately include a post-reform dummy in these
interactions. In contrast to the upcoding model, the base coefficients on Spread are either not
statistically significant or significantly negative. Neither of the Spread×EM R interactions is
statistically significant. Hence, we do not see any evidence that upcoding based on financial
incentives exists or that EMRs facilitate this practice.
   Table A3 in the Appendix reports the results when Spread is interacted with measures
of financial health. For hospitals undergoing more financial stress, we do not see a greater
proportion of patients coded to higher levels. Instead, financially healthy hospitals are more
likely to respond to financial incentives among medical patients. Table A4 in the Appendix
presents the coefficients when we add the hospital’s profit status as a regressor. Neither
for-profit nor not-for-profit hospitals code more aggressively following the increase in reim-
bursement. However, these two tables suggest that hospitals, in general, see a rise of top-code
patients in medical admissions but a reduction in surgical admissions.
   Overall, our results here show no evidence of upcoding based on financial incentives and
no evidence that EMRs facilitate upcoding. In contrast, consistent with Hypothesis 1, EMRs
seem to lead to greater “charge capture” rather than assist in bill inflation.


5.3    Hypotheses 3 and 4: Services and Patient Selection

Table 9 considers Hypothesis 3. The upper panel displays the estimates for base DRGs
with two subclasses pre- and post-reform while the lower panel displays estimates for those
expanding from two to three subclasses. We find no significant effect of EMR adoption on
length of stay or number of procedures except for a slight increase in the number of procedures
for medical admissions in the 2-to-2 cases, which is significant at the 10% level. While we
cannot identify the baseline effect because we only have one-year data prior to the reform, the



                                              36
                      Table 9: EMRs and service provision (Hypothesis 3)
                                                          2 to 2
                                    Length of Stay                  # Procedures
                                   MED           SURG            MED          SURG
                                                                 ∗
EM R×Post                      −3.23 (2.88) .87 (2.85) 1.03         (.612) −.361 (.925)

EarlyEM R×Post                     3.09 (3.57) .676 (1.92) −1.56 (1.23) 2.49∗∗ (.986)
N                                     105,456     91,932        105,456         91,932
                                                         2 to 3
                                      Length of Stay                 # Procedures
                                     MED          SURG           MED            SURG
EM R×Post                        −2.07 (1.75) 1.45 (3.03)     .5     (.626)  .42    (1.01)

EarlyEM R×Post                     1.91    (2.2)     1.93 (3.1)        −.078 (1.15)         .691    (1.21)
N                                     241,831           265,286           241,831              265,286
Note: unit of observation is hospital/base DRG/year. Standard errors are clustered at both hospital and
base DRG levels. Other regressors are bed size, total outpatient visits, teaching hospital, total admissions,
full-time physicians and dentists, percentage Medicare, percentage Medicaid, profit status, total number
of births, hospital/base DRG fixed effects, and year fixed effects.


              Table 10: EMRs and patient selection (Hypothesis 4)
                                                  2 to 2
                           Distance        # Diagnoses         Mean DRG weight
                       MED       SURG    MED        SURG           Overall
                                              ∗∗∗
EM R×Post                61      −119 −3.11          1.21           2.17∗∗∗
                       (90.3)    (179)   (1.15)     (2.03)          (.472)
EarlyEM R×Post          298       128     2.04       1.13           −.643
                       (201)     (150)   (1.68)     (2.55)          (.695)
Observations          105,456 91,932 105,456 91,932                 12,562
                                                  2 to 3
                           Distance        # Diagnoses         Mean DRG weight
                       MED       SURG    MED        SURG           Overall
EM R×Post              −92.1     −147    −.733       .873            .158
                       (84.9)    (114)   (1.08)      (1.8)           (.14)
EarlyEM R×Post          157∗      91.5    .618       1.31           1.88∗∗∗
                       (82.2)    (135)   (1.52)     (2.13)          (.262)
Observations          241,831 265,286 241,831 265,286               12,671
Unit of observation: hospital/year for last column and hospital/base DRG/year for other columns. Mean
DRG weight is calculated using the lowest DRG weight within a base DRG. Standard errors are clustered at
both hospital and base DRG levels. Other regressors are bed size, total outpatient visits, teaching hospital,
total admissions, full-time physicians and dentists, percentage Medicare, percentage Medicaid, profit status,
total number of births, hospital/base DRG fixed effects, and year fixed effects.


                                                    37
overall lack of significance on the coefficients suggests that this effect may not be significant.
   Table 10 considers Hypothesis 4, examining the effect of EMRs on distance from patients
to hospitals, the number of diagnoses within a base DRG, and changes in base DRGs. We
find no significant evidence of selection of patients traveling further or having more secondary
diagnoses.
   For the last column, the dependent variable is the mean DRG weight by hospital/year,
calculated using the lowest DRG weight for each base DRG. Here, we find a positive and
significant effect from EMR adoption on the mean DRG weight following the reform. Thus,
EMR hospitals select patients with more severe base DRGs following the reform.


5.4    Economic Magnitudes of Complete Coding

Having established that EMR adoption leads to more complete coding, we now seek to
quantify the economic magnitude of this effect. From column 6 of Table 6, early adopters
experienced a 1.01 percentage point increase in top-coded medical patients in the post-reform
period. On average, there are 3.34 million patients per year with the DRGs considered in
our paper, about 1.97 million of whom are medical patients, and about 1.28 million of whom
are medical patients admitted to early-adopting hospitals. The average spread of the DRGs
on which we focus is 1.19 and the average DRG price is $6,349 for an admission with weight
1. Therefore, the in-sample cost due to the relatively more complete coding from the 2007
reform by early EMR adopters is 1.28 million times $6,349 times 1.19 times 1.01%, which is
$97.7 million per year for the U.S.
   Our sample accounts for about one fifth of the Medicare inpatient population. Considering
the fact that almost 89% of patients are in DRGs with multiple subclasses, we expect that
the costs for early adopters would amount to $448 million when extrapolating to all DRGs.
Moreover, given that almost all hospitals have adopted EMRs by 2016, when considering the
full Medicare sample, the costs of the reform for all 2016 EMR hospitals would amount to
$689.6 million per year, which is 0.47 percent of total Medicare hospital claims costs.
   Note also that, from Table A2, new EMR adopters in 2010 experienced a 1.17 percentage



                                               38
point increase in top coding in 2010. The similarity between this coefficient and our base
coefficient of 1.01 from Table 6 implies that the effect of EMR adoption on more complete
coding post-reform (1.17) is similar to the effect of the reform on more complete coding for
EMR hospitals (1.01). This in turn implies that EMR adoption likely did not lead to more
complete coding pre-reform, perhaps because coding of secondary diagnoses was simpler then.
    Finally, Medicare accounts for about 30% of total spending on hospital care. Many
private insurers have DRG-based contracts with hospitals (Gowrisankaran et al., 2014). If
all hospitals were reimbursed on a DRG basis, the impact of a change to MS-DRGs on extra
charge capture from EMR hospitals would translate into approximately $2.3 billion in annual
billed costs. Overall, our takeaway is that the costs of complete coding from EMR adoption
are a small but significant fraction of one of the largest sectors of the economy, and hence,
still substantial in magnitude.



6     Conclusion
The federal government has provided $27 billion to promote the adoption of EMRs, but its
impact on the health care sector remains uncertain. Our paper examines the effect of EMRs
on hospital billing practices. In particular, we try to understand whether the application of
this technology causes upcoding or increased completeness of coding by lowering hassle costs.
Both upcoding and more complete coding lead to higher Medicare reimbursements but have
very different policy implications. The recent literature has not reached a consensus on the
sources of top coding. Our paper is the first to try to separately identify these two effects.
We make use of the 2007 Medicare payment reform, which creates variations in both financial
incentives and the hassle costs of coding.
    We find that, following the payment reform, EMR hospitals see a larger proportion of
patients assigned to higher severity subclasses within a base DRG and that this increase
occurs only for medical DRGs. We argue that this reflects a relative drop in the hassle
costs of complete coding for medical DRGs following the payment reform. Unlike what has
been documented in the media in different contexts, we do not find that hospitals top-code


                                             39
patients more when there is a larger reimbursement increment from top coding. Therefore,
we believe that EMR adoption allows for increased information transmittal in the form of
more complete coding but does not add to any incentives to inflate bills. We do not find
any evidence that hospitals provide different services to patients following the reform. Nor
do we detect patient selection within a base DRG by EMR hospitals after the reform. EMR
hospitals do select patients with more severe base DRGs in the post-reform period.
   Our calculations suggests that the potential cost resulting from extra charge capture at
EMR hospitals post-reform amounts to $689.6 million annually in billed costs to Medicare
and up to $2.3 billion in annual billed costs in the U.S. as a whole. These results are
potentially important for policy makers in understanding the impacts of EMR diffusion and
how to maximize their benefits.
   Finally, our paper provides general evidence on incentives in the health sector. Our lack
of substantiation to the proposition that hospitals are engaged in bill inflation suggests that
there is limited ability to reduce Medicare hospital expenditures by eliminating upcoding.
We also find no evidence that health information technology is contributing to bill inflation.



References
Adler-Milstein, J. and Jha, A. K. (2014). No evidence found that hospitals are using new
  electronic health records to increase medicare reimbursements. Health Affairs, 33(7):1271–
  1277.

As-Sanie, S., Zolnoun, D., Wechter, M. E., Lamvu, G., Tu, F., and Steege, J. (2005). Teach-
  ing residents coding and documentation: effectiveness of a problem-oriented approach.
  American journal of obstetrics and gynecology, 193(5):1790–1793.

Cameron, A. C., Gelbach, J. B., and Miller, D. L. (2012). Robust inference with multiway
  clustering. Journal of Business & Economic Statistics.

Clemens, J. and Gottlieb, J. D. (2014). Do physicians’ financial incentives affect medical
  treatment and patient health? The American economic review, 104(4):1320.

                                              40
Dafny, L. S. (2005). How do hospitals respond to price changes? American Economic Review,
  pages 1525–1547.

Dranove, D., Forman, C., Goldfarb, A., and Greenstein, S. (2014). The trillion dollar co-
  nundrum: Complementarities and health information technology. American Economic
  Journal: Economic Policy, 6(4):239–270.

Fakhry, S. M., Robinson, L., Hendershot, K., and Reines, H. D. (2007). Surgical residents?
  knowledge of documentation and coding for professional services: an opportunity for a
  focused educational offering. The American journal of surgery, 194(2):263–267.

Ganju, K., Atasoy, H., and Pavlou, P. (2015). Does the adoption of electronic medical record
  systems inflate medicare reimbursements? Working paper.

Gowrisankaran, G., Nevo, A., and Town, R. (2014). Mergers when prices are negotiated:
  Evidence from the hospital industry. The American Economic Review, 105(1):172–203.

Jha, A., DesRoches, C., Campbell, E., Donelan, K., Rao, S., Ferris, T., Shields, A., Rosen-
  baum, S., and Blumenthal, D. (2009). Use of electronic health records in us hospitals. New
  England Journal of Medicine, 360(16):1628–1638.

King, S. H., McArthur, C. G., and Norman, J. C. (1975). The surgical personality: a
  comparison of medical and surgical residents with the rorschach. Cardiovascular diseases,
  2(2):117.

Lee, J., McCullough, J. S., and Town, R. J. (2013). The impact of health information
  technology on hospital productivity. The RAND Journal of Economics, 44(3):545–568.

Li, B. (2014). Cracking the codes: do electronic medical records facilitate hospital revenue
  enhancement. Working paper.

Marco, A. P. and Buchman, D. (2003). Influencing physician performance. Quality Manage-
  ment in Healthcare, 12(1):42–45.



                                            41
McCullough, J., Casey, M., and Moscovice, I. (2010). Critical access hospitals and meaningful
  use of health information technology. University of Minnesota, Team FM.

McCullough, J. S., Parente, S. T., and Town, R. (2016). Health information technology and
  patient outcomes: the role of information and labor coordination. The RAND Journal of
  Economics, 47(1):207–236.

Miller, A. and Tucker, C. (2009). Privacy protection and technology diffusion: The case of
  electronic medical records. Management Science, 55(7):1077–1093.

Miller, A. R. and Tucker, C. (2011). Can health care information technology save babies.
  Journal of Political Economy, 119(2):289–324.

Novitsky, Y. W., Sing, R. F., Kercher, K. W., Griffo, M. L., Matthews, B. D., and Heniford,
  B. T. (2005). Prospective, blinded evaluation of accuracy of operative reports dictated by
  surgical residents. The American surgeon, 71(8):627–632.

Office of the Federal Register and National Archives and Records Service (2007). Medicare
  Program; Changes to the Hospital Inpatient Prospective Payment Systems and Fiscal Year
  2008 Rates, volume 72. Federal Register, Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing
  Office.

Parente, S. T. and McCullough, J. S. (2009). Health information technology and patient
  safety: evidence from panel data. Health Affairs, 28(2):357–360.

Qi, K., Krishnan, R., Wimble, M., and Heese, J. (2015). Does it enable revenue management
  in hospitals? Working paper.

Sacarny, A. (2014). Technological diffusion across hospitals: The case of a revenue-generating
  practice.

Silverman, E. and Skinner, J. (2004). Medicare upcoding and hospital ownership. Journal
  of health economics, 23(2):369–389.



                                             42
Thompson, S. B. (2011). Simple formulas for standard errors that cluster by both firm and
  time. Journal of Financial Economics, 99(1):1–10.

Tinsley, J. A. (2004). An educational intervention to improve residents? inpatient charting.
  Academic Psychiatry, 28(2):136–139.




                                            43
Appendix: For On-Line Publication Only

                                                Figure A1: List of CCs and MCCs


                       Major Complications and Comorbid Conditions (MCC) & Complications and Comorbid Conditions (CC)
                                                                     Abbreviated CMS List of MCCs and CCs

                  Major Complications/Comorbid Conditions        Complications/Comorbid Conditions             Complications/Comorbid Conditions

                  Cardiovascular/Cerebrovascular                 Cardiovascular & Vascular                     Gastrointestinal
                  ❑Congestive Heart Failure, Acute               ❑Myocardial Ischemia, Acute, Without MI       ❑Ascites
                            Acute on Chronic                     ❑Angina, Unstable                             ❑Attention to Gastrostomy
                            Systolic or Diastolic                ❑Complete Block                               ❑C. Difficile Enteritis
                  ❑Cor Pulmonale, Acute                                     AV or Mobitz Type II               ❑Cholelithiasis with Cholecystitis
                  ❑CVA, Stroke, Cerebral Infarct or Hemorrhage              Trifascicular or BBB               ❑Colitis, Enteritis or Gastroenteritis
                  ❑Cerebral Edema                                ❑Atrial Flutter                                           of Presumed Infectious Origin
                  ❑Coma                                          ❑CAD of Bypass Graft                          ❑Colitis, Ischemic or Ulcerative
                  ❑Endocarditis or Myocarditis, Acute            ❑Congestive Heart Failure                     ❑Colostomy or Enterostomy, Complications
                  ❑MI, Acute                                                Chronic or Unspecified             ❑Crohn’s Disease
                  ❑Pulmonary Embolism, Acute                                Systolic or Diastolic              ❑Diverticulitis
                                                                 ❑Cardiomyopathy EXCEPT Ischemic               ❑Esophagitis, Acute
                  Respiratory & Infectious Disease               ❑Demand Ischemia                              ❑Gastroenteritis, Toxic or due to Radiation
                  ❑Aspiration Bronchitis, Aspiration Pneumonia   ❑Heart Failure, Left                          ❑GI Bleed, Melena, Hematemesis, Hemoptysis
                  ❑HIV Disease                                   ❑Hypertension, Accelerated or Malignant       ❑Hernia with Obstruction
                  ❑Peritonitis                                   ❑Hypertensive Heart Disease with CHF          ❑Ileus
                  ❑Pneumonia, Including viral                    ❑Hypertensive Encephalopathy                  ❑Intestinal Infections, Viral or Bacterial
                  ❑Pulmonary Edema, Acute, Non-cardiogenic       ❑In-Stent Stenosis, Cardiac                   ❑Intestinal Malabsorption
                  ❑Respiratory Failure, Acute                    ❑Pleural Effusion                             ❑Jaundice
                  ❑Respiratory Insufficiency                     ❑Post-MI Syndrome                             ❑Pancreatitis, Chronic
                            Acute Post-Operative                 ❑Tachycardia, Sustained PSVT                  ❑Ulcer, Acute Gastric, Duodenal or Peptic
                  ❑Sepsis, Severe Sepsis, Septic Shock           ❑Thrombophlebitis & Venous Thrombosis
                                                                            Acute or Chronic                   Nephrology & Genitourinary
                  Other MCCs                                                                                   ❑Acute Renal Failure
                  ❑Acute Renal Failure with                      Behavioral, Nervous & Cerebrovascular         ❑Calculus of Ureter or Kidney
                             Acute Tubular Necrosis (ATN)        ❑Alzheimer’s Dementia with Behavioral         ❑Chronic Kidney Disease, Stage IV or V
                  ❑Aplastic, Anemia due to                       Disturbance                                   ❑Hydronephrosis or Hydroureter
                             Drugs, Chemo, Infection, or         ❑Aphasia, NOT Post-Stroke                     ❑Nephrotic Syndrome
                  Radiation                                      ❑Delirium, Drug Induced                       ❑Polycystic Kidney
                  ❑Diabetic Ketoacidosis or Diabetes with        ❑Dementia with                                ❑Pyelonephritis, UTI
                             Hyperosmolarity or Other Coma                  Delirium, Depression or Delusion
                  ❑Encephalopathy                                           Presenile, Senile or Vascular      Orthopedic & Skin
                             Metabolic or Toxic                  ❑Depression, Major, Acute                     ❑Cellulits, EXCEPT Fingers or Toes
                             Other or Unspecified                ❑Encephalopathy, Alcoholic                    ❑Compartment Syndrome, Non-Traumatic
                  ❑End Stage Renal Disease                       ❑Hallucinations                               ❑Complications of Prosthetic Joint
                  ❑GI Disorder With                                         Auditory OR Drug/Alcohol-Induced   ❑Fractures, Pathologic
                             Hemorrhage, Gastritis, Duodenitis   ❑Hemiplegia, Hemiparesis                      ❑Fractures, Traumatic, Closed/Many Sites
                             Or Diverticular Disease             ❑Normal Pressure Hydrocephalus                ❑Osteomyelitis, Acute, Chronic or Unspecified
                  ❑GI Ulcer With Perforation, Hemorrhage or      ❑Paraplegia                                   ❑Stasis Ulcer, Inflamed or Infected
                             Obstruction                         ❑Post-Traumatic Seizures                      ❑Ulcer of Skin, Lower Extremity
                  ❑Ischemic Colitis, Acute                       ❑Schizophrenia EXCEPT Unspecified
                  ❑Major Injuries                                ❑Suicidal Ideation                            Respiratory
                  ❑Malnutrition, Severe                          ❑TIA                                          ❑Asthma Exacerbation
                  ❑Pancreatitis, Acute                           ❑Vertebrobasilar Insufficiency                ❑Atelectasis
                  ❑Peritonitis                                   ❑Withdrawal, Drug or Alcohol                  ❑COPD with Acute Exacerbation
                  ❑Pressure Ulcer Stage III OR IV                                                              ❑Emphysema
                  ❑Quadriplegia or Functional Quadriplegia       Hematology & Oncology                            with Exacerbation of Chronic Bronchitis
                  ❑SIRS due to Noninfectious Process with        ❑Anemia due to Acute or Post-Op Blood Loss    ❑Hemoptysis
                             Acute Organ Dysfunction             ❑Aplastic Anemia                              ❑Pulmonary Edema, Non-Cardiogenic
                  ❑Volvulus                                      ❑Lymphoma, Leukemia Also In Remission         ❑Respiratory Distress, Acute
                                                                 ❑Malignant Neoplasm, Most Sites               ❑Respiratory Failure, Chronic
                  MCC IF Discharged Alive                                  NOT Breast or Prostate              ❑Respirator Weaning or Dependence
                  ❑Cardiac Arrest                                ❑Pancytopenia
                  ❑Cardiogenic Shock                             ❑Secondary Neuroendocrine Tumor               Other
                  ❑Respiratory Arrest                                                                          ❑Bacteremia
                  ❑Ventricular Fibrillation                      Metabolic                                     ❑Complications of Device, Implant or Graft
                  ❑Other Shock without Trauma                    ❑Acidosis/Alkalosis                           ❑SIRS due to Non-Infectious Process
                                                                 ❑Adult BMI <19 OR ≥40                         ❑Thrush
                                                                 ❑Cachexia                                     ❑Transplant Status, Most Organs
                                                                 ❑Hypernatremia OR Hyponatremia
                                                                 ❑Malnutrition, Unspecified
                                                                 ❑Obesity Hypoventilation Syndrome




                                                                            e-MedTools.com




Sources: http://e-medtools.com/drg_modifier.html




                                                                                    44
                              Table A1: Most common base DRGs
                         Medical                                            Surgical
Rank Title                           Weight   Percent   Title                          Weight   Percent
1    Rehabilitation                  1.2388   6.05%     Major joint replacement        3.3282   3.36%
                                                        or reattachment of
                                                        lower extremity
2     Heart failure                  1.4609   4.36%     Percutaneous cardiovascular    3.0955   1.19%
      and shock                                         procedure w/ drug-eluting
                                                        stent
3     Simple pneumonia               1.4378   3.64%     Hip and femur procedures       2.8752   0.97%
      and pleurisy                                      except major joint
4     Chronic obstructive            1.2076   3.43%     Major small and large          5.1396   0.94%
      pulmonary disease                                 bowel procedures
5     Septicemia or severe           5.8007   3.26%     Other vascular                 2.9443   0.84%
      sepsis w/ mechanical                              procedures
      ventilation 96+ hours
6     Psychoses                      0.8899   2.73%     Permanent cardiac pacemaker 3.5878      0.68%
                                                        implant
7     Esophagitis, gastroenteritis   1.0958   2.54%     Laparoscopic cholecystectomy 2.405      0.54%
      and misc digest disorders                         w/o common duct
                                                        exploration
8     Kidney and urinary             1.2122   2.50%     Spinal fusion except         6.1506     0.50%
      tract infections                                  cervical
9     Cardiac arrhythmia and         1.2188   2.36%     Back and neck procedure      1.7718     0.44%
      conduction disorders                              except spinal fusion
10    Renal failure                  1.6422   2.05%     Major cardiovascular         5.0355     0.44%
                                                        procedures




                                                  45
Figure A2: Sample Patient Progress Note for Medical Admission




                             46
Figure A3: Sample Patient Progress Note for Surgical Admission




                             47
                         Figure A4: Sample Discharge Summary




                           Discharge Summary: General Format


Patient Name:
Medical Record Number:
Admission Date:
Discharge Date:
Attending Physician:
Dictated by:

Primary Care Physician:
Referring Physician:
Consulting Physician(s):
Condition on Discharge:

Final Diagnosis: (list primary diagnosis FIRST)

Procedures: (list dates, complications)

History of Present Illness (can refer to dictated/written HPI)

Laboratory/Data (be BRIEF, just the most PERTINENT results that need to be followed)

Hospital Course (by PROBLEM LIST…. NOT BY DATE --- )



Discharge Medications (MOST IMPORTANT – LIST MEDS THAT ARE DIFFERENT FROM

ADMISSION MEDICATIONS)



Discharge Instructions (diet, activity, discharged to home/nursing facility, etc)

Follow up Appointments

Code Status


Dictated by…


                                                48
                   Figure A5: Sample Operative Report




 Sample Operative Report


 Blair General Hospital
 123 Main Street
 Anytown, USA 56789

 Patient Name: Betty Doe

 Date: January 1, 2005

 Preoperative Diagnosis: Bilateral upper eyelid dermatochalasis

 Postoperative Diagnosis: Same

 Procedure: Bilateral upper lid blepharopoasty, (CPT 15822)

 Surgeon: John D. Good, M.D.

 Assistant: N/A

 NAME: Doe, William

 Anesthesia: Lidocaine with l:100,000 epinephrine

 Anesthesiologist: John Smith, M.D.

 Dictated by: John D. Good, M.D.

This 65-year-old female demonstrates conditions described above of excess
and redundant eyelid skin with puffiness and has requested surgical
correction. The procedure, alternatives, risks and limitations in this individual
case have been very carefully discussed with the patient. All questions have
been thoroughly answered, and the patient understands the surgery
indicated. She has requested this corrective repair be undertaken, and a
consent was signed.

 The patient was brought into the operating room and placed in the supine
 position on the operating table. An intravenous line was started, and sedation
 and sedation anesthesia was administered IV after preoperative P.O.
 sedation. The patient was monitored for cardiac rate, blood pressure, and
 oxygen saturation continuously.

 The excess and redundant skin of the upper lids producing redundancy and
 impairment of lateral vision was carefully measured, and the incisions were
 marked for fusiform excision with a marking pen. The surgical calipers were
 used to measure the supratarsal incisions so that the incision was
 symmetrical from the ciliary margin bilaterally.


                                          49
The upper eyelid areas were bilaterally injected with 1% Lidocaine with 1:100,000
Epinephrine for anesthesia and vasoconstriction. The plane of injection was
superficial and external to the orbital septum of the upper and lower eyelids
bilaterally.

The face was prepped and draped in the usual sterile manner.

After waiting a period of approximately ten minutes for adequate vasoconstriction,
the previously outlined excessive skin of the right upper eyelid
was excised with blunt dissection. Hemostasis was obtained with a bipolar
cautery. A thin strip of orbicularis oculi muscle was excised in order to expose the
orbital septum on the right. The defect in the orbital septum was identified, and
herniated orbital fat was exposed. The abnormally protruding positions in the
medial pocket were carefully excised and the stalk meticulously cauterized with
the bipolar cautery unit. A similar procedure was performed exposing herniated
portion of the nasal pocket. Great care was taken to obtain perfect hemostasis
with this maneuver. A similar procedure of removing skin and taking care of the
herniated fat was performed on the left upper eyelid in the same fashion. Careful
hemostasis had been obtained on the upper lid areas. The lateral aspects of the
upper eyelid incisions were closed with a couple of interrupted 7 – 0 blue prolene
sutures.

At the end of the operation the patientʼs vision and extraocular muscle movements
were checked and found to be intact. There was no diplopia,no ptosis, no
ectropion. Wounds were reexamined for hemostasis, and no hematomas were
noted. Cooled saline compresses were placed over the upper and lower eyelid
regions bilaterally.

The procedures were completed without complication and tolerated well. The
patient left the operating room in satisfactory condition. A follow-up appointment
was scheduled, routine post-op medications prescribed, and post-op instructions
given to the responsible party.

 The patient was released to return home in satisfactory condition.




 John D. Good, M.D.




                                         50
Figure A6: Picture of EMR Menu with Diagnoses




                     51
Figure A7: Picture of EMR Menu where Diagnosis is Not Found




                            52
     Table A2: Robustness results on complete coding (Hypotheses 1a and 1b)
                       Dependent variable: percent top code within a base DRG
                      2 to 2              2 to 3                 Combined
                 MED       SURG      MED       SURG     MED            SURG
                                 ∗
EM R×Post        −.0946 −.659         .135      .131    .0903          −.383
                 (.285)    (.363)    (.239)    (.293)  (.231)          (.313)

EarlyEM R×Post           1.92∗∗∗     −.243      .834∗∗      −.136       1.06∗∗∗            −.0265
                         (.447)      (.263)     (.371)      (.34)       (.373)             (.332)

EM R×2009                1.71∗∗       .483       .316        .328        .634              −.0153
                         (.679)      (.723)     (.514)      (.474)      (.529)              (.47)

EarlyEM R×2009           −.266       −.123      −.057       −.0207     −.0994              −.0735
                         (.29)       (.353)     (.227)       (.2)      (.198)              (.221)

EM R×2010                1.88∗∗∗    −.0755       .955        .662       1.17∗∗              −.488
                         (.572)     (1.01)      (.611)      (.629)      (.572)              (.615)

EarlyEM R×2010           −.168        −.27      −.056        .161       −.071              −.0682
                         (.301)      (.331)     (.208)      (.228)      (.198)              (.248)
Observations            105,456      91,932    241,831     265,286     347,287             357,218
Note: unit of observation is hospital/base DRG/year. Standard errors are clustered at both hospital and
base DRG levels. Other regressors are bed size, total outpatient visits, teaching hospital, total admissions,
full-time physicians and dentists, percentage Medicare, percentage Medicaid, profit status, total number of
births, hospital/base DRG fixed effects, and year fixed effects.




                                                    53
             Table A3: Upcoding and financial distress (Hypothesis 2b)
                                            Dependent variable: Percent top code
                                            within a base DRG, 2 to 2
                                                 MED                   SURG
                                                   ∗
Distressed× Post                            −1.16 (.646)      −.225        (.427)

Distressed × Spread                                      −.0206      (1.6)       .132           (.374)

F inHealthy× Post                                         −.379      (.435)    −.877∗∗          (.397)

F inHealthy × Spread                                      1.68∗∗∗    (.576)      .288           (.305)

Spread                                                    36.4∗∗∗ (12.4) −19.8∗∗∗      (4.29)
Observations                                                  102,875             89,820
Note: unit of observation is hospital/base DRG/year. Standard errors are clustered at both hospital and
base DRG levels. Other regressors are bed size, total outpatient visits, teaching hospital, total admissions,
full-time physicians and dentists, percentage Medicare, percentage Medicaid, profit status, total number of
births, hospital/base DRG fixed effects, and year fixed effects.




               Table A4: Upcoding and for-profit status (Hypothesis 2b)
                                             Dependent variable: Percent top code
                                             within a base DRG, 2 to 2
                                                   MED                  SURG
F orP rof it×Post                             −.514 (1.55)     .565        (.776)

F orP rof it × Spread                                     −.45      (1.68)     .966            (.757)

N otF orP rof it×Post                                       .98     (1.01)     −.55            (.519)

N otF orP rof it × Spread                                 −.128     (1.14)    −1.2∗∗           (.485)

Spread                                                   36.9∗∗∗ (13.4) −19∗∗∗                (4.32)
Observations                                                 105,456                     91,932
Note: unit of observation is hospital/base DRG/year. Standard errors are clustered at both hospital and
base DRG levels. Other regressors are bed size, total outpatient visits, teaching hospital, total admissions,
full-time physicians and dentists, percentage Medicare, percentage Medicaid, profit status, total number of
births, and hospital/base DRG fixed effects, and year fixed effects.




                                                    54
