                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                    INSURERS' RESPONSE TO SELECTION RISK:
                EVIDENCE FROM MEDICARE ENROLLMENT REFORMS

                                      Francesco Decarolis
                                       Andrea Guglielmo

                                      Working Paper 22876
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w22876


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                  December 2016




Andrea Guglielmo is an associate at Analysis Group, Inc. Research for this article was
undertaken when he was a student at the University of Wisconsin - Madison. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of Analysis
Group or the National Bureau of Economic Research. Decarolis is grateful to the Sloan
Foundation (grant 2011-5-23 ECON) for financial support. We are also grateful for the comments
received from Pierre Andre Chiappori, Vilsa Curto, Mark Duggan, Liran Einav, Randy Ellis,
Amit Gandhi, Jesse Gregory, Ken Hendricks, Kate Ho, Brad Larsen, Jon Levin, Tim Layton,
Maria Polyakova, Mike Riordan, Alan Sorensen, Chris Taber, Pietro Tebaldi and Bob Town and
from the participants at the seminars at Boston University, Columbia, EIEF, Stanford, Università
Bocconi and the University of Wisconsin Madison where earlier versions of this paper were
presented.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2016 by Francesco Decarolis and Andrea Guglielmo. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Insurers' Response to Selection Risk: Evidence from Medicare Enrollment Reforms
Francesco Decarolis and Andrea Guglielmo
NBER Working Paper No. 22876
December 2016, Revised February 2017
JEL No. I1,I13,I18,L22

                                          ABSTRACT

Evidence on insurers’ behavior in environments with both risk selection and market power is
largely missing. We fill this gap by providing one of the first empirical accounts of how insurers
adjust plan features when faced with potential changes in selection. Our strategy exploits a 2012
reform allowing Medicare enrollees to switch to 5-star contracts at anytime. This policy increased
enrollment into 5-star contracts, but without risk selection worsening. Our findings show that this
is due to 5-star plans lowering both premiums and generosity, thus becoming more appealing for
most beneficiaries, but less so for those in worse health conditions.


Francesco Decarolis
Department of Economics
Boston University
270 Bay State Road
Boston, MA 02215
and EIEF
and also NBER
fdc@bu.edu

Andrea Guglielmo
Analysis Group, Inc
Prudential Center Plaza III
111 Huntington Ave, B
Boston, MA 02199
andrea.guglielmo.85@gmail.com
I        Introduction

The behavior of insurers is a crucial component of the functioning of any insurance market.
Understanding such behavior is thus key to evaluate reforms like the creation of the health-
care marketplaces under the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act (ACA) and the
growingly privatized provision of Medicare throughout the Part C and Part D programs.1
The question of how competition works in environments with potential risk selection (either
advantageous or adverse) is, however, still unsettled from a theoretical perspective and there
is still much to be learned on the complex interaction between market power and selection.

        More specifically, nearly all the recent literature on selection markets focuses on pricing
distortions while abstracting from how selection affects the broader set of characteristics
of the contracts offered. The supply-side analysis presented in this paper is, instead, about
how health plans respond in terms of both premiums and benefits to additional opportunities
for beneficiaries to move among plans, possibly in response to health shocks. Therefore, our
contribution follows in the tradition initiated by the seminal theoretical studies of Rothschild
and Stiglitz (1976) and Glazer and McGuire (2000) in which plans alter their product seeking
to attract good risks. Although a handful of earlier studies have already shown evidence
of insurers taking actions to attract good and deter bad health risk,2 our contribution is
to provide a particularly clean identification strategy to quantify how both premiums and
benefits respond to a potential change in selection driven by a policy reform stimulating
consumers’ mobility between plans and to do so in a context, that of Medicare Advantage,
that is characterized by the presence of market power.3

        Reliable evidence on this type of behavior is hard to collect because it is rare to observe

    1
      Part C, also known as Medicare Advantage, is a substitute for the traditional Medicare services (i.e.,
Part A covering in-hospital services and Part B covering physicians, surgeons and other outpatient hospital
services. Part D is a program offering prescription drug insurance.
    2
      Several of these contributions, from the early study of Ellis and McGuire (2007) to the more recent
contributions of Carey (2016) and Shepard (2016), will be discussed next.
    3
      Using Part C data for 2006-2011, Curto et al. (2014) estimate that plan margins are on the order
of 16 percent above their (variable) costs of coverage. Similar estimates are found by Guglielmo (2016)
with a shorter dataset (2008-2011): by looking separately at plan types, he finds that HMOs and LPPOs
generate the most profit per enrollee, amounting to a markup of 12 percent, while PFFS plans’ markup
is approximately 9.5 percent. These estimates are also broadly consistent with the average markup of 13
percent reported the MedPAC annual report 2010.

                                                     1
changes in selection risk within a market. Furthermore, even when selection risk changes
for a subset of plans, it is often impossible to find a set of plans that can serve as a valid
comparison group since the equilibrium in the whole market is affected. Our analysis over-
comes this difficulty by exploiting the combined effects of a Medicare reform that altered
the potential selection risk of the highest quality (5-star) Part C and D plans and the geo-
graphical dispersion of such plans over the US. This allows us to separately observe treated
and control geographical markets both before and after this policy change, thus allowing a
quantile differences-in-differences approach that we use to study distributional changes in
contract features in the treated markets relative to the control ones. Our main finding is
that the policy triggered a response that involved not only changing premiums, but also
adjusting benefits. This made 5-star plans more appealing for most beneficiaries through
lower premiums, but less so for those in worse health through higher out of pocket costs.

       The starting point of our analysis is a Medicare reform changing the enrollment rules,
most notably allowing enrollment outside the open enrollment period for a subset of plans.
As in most insurance markets, beneficiaries select their Part C or D plan for coverage year
t during a window of time in the fall of year t − 1.4 However, starting with the enrollment
year 2012, a reform allowed enrollees to switch to 5-star Part C or D plans at any point
during the year. Despite the official motivation for this reform (known as “5-star Special
Enrollment Period” or “5-star SEP”), which was to foster enrollment into high quality plans,
the reform exposes 5-star plans to an evident selection risk: enrollees could initially select
cheap plans and then move to expensive 5-star plans with generous coverage only after
being hit by health shocks. The selection risk associated with within-year plan changes
is different from the typical selection problem studied in the existing Medicare literature
involving choices made in the open enrollment period and is potentially more severe as
people select plans after learning their health status. Limiting this type of selection is
typically seen as important for the proper functioning of managed care markets and, indeed,


   4
    While the open enrollment period length can very from 2 months to 2 weeks in employer sponsored
health insurance, the open enrollment period in Medicare is fixed. Specifically in Medicare, as well as in the
ACA exchanges, the open enrollment period is from October 15th to December 7th. This open enrollment
period only applies to those who are already Medicare beneficiaries and not to individuals turning 65 who
become eligible for Medicare.

                                                      2
this the logic behind the penalties for waiting beyond age 65 to join Part D and Medigap,
for the individual mandate in the ACA and for insurers’s resistance to expand the set of
“qualifying life events” allowing plan changes.5 Moreover, institutional remedies for selection
that exist in both privatized Medicare and the ACA exchanges are currently not arranged
to deal with selection originating from within-year plan changes.6

      To study the impact of this reform, we exploit the heterogenous presence of 5-star plans
across geographical markets. Due to regulatory reasons, the US is segmented into geographi-
cally separated markets both for Part C - where insurers offer plans at the county level - and
for Part D - where insurers offer plans at regional level. Since not all geographical markets
have 5-star plans, some markets were affected by the reform while others were not. Our
empirical strategy exploits this difference, together with the robustness to manipulations of
the star rating in the first two years after the policy change, to identify the causal effect of
the policy on various features of the plans supplied. In particular, the methodology that
we use is a quantile-based difference-in-differences analysis (Chetverikov, Larsen and Palmer
(2015)) that we use to estimate distributional changes in the treated markets (those with
at least one 5-star plan) and compare them to control markets (those with at least one 4 or
4.5-star plan, but no 5-star plans). Since, during our sample period, we observe 160 treated
counties for Part C, but only 2 treated regions for Part D, we focus our analysis on the
plans active in Part C, most of which also bundle together Part D benefits. These plans are
usually referred to as MA-PD plans.7

      We analyze how the distribution of both premiums and generosity changes in response to
the 5-star SEP treatment and find a tendency for premiums to increase in the medium-low
end of the premium distribution and to decrease in the medium-high end of the distribution,
where 5-star plans are located. To measure the effects on plan generosity, we look at three
measures of the out of pocket cost which have the benefit of aggregating all non-premium and
non-customer service benefits into expected cost measures. The first is the Part C maximum
out of pocket (MOOP). We find that the MOOP remains unchanged for plans in the high end


  5
    In theACA exchanges, for instance, these events include marriage, release from prison, and childbirth.
  6
    For instance, the enrollees’ risk score is recalculated only on a yearly basis.
  7
    We do not analyze, instead, the market for Prescription Drug Plans (PDP) active exclusively in Part D.

                                                   3
of the MOOP distribution, but tends to worsen for plans at the low and medium end of the
distribution. Since 5-star plans are among those with a low MOOP before the reform, this
result implies a worsening of their generosity. We find the same result when looking at our
second proxy for benefits, the Part C plan simulated out of pocket cost (OOPC) of enrollees
in poor health. For the third measure, the simulated OOPC of enrollees in excellent health,
instead, we find that the 5-star SEP did does not cause changes in the OOPC distribution.

   Among the additional coverage generosity measures that we observe, an interesting one
for which we observe the opposite pattern relative to what described above (i.e., 5-star plans
becoming more generous) is the Part D deductible. Given the importance of the deductible
for beneficiaries switching to 5-star plans during the year, we argue that this is consistent with
a strategic response by insurers. We also use the same empirical strategy to study several
“soft” quality measures behind the star rating and show that 5-star plans do not worsen on
those. We conclude that the insurers’ response entailed making 5-star plans more appealing
than competing plans for most consumers (by lowering premiums and deductibles), but less
so for the less healthy enrollees (by worsening generosity for enrollees in poor health).

   Finally, to better understand the interaction between competition and the effects of the
5-star SEP, we repeat the analysis separately for markets where there is a monopolist insurer
for 5-star plans and for markets where there is competition (duopoly) in the supply of 5-
star plans. The most interesting result is that competition among 5-star insurers seems to
exacerbate the extent to which these insures try to cream skim the market by worsening their
plan generosity. Consumers in duopoly markets are more likely to be negatively affected by
the 5-star SEP: while the premium changes in the two cases are similar, the increase in the
OOPC for poor health enrollees is about twice in duopoly relative to monopoly markets.

   A simultaneous reform that, starting in 2012, bolstered plan payments in proportion to
their star rating requires particular care on how the earlier results should be interpreted.
Indeed, the evidence on declining premiums might be in part due to the pass-through of
the extra payments for 5-star plans. Nevertheless, by comparison with 4/4.5-star plans that
received similar, albeit smaller payment increases we illustrate how 5-star plans experienced
a substantially stronger premium decline. Furthermore, the evidence on sharper declining


                                                4
benefits for 5-star plans cannot be explained by the payment reform as a pass-through effect
of these higher payments would have gone in the direction of higher, not lower benefits.
Finally, the payment reform cannot explain the heterogenous decline in benefits for enrollees
in different health status or the difference we find between monopoly and duopoly markets.

       From a policy perspective, our results offer several contributions. First, they are one
of the first comprehensive assessments of a complex, but little analyzed piece of regulation.
The adoption of the 5-star SEP to boost 5-star plans enrollment was a risky choice from an
ex ante perspective due to its potential to trigger substantial shifts in plan risk pools. It is
therefore of great policy relevance to document both what it produced and what this implies
for other possible policy reforms. Regarding the latter, our main insight is that insurers
have the ability to design plan features even in the context of the tightly regulated Medicare
market by changing not only easily observable features - like premiums - that a regulator can
target, but also harder to measure financial generosity measures and soft quality features.
Clearly, while the sophisticated reaction by insurers might have helped making the 5-star
SEP reform successful in terms of improving 5-star plans enrollment without worsening their
selection, it also underscores the complexity of designing rules capable of steering the market
toward the goals set by the regulator. Indeed, even for the 5-star SEP, the different effect
that we estimate for enrollees in different health status highlights a drawback of this policy
and, more generally, a difficulty of relying on competition in selection markets.

Related literature - This study contributes to different strands of the literature on health
insurance, especially within the context of insurers’ response to potential selection risk. Fol-
lowing Layton, Ellis and McGuire (2015), it is useful to categorize the economic analysis of
insurers’ behavior into two broad groups, originating from the two seminal studies of Akerlof
(1970) and Rothschild and Stiglitz (1976).8 The first group of studies, descending from Ak-
erlof (1970), looks at insurers’ pricing choices when health plans have fixed characteristics.
Within this framework, the early empirical work of Cutler and Reber (1998) has been re-
cently complemented by a large number of studies proposing empirical methods to estimate


   8
     Several recent studies theoretical studies, including Mahoney and Weyl (2014), Azevedo and Gottlieb
(2015), Farinha Luz (2015), Lester et al. (2015) and Veiga and Weyl (2016), exemplify well how the theoretical
literature is still hotly debating between these two approaches.

                                                      5
welfare and evaluate counterfactual policies through the formulation of structural models
of plan demand and supply (see Einav, Finkelstein and Cullen (2010), Einav and Finkel-
stein (2011), Curto et al. (2014), Bundorf, Levin and Mahoney (2012), Lustig (2012), Starc
(2014), Guglielmo (2016)).9 The second group of studies, originating from Rothschild and
Stiglitz (1976) (henceforth RS), endogenize not only premiums, but also benefits. Glazer
and McGuire (2000) extended this theoretical framework to the setting of managed care
health insurance where premiums are regulated, but insurers can use “service-level selection”
to make their plans relatively more appealing to enrollees of different risk type. Our paper
contributes to the empirical literature based on this endogenous contract framework which
includes: Ellis and McGuire (2007) who apply to Medicare Part C the insights from Frank,
Glazer and McGuire (2000) showing that services that are predictable (i.e., enrollees can
foresee their future usage) are those rationed tightly; again in Part C, evidence of strategic
benefit design in order to exploit the imperfect risk scoring is presented in Cao and McGuire
(2003) and Batata (2004), but more recent studies have argued that risk adjustment drasti-
cally reduced it (McWilliams, Hsu and Newhouse (2012), Newhouse et al. (2013) and Brown
et al. (2014)); in the Part D context, the study of Carey (2016) illustrates how insurers design
more favorable benefits for drugs that treat profitable diagnoses as compared to unprofitable
diagnoses, where the variation in diagnoses’ profitability is driven by technological change
after risk adjustment re-calibration (for new drug entry and generic competition); again in
Part D Polyakova (2014) and Ho, Hogan and Scott Morton (2014) find evidence of selection
and discuss how that interacted with the plan offerings by insurers.10

       In addition to the literature on selection in insurance markets, our study also contributes
to the analysis of how insurers respond to regulation. Thus, it is also related to other recent
empirical studies that address this issue in the context of Medicare, like Decarolis (2015)

   9
    See Einav, Finkelstein and Levin (2010) for a more complete survey of this literature.
  10
    A closely related analysis is also that of Kuziemko, Meckel and Rossin-Slater (2014) on how competition
in the presence of risk selection in Medicaid managed care leads to a worsening of outcomes for enrollees
in poorer health conditions. Furthermore, Shepard (2016) presents in the context of the Massachusetts
subsidized health insurance exchange an analysis of how selection interacts with the choice of the plan’s
hospital network, illustrating how the preference of high cost enrollees for “star” hospital would lead insurers
to drop such hospitals from their network. Our broader focus on contract characteristics is also related to
Hendel and Lizzeri (2003) and Crocker and Moran (2003) who argue that greater ex-ante commitment may
reduce adverse selection and, thus, may increase insurance provision.

                                                       6
for Part D and Geruso and Layton (2015) for Part C. Finally, our analysis of how insurers
affect soft quality measures of the offered plans is related to the issue of the public disclo-
sure of quality measures analyzed in Glazer and McGuire (2006).11 At a very general level,
our findings about how firms adjust product features different than premium is an impor-
tant contribution to the growing empirical literature on endogenous product characteristics
(Crawford (2012); Fan (2013); Wollman (2014)). In most of the industrial organization liter-
ature, product characteristics are taken to be exogenous because it is to difficult to analyze
when they are chosen, but our study isolates a clean setting in which it is possible to analyze
multiple endogenous product characteristics. This is especially relevant in insurance markets
where products are contracts characterized by multiple, simultaneously determined features.

       Finally, a few demand-related papers have already stressed the relevance of the Medicare
star rating system for plan choices (see Abaluck and Gruber (2015), for Part D, and Reid
et al. (2013) and Darden and McCarthy (2014), for Part C). The specific impacts of the 5-star
SEP on the demand for plans is analyzed in Madeira (2015) and Decarolis, Guglielmo and
Luscombe (2016). The former study, uses consumer-level data in the Part D market to study
plan switching with regard to the presence of behavioral biases in enrollee choices and finds
that at least some Medicare beneficiaries are present-biased. For these enrollees tending to
procrastinate choices, the 5-star SEP leads to a drop in enrollment in 5-star plans, driven by
an overall increase in inertia. Decarolis, Guglielmo and Luscombe (2016), instead, uses both
Part C and D data. For Part C, it finds that the introduction of the 5-star SEP caused an
increase in within-year enrollment of 5-star plans amounting to 7% to 9% of their enrollment
base at the beginning of the enrollment year (January), but it did not significantly affect
plan switching across years. The increased enrollment into 5-star plans is not associated
with worsening of the risk pools for these plans. The following analysis complements these
findings with evidence on the insurers’s response to the 5-star SEP reform.




  11
   Related applications involve the cases of how cardiac surgery report cards led to selection by providers
David Dranove and Satterthwaite (2003) in New York and Pennsylvania and the similar evidence on the
Nursing Home Quality Initiative by Werner et al. (2009) and Lu (2012).

                                                    7
II       Institutions: Rating System and Policy Changes

The Medicare Part C and D programs share several organizational features. Both programs
entail Medicare beneficiaries choosing a plan from a menu of plans offered by private insurers.
Detailed regulations, mostly from the Center for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS),
contribute to the determination of both the types of plans offered and their premiums.
The two programs, however, differ along many dimensions: Part C is a privately provided
alternative to traditional Medicare, TM. Thus, plans must cover Medicare Part A and Part
B benefits (except hospice care), but can offer additional benefits.12 Part D, instead, is a
program with voluntary enrollment that provides coverage for prescription drugs. For Part
C, nearly all Medicare Advantage (MA) plans also include Part D benefits (i.e, these are
MA-PD plans).13 TM enrollees can obtain Part D benefits by enrolling in stand alone PDP
plans. This section describes three key regulatory aspects: the plan rating systems and the
two reforms linking ratings with enrollment periods and subsidies, respectively.14

A. Rating Systems for Part C and D
To help beneficiaries select plans and to monitor the market, CMS rates plans on a 1 to 5
scale, with 5-stars indicating the highest quality. More precisely, CMS assigns ratings at the
contract level and so every plan covered under the same contract receives the same rating.15
Information about plan performance has been collected since 1999, but the introduction of
the star rating system started only in 2006 for Part D and in 2007 to Part C.

       The details concerning the rating system are fairly complex and have changed over time.
The essential aspect is that different data sources (enrollees surveys as well as CMS adminis-
trative data, and data from plans and other CMS contractors) are used to collect information
on a broad set of indicators. The process through which CMS calculates the star rating in-
  12
      Medicare Part A includes inpatient hospital, skilled nursing, and some home health services. Medicare
Part B includes physicians’ services, outpatient care, and durable medical equipment.
   13
      The subset of plans offering both Pat C and D coverage are usually indicated as MA-PD plans. With a
slight abuse of notation we will typically refer to all Part C plans as MA plans.
   14
      Newhouse and McGuire (2014) and Duggan, Healy and Scott Morton (2008) are recent studies discussing
more broadly the institutional aspects of Part C and D respectively.
   15
      In Part C, a contract is a particular product type (HMO, PPO or Private FFS) covering a specific service
area (i.e county or group of counties), while a plan is finer specification of benefit package that include type
of coverage, premium, copayment, etc. In Part D, a contract typically indicates a drug formulary and, then,
each plan within the contract applies different conditions (for instance copays) to the same formulary.

                                                       8
volves several steps. At the most disaggregated level there is a large number of “individual
measures,” which are aggregated into a smaller number of “domain measures” and finally into
the “summary rating” through a complex weighting system.16 Table 2 reports the domain
measures: for Part C, they cover features such as clinical quality, patient experience, and
contractor performance; for Part D, they cover aspects such as call center hold time, mem-
bers’ ability to get prescriptions filled easily when using the drug plan, and plan fairness in
denials to members’ appeals. The overall rating, expressed in a 5-Star scale with increments
of half a star, is released every year in October on the CMS Plan Finder web site.

       A notable feature of the rating system is that it is hard to manipulate for insurers,
especially in the short run. There are at least three reasons for this: first, CMS changes the
system from year to year in terms of both which parameters are evaluated and how they
are aggregated into the overall rating. This aspect is particularly salient given the large
number of different measures that are evaluated, as shown in Table 2. Second, ratings on
individual measures are assigned by comparing the relative performance of each contract to
the entire population of contracts so that manipulations would require detailed information
on all competing contracts. Third, and most crucially, the rating is based on lagged data:
year t ratings (released on October of year t − 1) use data for the period between January
of year t − 2 and June of year t − 1. To exploit these features limiting potential rating
manipulations in the short run, we focus on the first two years after the enrollment reform.

       Very few contracts obtain the 5-star maximum. In 2012 and 2013, for instance, only two
firms offer 5-star PDP, while for Part C seven firms offer 5 star plans, as shown in Table
3. Regarding the geographical distribution of plans, out of the 34 regions into which Part
D divides the United States, only 2 regions (region 3, New York, and region 25, formed by
7 midwest states) had a 5-star PDP. 5-star plans are more frequent among MA. However,
while PDP must be offered to all counties within a region, Part C plans are offered at the
county level. Figure 1 presents a heat map showing the offerings of MA plans. In 2012-2013
period, 5-star plans are offered in 160 counties belonging to 10 different states and spanning


  16
    More precisely, for PDP and MA plans not offering Part D, the summary rating is also the overall rating.
For MA plans, the Part C and D summary ratings are combined to obtain an overall rating. A more complete
description of the process through which CMS calculates the star rating is detailed in the web appendix.

                                                     9
almost all the U.S. geographical areas, with the relevant exception of the center-south area.
This geographical dispersion of 5-star MA plans plays a fundamental role in our empirical
strategy and we return to it in the next section.

B. Demand Side Reform: Plan Rating and Enrollment Periods
Generally, beneficiaries enroll in a plan between mid October and early December of the year
before the coverage period (Open Enrollment Period, OEP) and must keep the same plan
for the entire coverage year (i.e., from January though the end of December). Exceptions
to the OEP, known as Special Enrollment Periods (SEPs), permit enrollees to change plans,
but are typically confined to special circumstances.17

       Starting with the 2012 coverage period, CMS introduced a new type of SEP linked to the
star rating system. This reform allows all beneficiaries to enroll in a 5-star Part C or D plan
at any point in time.18 This SEP rule can only be used once per year and is available even to
enrollees already in a 5-star plan, but who want to switch to another 5-star plan. Coverage
with the new 5-star plan takes effect the first day of the month following the enrollment.
Similar to any other enrollment request, 5-star plans must accept all applicants. The SEP
cannot be used to enroll in a plan that does not have an overall 5-star rating, even if the plan
receives 5-stars in some rating categories, or if the plan is in the same parent organization.19
CMS has extensively advertised this new SEP rule in its communications to consumers.
Insurers were publicly informed of the introduction of the 5-star SEP on November 2010.
Since the next round of plan bids was in June 2011 for the menu of plans to be offered in
2012, then we can consider 2012 as the first year from which we can expect to see reactions
in plan features driven by the policy change.

C. Supply Side Reform: Plan Rating and Insurers’ Payments
Payments to insurers come mostly from various types of Medicare payments and, only in

  17
      The most relevant SEPs are: (i) for change of residency, including moving to a nursing home; (ii) for
low income people (dual eligible or qualifying for the LIS or for SPAPs); (iii) for people who enroll in a MA
plan when they are first eligible at age 65 get a “trial period” (up to 12 months) to try out MA. This SEP
allows them to disenroll from their first MA plan to go to TM.
   18
      See the 2012 Newsletter at http://www.cms.gov/Medicare/Prescription-Drug-Coverage/
PrescriptionDrugCovContra/downloads/Announcement2012final2.pdf.
   19
      There is also a special provision for which, if the enrollee uses the 5-Star SEP to enroll in either a 5-star
PFFS plan or a 5-star Cost Plan, then he gets a “coordinating Part D SEP” allowing him to enroll in a
stand-alone PDP, or in the Cost Plan’s Part D optional benefit, if applicable.

                                                        10
small part, from enrollees premiums, see Newhouse and McGuire (2014) and Decarolis (2014).
The ACA of 2010 reformed various aspects of the system and, crucially, introduced a link
between the star rating system and payments.

       This supply side reform exclusively affects Part C and, like the enrollment reform, became
effective in 2012. Essentially, the reform sought to reduce overall plan payments, but also to
make payments relatively more generous for higher quality plans than for lower quality plans.
For the purposes of our study, this reform implies that after 2012 per enrollee payments of
5-star plans are more comparable to those of 4 and 4.5 then to those of plans with lower
ratings. In essence this is due to how this reform affects the following two features of the
payment system.

       The first is the benchmark. The benchmark is a function of what TM spends in the
plan’s service area. CMS determines the payment to an MA plan by comparing its “bid”
(the amount the insurer requests to enroll a beneficiary in the plan) to the service area
benchmark. Plans with a bid below benchmark (the typical case) receive their bid plus a
rebate based on the difference between benchmark and the bid. The ACA reform aligned
benchmarks more closely with TM spending20 and, instead of the flat 75% rebate used before
2012, introduced a variable rebate, ranging from 50% to 70%, linked to the plan star rating.21

       The second is the bonus. Bonuses were introduced in 2012 to bolster payments for high-
quality plans by proportionally increasing their benchmarks. For instance, in 2012 the bonus
for 5-star plans is 5% of the benchmark. Thus, a 5-star plan with a bid below the benchmark
receives a rebate equal to 73% of 1.05 times its service area benchmark. While under the
ACA bonuses were reserved for plans with 4 or more stars, CMS used its demonstration
authority to extend bonuses to plans with 3 or more stars. In the period that we study,
benchmarks are increased by 4% for 4.5-4 star plans, by 3.5% for 3.5 star plans, by 3% for
3 star plans and plans that are too new or with too few enrollees to be rated.22

  20
      It ties the benchmarks to a percentage of mean TM cost in each county and caps them at the pre-ACA
level. These benchmarks are phased in from 2012 to 2017 by blending them with the old benchmarks.
   21
      The new rebates are phased in from 2012 to 2014. In 2012, the rebate equals the sum of two-thirds
of the old rebate amount and one-third of the new rebate amount. In 2013, the rebate equals the sum of
one-third of the old rebate amount and two-thirds of the new rebate amount. From 2014 onward, the rebate
is 70% for 5-4.5 star contracts, 65% for 4-3.5 contracts and 50% for the rest of the contracts.
   22
      The demonstration is expected to cost more than $8 billion, making it more costly than the combined

                                                   11
III      Conceptual Framework

It is useful, before presenting the data, to illustrate through a simple conceptual framework
the incentives produced by the regulations described above for the insurers. Consider the
typical RS setting with a pool of consumers having homogenous preferences over wealth
and heterogeneous expected health care costs, who make up the demand side of a health
insurance market. Suppose that on the supply side there are two insurers setting premiums
and benefits and that only one of them is labeled 5-star.23 Now, extending RS, suppose that
enrollees exhibit inertia in the form of a switching cost and that the 5-star SEP reform acts as
a reduction in this switching cost, but only if the switch is toward the 5-star plan.24 Notice
that, by comparison with RS, given an exogenous initial allocation of consumers, a plan
seeking to expand its enrollment will have to alter price and/or benefits by a larger margin
to overcome the inertia. Hence, the asymmetric reduction in switching costs driven by the
5-star SEP increases the incentive for the 5-star plan to lower its premium and benefits: the
5-star SEP increases the sensitivity to contract changes for consumers who are not the 5-star
plan’s enrollees, without altering the sensitivity to contract changes of its current enrollees.
Under most initial allocations, since enrollees value premiums equally, but benefits are valued
more by the sickest, who are also more costly to serve, the 5-star plan has an incentive to
lower premiums to expand its pool of enrollees, capitalizing on the reduced switching cost,
while limiting its appeal for the bad risk by lowering generosity.25 The main hypothesis that
our analysis will seek to test is whether the data indicates declines of premiums and benefits
compatible with a RS framework, that are also present when consumers exhibit inertia.

    In a market with multiple, competing 5-star plans, the response by insurers to the policy
might reflect the degree of market power of the different plans. Although the presence of mar-

cost of all 85 other Medicare demonstrations that have taken place since 1995. See Layton and Ryan (2014)
for a first assessment of its effects.
  23
     Despite the presence of risk adjustment in Part C, recent empirical evidence from Brown et al. (2014)
shows that under the current arrangement incentives for risk selection are still present.
  24
     Inertia in health insurance demand is a well documented issue, see Nosal (2012) for a study on Part C.
  25
     The supply-side reform boosting payments to 5-star plans described above might be partially passed-
through to consumers in the form of lower premiums or higher benefits. Furthermore, depending on the
nature of the inertia, it might be that the enrollees that switch during the year to a 5-star plan are relatively
healthier than those already forming the risk pool of the 5-star plans, thus lowering the plans average risk
score. These forces might exacerbate premiums decline, but also limit benefit reductions.

                                                       12
ket power makes an exact characterization of the equilibrium hard to formulate (Einav and
Finkelstein (2011)), recent results by Lester et al. (2015) show that greater cream-skimming
occurs when insurers face more competition. In our context, competition between 5-star
insurers is likely to put relatively more downward pressure on benefits than on premiums.26

       For a managed care health insurance markets like Part C and D, insurers are limited in
their design choices. Thus, together with premiums and expected out of pocket costs, which
we will use to proxy for benefit generosity, the next section will also look at a few other
plan features. The first measure is the maximum out of pocket cost which, clearly, is going
to be salient for the enrollees in poorer health conditions as these individuals are likely to
have larger out of pocket expenditures. The second is the Part D deductible. Under the
5-star SEP, enrollees switching to a 5-star plan during the year face a deductible equal to the
maximum between zero and the difference between the new and old plan deductibles. Thus,
if 5-star plans were to ask for high deductibles, this would reduce their appeal for every
consumer considering a within-year switch and especially so for the healthiest ones who are
unlikely to have made large deductible payments. On the other hand, for non 5-star plans
increasing the deductible might not trigger a major loss of enrollees since these enrollees are
aware of the possibility of switching to 5-star plans.27 Since the deductible is a transparent
and understandable plan feature for enrollees, the logic in Frank, Glazer and McGuire (2000)
suggests that insurers are likely to use it as a tool to influence consumer choice.

       Finally, a last group of plan features involves “soft” quality measures. In a more realistic
setup where enrollees have multiple dimensions along which they value plan features, the
plan’s quality in terms of “customer care” can be an additional screening tool. In particular,
to the extent that enrollees’ switching behavior is driven not only by health shocks, but also
by negative experiences with service quality, and that consumers attentive to quality tend to
be good risk (in the spirit of Fang, Keane and Silverman (2008)’s advantageous selection),
then 5-star plans might respond to the 5-star SEP by enhancing their perceived quality.

  26
     Lowering benefits can have smaller effects in terms of discouraging initial enrollment choices, when plan
choices are made based on an expectation of health status, and large effects on within-year plan switches,
when choices reflect new information. Higher premiums, instead, discourage equally both enrollment choices.
  27
     The opposite incentives for 5 and non-5-star plans might thus move their deductibles further apart, with
the one of 5-star plans becoming relatively more generous, despite the overall generosity of the plan declining.

                                                      13
IV         Data and Descriptive Evidence

Our analysis is based on publicly available data released by CMS describing plan/contract
characteristics. For all the MA-PD plans offered, we observed their monthly enrollment,
Part C and D premiums, star rating (with all the associated individual components), several
out of pocket cost measures and several Part D features (deductible, extra coverage in the
gap and multiple measures of drug generosity). We also use the Area Health Resource File
released by the Health Resource Service Administration to assess a number of county-level
demographic, economic and heath indicators. We focus on the period from 2009 to 2013.

       Although data on the generosity of Part C benefits is available to researchers, we decided
to capture this crucial element of our analysis focusing on three synthetic measures related
to out of pocket costs that CMS releases at plan level. The first is the maximum out of
pocket an enrollee can be responsible for within a year from in-network utilization.28 The
other two measures are representative expected cost measures. Specifically CMS applies plan
designs to representative consumers to simulate an expected out of pocket cost (OOPC). This
expected cost measure is calculated separately for representative enrollees in different health
conditions and, in our analysis, we focus on the two polar cases of “poor health” enrollees
and “excellent health” enrollees. These measures are commonly used by researchers and
practitioners to approximate plans’ generosity (see Stockley et al. (2014); Guglielmo (2016))
and are shown to enrollees when they choose their plans.

       Table 1 reports summary statistics separately for contracts with different star ratings (5
star; 4 and 4.5 star; less than 4 star), for different set of counties (160 treated counties and
1,084 control counties) and for different time periods (2009-11 and 2012-13). We present
the data at contract and not at plan level both because the rating does not vary among
plans under the same contract and because missing enrollment data are more common at
plan than at contract level.29 Our main dependent variables are premiums (for both Part C
and D) and the three out of pocket cost measures described above (MOOP and OOPC for
  28
     Any in-network covered utilization will be paid in full by the insurer once out of pocket expenditure
reaches this threshold.
  29
     A subset of our measures are available only at plan level. We aggregate them at contract level by
weighting the plan characteristics by the enrollment of the plan. As discussed below, we tested the robustness
of our results to aggregation (i.e. simple average), the results are reported in appendix.

                                                     14
enrollees in “poor health” and “excellent health”). Additionally, among the various Part D
features that we observe, we report in the analysis below the Part D deductible.

       For these six outcome variables, Figure 2 reports their evolution over time among different
sets of contracts. The visual inspection of the plots immediately suggests a few tendencies
that will be confirmed by the subsequent regression analysis. In particular, regarding the
Part C premium (plot (a)), the average value among 5-star plans declines sharply in 2013,
relative to the previous years, passing from about $800 per year to slightly less than $600 per
year. In comparison, the premiums of all other star rating groups, for both treatment and
control counties, do not express such a pronounced decline post 2011. A similar description
applies for the Part D premium (plot (b)) where, however, the premium decline of the 5-star
plans post 2011 is also accompanied by an increase for almost all the other plan groups.
Regarding the OOPC measures, plots (d) and (e) are suggestive of an increase in both the
MOOP and the OOPC for enrollees in poor health that after 2011 is steeper for 5-star plans
relative to all other plan groups. No apparent change is instead visible for the OOPC of
enrollees in excellent health.

       Although most of the analysis below will focus on these six main outcome variables,
auxiliary results will also explore the effects of the 5-star SEP on additional features. These
involve soft quality measures, such as health care quality, customer service and drug access.
The latter set of measures are all components of the star rating system illustrated in the
previous section for which we take the appropriate time window.30 Finally, an analysis
involving additional plan observable characteristics is reported in the web appendix.31

       Regarding the insurers offering 5-star MA plans, Table 3 shows that there are seven of
these insurers offering plans in 2012-2013.32 A first interesting feature revealed by the table is
the fact that the 5-star SEP did not trigger any major entry/exit of plans. Table 3 illustrates

  30
      As mentioned earlier, certain components of the rating enter its calculation with a time lag and, hence,
their usage requires attention to their period of reference.
   31
      The outcomes are: the Part D OOPC for enrollees in poor and excellent health, the number of most
frequently purchased drugs included in the formulary, the number of drugs without utilization restrictions
and the Part C and D risk scores.
   32
      The overall set of firms active on the supply side of Part C and D are many and heterogeneous. They
range from large scale, nation-wide insurers like United Healthcare and Humana, to a plethora of small local
companies. Almost all insurers offering Part C also offer Part D, but some major Part D insurers, like CVS
Caremark, are not present in Part C.

                                                     15
this point by reporting, for each of the seven insurers offering at least one 5-star contract in
2012-2013 (i.e., treated contracts), the total number of counties where these treated contracts
where offered in all the years from 2009 to 2013. This table indicates that there was no exit
of these plans and, instead, they expanded their presence to more counties in both 2012 and
2013 relative to the previous years. This is clearly relevant to alleviate any concern that a
selective exit from certain counties might drive any of the results described below.33

       A second feature related to these seven insurers is that only three of them, Group Health,
Humana and Kaiser Foundation, are major national players. However, while the 5-star plans
of Group Health and Humana are offered only in a limited geographical area (Wisconsin for
Humana and Oregon-Washington for Group Health), Kaiser has 5-star plans in various states:
California, Colorado, Hawaii, Oregon and Washington. Moreover, Kaiser’s 5-star contracts
have large market shares in all of these states, ranging from 12 to 48 percent of the relative
markets. For Group Health and Humana, the market shares of their 5-star plans are smaller,
but in both cases greater than 5 percent.34

       The small number of insurers with relatively large market shares, makes it both feasible
and interesting to look at the possible strategies with which these insurers responded to
the 5-star SEP. In fact, both Humana and Kaiser offer non-5 star plans in control counties,
where no 5-star plan is offered by any company, which allows for some additional descriptive
comparisons. The most surprising aspect that we find is that Humana and Kaiser seem to
follow different strategies. Humana reduced generosity without much change in premiums,
while Kaiser decreased premiums without a measurable change in generosity. Specifically,
comparing the periods before and after the 5-star SEP, Humana’s 5-star plans offered in
Wisconsin lower their generosity (the average MOOP grows from $3,400 to $6,260), substan-
tially more than what is done by both its 4.5 star plans also offered in Wisconsin (the average
MOOP grows from $4,500 to $6,331) and its 4.5 star plans offered in other Midwest counties
(the average MOOP grows from $3,400 to $4,358). In the same period, the average premium

  33
     It is also important to point out that CMS poses limits to the exit of plans as it can impose a two year
ban to a firms that retires all its contracts from MA.
  34
     For expositional purposes, the market share is calculated considering as the geographical markets the 34
regions of Medicare Part D, and not individual counties. The goal here is to identify large insurers with a
national, or at least regional, footprint.

                                                     16
of 5-star plans registers an increase, but in line with that of the 4.5 plans in Wisconsin. For
Kaiser, instead, we can compare its 5-star plans with the 4.5 star plans it offers in Georgia.
We observe that generosity remains nearly identical for both the 5-star plans (the average
MOOP goes from $3,200 to $3,233) and 4.5 star plans (the average MOOP remains identical
at $3,400). Average premiums, however, decline slightly more for 5-star plans than for 4.5
star plans (Part D premiums decline from $178 to $124 for 5-star plans, while they increase
from $18 to $25 for 4.5-star plans; Part C premiums, instead, decreases $807 to $584 for
5-star plans and from $499 to $421 for 4.5 star plans) .

    This descriptive evidence is suggestive that insurers’ response to the policy involves
changes in both premium and generosity dimensions. To draw more consistent conclusions
about such responses, however, it is necessary to take into account how not only 5-star plans
response, but also how their competitors reacted to the policy change. Insurers offering non
5-star plans in markets with 5-star plans face the possibility of losing enrollees during the
year and, accordingly, of experiencing changes to their risk pools. Indeed, they might face
a worsening of selection if 5-star plans increase their cream skimming activity. We describe
below an empirical strategy that aims to detect this type of insurers’ responses.




V     Empirical Analysis

A. Empirical Strategy
The empirical strategy that we pursue is a form of difference-in-differences (DID) strategy.
The two key features of our approach are as follows. First, our unit of analysis is the county,
and not the contract (or plan). As discussed above, since all contracts offered in a county
with at least one 5-star contract can respond to the 5-star SEP reform, our interest is in
understanding how the market (i.e., the county) responded to the policy change. Hence, we
label treated counties those with at least one 5-star contract in either 2012 or 2013, and as
control counties those having either 4 or 4.5 star contracts as their highest rated contracts.

    The second feature is that, to capture the changes in how the overall market readjusts,
we pursue a quantile-based DID analysis. This allows us to evaluate changes along the

                                              17
whole distribution of each one of the dependent variables that we will consider (premium,
deductible, etc.). The goal is to understand how the 5-star SEP affects the nature of com-
petition within a market. For example, in the case of the premium, a 3 star contract with a
low premium and a 5-star contract with an high premium would probably have a different
reaction to the 5-star SEP, and analyzing different quantiles of the premium distribution
within a market can be more informative than just focusing on the mere average effect.

       We model the τ th quantile of the distribution of characteristic Y in county c at time t as:


                      Yct (τ ) = ac (τ ) + bt (τ ) + β(τ ) × 5StarCountyct + εct (τ )                      (1)


where the coefficient of interest is β(τ ), the effect of the 5-star SEP on the dependent
variable Y for the τ th quantile. For instance, when analyzing the Part C premium, estimating
β(0.2)=2 implies that the 5-star SEP induced an increase in the 20th percentile of the Part
C premium distribution by $2. ac (τ ) and bt (τ ) represent the county and year fixed effects.
The error term εct (τ ) includes all the unobserved factors that may affect the τ th quantile at
the county-year level.

       The assumptions required for the validity of this strategy are the same as those of the
standard DID framework, in particular the presence of a five star contract in a county after
2011 must be uncorrelated with other unobserved county-year specific shocks (εct (τ )). Our
model is a special case of the grouped instrumental variables quantile model of Chetverikov,
Larsen and Palmer (2015) and can be estimated using OLS. As explained in Larsen (2015),
we can easily estimate this model in two steps: first, we compute the quantile for the
contracts characteristic of interest (i.e. Part C premium) for each group (county-year);
second, we estimate equation (1) using the computed quantile as a dependent variable in an
OLS regression where the units of observation are the groups.35

       There are challenges to interpret β as the causal effect of the policy change. As usual in
any DID study, the first and foremost concern is to select a valid control group. In our setting,
  35
      Compared to standard quantile method, the simplicity of this approach allows us to include a rich control
structure, such as county and year fixed effects, while limiting the computational time given the use of OLS.
Moreover, standard quantile methods would retrieve a biased β(τ ) in presence of a county-year specific shock
εct (τ ) (see Chetverikov, Larsen and Palmer (2015)).

                                                      18
counties with highest rated contracts having a rating of 4 or 4.5 stars are an appropriate
control group. Clearly, both treatment and control counties have similar quality plans at the
top of their respective menu of offerings. As discussed above, this is relevant to ensure that
insurers in both sets of counties face similar financial incentives, thus allowing us to identify
the effect of the 5-star SEP policy reform separately from any other effect produced by the
simultaneous payment reform. The geographical location of the two sets of counties is also
similar: Figure 1, shows the geographic distribution of treated (dark red) and control (light
red) counties. Nevertheless, treatment and control groups differ along several observable
characteristics, like size of the enrollment base and features of the enrollment pool. Indeed,
the fact that the 5-star plans are scattered across many different counties does not ensure
that their assignment to counties is random. We have two arguments to address this concern,
the first is that, for the three reasons explained earlier, it is hard for insurers to perfectly
control their rating so that the difference between a 4-4.5 and a 5-star plan is likely quasi-
random, at least for the period analyzed. Second, to the extent that the selection into the
treatment state is based on observable characteristics, we have a rich set of covariates that
permits us to control for this threat. Thus, as a robustness check for our baseline estimates,
we use a matching DID strategy, where the control group observations are selected to match
the characteristics of the treatment group in terms of observable characteristics. Therefore,
our identification strategy rests upon the fact that the assignment of the treatment relative
to the control status is quasi-random within the union of the counties marked in dark and
light red in Figure 1.

B. Baseline Results
The plots of Figure 3 summarize our findings for each of the plan characteristics analyzed.
Plot (a), for instance, reports the effect of the policy change on the Part C premium. The
plot contains a great deal of information: the solid, dark line is drawn using the regression
coefficients, β(τ ), estimated separately for each one of the quantiles (τ = 0.05, 0.1, ..., 0.9,
0.95) of the Part C premium distribution. The two solid lines around it show the 95 percent
confidence interval. This plot reveals that the policy change is associated with a premium
increase at the lower end of premiums (up until the third decile) and with a premium decrease
in the top end of the premiums (starting from the seventh decile). The decline is about $250

                                               19
for plans at the 90th percentile of the distribution and it his highly statistically significant. To
illustrate the usefulness of a distributional analysis, the plots also report the average effect.
The dark, horizontal, dashed line shows the mean effect (with the associated surrounding
lines denoting the 95 percent confidence interval) that is estimated by applying a conventional
DID method, like the one used for the enrollment analysis. For Part C premium, this mean
effect is negative but not statistically significant. The mean effect is clearly unable to reveal
the nature of the market readjustment uncovered by the distributional analysis.

   Plot (a) also describes where 5-star plans are located within the Part C premium dis-
tribution. Small squares and circles are used to mark the share of 5-star plans present at
each decile of the distribution (relative to total number of 5-star plans): squares measure the
share of 5-star plans in the pre-policy period, while circles measure them in the post-policy
period. In terms of the Part C premium distribution, 5-star plans are mostly concentrated
in the top 50 percent of the distribution, both pre and post policy. In plot (a), we can thus
observe that prior to 2012 about 10 percent of all 5-star plans are located in the top 10
percent of the premium distribution, while after the 5-star SEP none of the 5-star plans is
in the top decile. A similar pattern is also observed for the next two deciles. The mass of
5-star plans that leaves the upper portion of the premium distribution reappears in its lower
portion. Across all the bottom half of the distribution their increased presence is reveled by
the positive gap between the hollow circles and the squares. Combined with the descriptive
evidence presented earlier about the sharp decline of 5-star premiums relative to those of
plans in different star rating groups of both treatment and control counties (see Figure 2),
these results indicate that the distributional effects estimated are produced by a change in
5-star plan premiums, and not merely by changes in the other plans.

   Using the same logic to interpret the evidence in the remaining plots, we document a
number of interesting results. First, consistent with the behavior of Part C premiums, also
for the Part D premium (plot (b)) we observe a slight tendency of premium increases for
plans in the medium-low end of the distribution and decreases for plans in the medium-high
end of the distribution (where 5-star plans are mostly located). Second, for the Part D
deductible, first notice that about 80 percent of all 5-star plans are located in the bottom



                                                20
decile of the deductible distribution both before and after the policy (the squares and circles
in plot (c), respectively). The estimates in plot (c) indicate that low deductible plans (like
5-star plans) reduce their deductible even further, while the deductible increases further for
high deductible plans. This evidence, is likely explained by the very peculiar role played by
the deductible under the 5-star SEP explained through our simple conceptual framework.36

       Third and most crucially, plan generosity - as summarized by the MOOP - tends to
worsen for plans at the low and medium end of the MOOP distribution, while it remains
unchanged for plans in the high end of the MOOP. 5-star plans, that are disproportionately
concentrated in the lowest end of the MOOP distribution, seem to respond by reducing their
generosity and so do the plans closest to them in terms of MOOP. The following plots, (e)-
(f), report additional results in terms of the OOPC. It is particularly interesting to compare
the estimates for the Part C OOPC of beneficiaries in poor health and excellent health. For
enrollees in poor health, the evidence in Plot (e) is once again of an increase in costs for the
plans at the low end of the OOPC distribution and a decline in costs for the high OOPC
plans. This is not surprising given the close connection between this OOPC measure and the
MOOP. For enrollees in excellent health, however, Plot (f) shows that for all deciles there
is no effect. This is reasonable since the representative healthy enrollees’ expected out of
pocket is not sensitive to changes in benefits that the healthy rarely utilize which are also
the most likely candidates for plan changes, if insurers are looking to improve their risk pool.

       In interpreting the above results, an important caveat regards the potentially confounding
effect created by the pass-through of the 5-star “subsidy.” As discussed earlier, starting in
2012 plan payments begun to be linked with their star rating, both for the calculation of
the rebate they receive (in case their bid is below the benchmark) and for the bonus applied
in the calculation of their benchmark. It is thus possible that part of the changes observed
for 5-star plans might be driven by the payment reform. Indeed, the question of whether
an higher Part C benchmark is passed through to enrollees in the form of lower premiums
  36
     Additional evidence, consistent with this interpretation is presented in the web appendix. For the Part
D OOPC, the results indicate an improvement of generosity for the plans that, like the 5-star ones, were
already low in terms of their Part D OOPC and a worsening of generosity for high Part D OOPC plans.
These features involve both the case of poor health beneficiaries and of excellent health beneficiaries. A
likely explanation for the different behavior of the Part C and D OOPC measures is based on what we report
regarding the Part D deductible.

                                                    21
has been extensively discussed. As series of recent papers exploring this question, Song and
Chernew (2013), Curto et al. (2014) and Cabral, Geruso and Mahoney (2014), agree on an
estimate of the pass-through of around 50%, but Duggan, Starc and Vabson (forthcoming)
report a substantially higher value closer to 100%. Stockley et al. (2014), instead, finds a
nearly zero pass-through for premiums, but a significant pass-through in terms of benefits
that is rationalized by fact that consumers do not observe premium reductions below the
FFS Medicare (i.e., Part B) premium. Although the evidence from these studies is mixed,
our results on the premium might in part be due to the benchmark change. Nevertheless,
it is interesting to point out that the evidence in Figure 2, panel (a), clearly shows that the
Part C premium reduction is substantially more marked for 5-star plans than for 4/4.5-star
plans. Since for the years that we study the subsidy created by this reform was nearly
identical for 5-star and 4.5-star plans,37 the sharper decline for 5-star premiums is suggestive
of a response to the 5-star SEP. Furthermore, in terms of benefits, observing a decline in
generosity for 5-star plans is clearly not the result of the payment reform which, following
Stockley et al. (2014), could have instead caused an expansion. The pass-through would also
not explain why the OOPC differs for enrollees in different health conditions, nor would it
explain the differences between monopoly and duopoly markets that we discuss below.

       Finally, the presence of such heterogenous responses between the deductible and the
OOPC measures is particularly interesting as it indicates the need, stressed by Glazer and
McGuire (2000), to broaden the view of the margins along which insurers compete. There-
fore, we conclude by exploring the effect of the 5-star SEP on further margins that insurers
could modify. In Figures 4 (a)-(c), we thus report additional estimates of the quantile DID
for three soft quality measures: health care quality, customer service and drug access. These
are three of the individual measures composing the summary star rating. An interesting
result revealed by these estimates is that, while the distribution of premiums and MOOP
tend to converge toward the middle, the distribution of various quality measures like health
care quality and customer service widens: plans at the higher end of the distribution experi-
ence an increase relative to plans at the lower end of the distribution. There is an apparent

  37
     The new rebate is identical for 5 and 4.5 star contracts, while the bonus is set to 5% for 5-star and 4%
for 4.5-4 star plans. See further details in section II.

                                                     22
heterogeneity, however, across the various measures: while for health care quality plans at
the high end of the distribution experience a positive and statistically significant effect, for
customer service the effect is negative essentially throughout the entire distribution. We
should also notice that while we observe a statistically significant increase in heterogeneity
across quantiles, the effect is rather small in absolute terms.38 To help understand the quan-
tile DID results in the plots (a)-(c) of Figure 4, we can look at the evolution overtime of the
three soft measures in plots (d)-(f) of Figure 4. Clearly, the individual measures and the
overall star rating are likely to be correlated and, therefore, it is fairly straightforward to
identify which of the 5 groups is driving our quantile results. For example, in the case health
care quality, plans with less than 4-star in the treated counties performing worst than similar
plans in control counties are driving the results in the lower quantile. Instead, for higher
quantiles what is mostly driving the effect are the 5-star plans that in 2012 perform better
than their counterparts in the control counties. The case of health care quality also confirms
how our quantile approach allows us to uncover market-wide effects that a traditional DID
analysis focusing only of 5-star plans would not be able to highlight.39

C. Markets with 5-Star Contracts Monopoly or Duopoly
As discussed at the beginning of this section, counties where 5-star plans are present have
either one or two insurers offering these plans.40 The distinction between markets with
5-star plan monopoly and duopoly is potentially informative of the interactions between
competition and the 5-star SEP reform. Indeed, the reform is such that even enrollees of
a 5-star plan can switch plan within the year, provided they move to another 5-star plan.
As argued through our discussion of the insurers’ incentives, while irrelevant in monopoly
markets, this provision can exacerbate the downward pressure on plan generosity in duopoly
  38
     The small magnitude of these effects could be due to two factors. First, the rating can assume only 5
values, from 1 to 5 stars. Second, overtime the majority of plans achieved 4 stars or more in these three
individual measures. This latter feature can also explain the large change in the quantile position of the
5-star plans post 2012 for health care quality: given that several plans have 4 or more stars, a drop of one
star can generate a large changes in the quantile ranking.
  39
     In the web appendix we explore the effect of the 5-star SEP on further margins that insurers could
modify and that are related to Part D plan features that we observe. The decline in generosity of 5-star
plans is confirmed by two Part D plan characteristics: the share of most frequently used drugs that the plan
covers and the number of drugs that the plan covers without placing any utilization restrictions. For both
variables, generosity improves for plans in the low end of the distribution, while it declines for plans in the
medium-high end (where 5-star plans are located).
  40
     We observe 7 counties for which there were more than one 5-star plan in either 2012 or 2013.

                                                      23
markets. Moreover, since the typical 5-star plan in the data enrolls high risk beneficiaries,
a 5-star plan must internalize the risk of attracting the high cost enrollees of other 5-star
plans, which can alter the incentives and ability to engage in selection.

       To evaluate differences in market responses to the policy between monopoly and duopoly
markets, we repeat the previous analysis on two subsamples. The six top panels of Figure
5 report the distributional effects for the monopoly case, while the latter six report the
effect for the duopoly cases. The comparison of the two environments reveals that, while
the decline in premiums is roughly similar, the worsening in generosity for enrollees in poor
health is stronger for duopoly than for monopoly markets. Interestingly, for the duopoly case
we observe a slight worsening of the OOPC also for individuals in excellent health, suggesting
that insurers are constrained in their ability to select based on expected health cost, and in
the presence of competition may even dissuade good risk beneficiaries to mitigate potential
entry by bad risk beneficiaries.41

       Altogether, this evidence is suggestive that 5-star plans in duopoly markets decreased
their generosity and quality more than 5-star plans in monopoly markets. On the other hand,
these reductions are not accompanied by a more pronounced premium decline. Thus, relative
to the pre-policy period, the effect of the 5-star SEP appears to have been more beneficial
for consumers located in counties with a single firm offering 5-star plans than in areas with
competition between 5-star plans. This potentially problematic effect of competition is
an interesting manifestation of the complexity of making competition work in healthcare
markets. This result complements similar findings by Kuziemko, Meckel and Rossin-Slater
(2014) for the related, but different setting of Medicaid managed care where no outside
option is present.

D. Robustness Checks
Finally, we discuss two sets of robustness checks. The first one deals with the non-random
presence of 5-star plans across counties and it entails using a control group that matches the
treatment group on observable characteristics. By comparing demographic characteristics

  41
    This evidence is further supported by the results involving the risk score reported in the web appendix.
Both Part C and D risk scores experience a clear decline for 5-star plans in duopoly markets, but there is
no statistically significant decline for the case of monopoly markets.

                                                    24
of treated and control counties collected from the AHRF files of the Health Resources and
Services Administration, we find that treated counties tend to have a larger population of
Medicare enrollees (and eligibles) and slightly less of both female Medicare enrollees and
hospitals accepting Medicare patients (see Table A.2 in the web appendix). Thus, we repeat
the analysis a matched DID strategy: we perform the DID analysis on a sample that matches
the control counties to the treated ones by using a propensity score method.42 The results
obtained are reported in the web appendix and they show patterns nearly identical to what
is reported as our baseline results.

       The second set of robustness checks involves the way plan features are aggregated at
contract level. Indeed, while we perform our analysis at contract level, certain features, like
the Part D deductible are plan-specific and will differ among plans within the same contract.
For our baseline estimates presented above, the aggregation method used is an enrollment-
weighted average of the plans. As an alternative, we report in the web appendix estimates
obtained from using equally-weighted plans which reveal patterns that are broadly in line
with the baseline estimates discussed above.43



VI         Conclusions

The reform that, starting in 2012, allowed Medicare enrollees to switch at any point in time to
the highest quality, 5-star plans could have backfired. By undermining the use of rigid open
enrollment periods, a pillar of most insurance markets, this policy could have exacerbated
the adverse selection faced by 5-star plans, potentially triggering premium spikes or even
plan exit. The fact that this did not happen and that, despite the substantial growth in
within-year enrollment in 5-star contracts, their risk pool did not worsen is consistent with
theoretical literature starting from Rothschild and Stiglitz (1976) and Glazer and McGuire
(2000) that suggests health care plans alter their product seeking to attract good risks.
  42
     For the propensity score, the probability that a county has a 5-star contract is estimated over a range
of socio-economical, demographic and health indicators of the counties. Only the counties on the common
support of the propensity score between the treatment and the control groups are included. The matched
DID estimates reported in Figure A.2 are based on the probit estimates in column 6 of Table A.2 in the web
appendix.
  43
     For this analysis, we consider only the subset of characteristics varying at plan level.

                                                    25
   This paper shows that a relevant force behind these facts is the sophisticated response
adopted by suppliers. Both 5-star insurers and their competitors responded to the new
policy. The 5-star insurers lowered their premiums, while, at the same time, worsening the
amount of coverage offered by their plans. This contributed to expand their enrollment base,
without worsening their risk pool. The overall market adjustment entails a compression in
the characteristics of the available plans, with greater convergence in terms of both premiums
and financial characteristics of the plans.

   These results, based on a clean identification strategy, empirically document key features
of insurance markets. There are various implications for both research and policy. In terms of
research, our findings suggest the relevance of three main avenues for future research. First,
when modeling insures behavior it is necessary to consider that competition extends well
beyond premium competition and entails subtle aspects of plan design. Second, enrollees
inertia in plan choices makes prominent the need to better understand the drivers of plan
switching behavior. Third, effective risk adjustment systems need to take into account plan
switching behavior associated with the presence of special enrollment periods. The potential
enlargement of the set of “life qualifying events” in the ACA exchanges referenced in the
introduction might be a fruitful area to further analyze this issue.

   Finally, in terms of policy, our results are both encouraging and problematic. On the one
hand, the flexibility in product design that insurers retain in Medicare Pact C and D has
allowed the 5-star SEP to achieve the goal of bolstering enrollment into 5-star plans. More
generally, such flexibility is likely to help making the market sustainable for insurers. On
the other hand, however, the very presence of such flexibility implies difficulties in designing
rules capable of steering the market toward any public goal. In the context of the 5-star SEP,
the reduced generosity of 5-star plans could negatively affect the well being of the weakest
beneficiaries and could also represent a diminished allocative efficiency in the market.




References

Abaluck, Jason, and Jonathan Gruber. 2015. “Evolving choice inconsistencies in choice

                                              26
  of prescription drug insurance.” American Economic Review, forthcoming.

Akerlof, George. 1970. “The Market for Lemons: Quality Uncertainty and the Market
  Mechanism.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 488Ð500.

Azevedo, Eduardo, and Daniel Gottlieb. 2015. “Perfect Competition in Markets with
  Adverse Selection.” mimeo.

Batata, Amber. 2004. “The effect of HMOs on fee-for-service health care expenditures:
  evidence from Medicare revisited.” Journal of health economics, 23(5): 951–963.

Brown, Jason, Mark Duggan, Ilyana Kuziemko, and William Woolston. 2014.
  “How Does Risk Selection Respond to Risk Adjustment? New Evidence from the Medicare
  Advantage Program.” American Economic Review, 104(10): 3335–64.

Bundorf, M. Kate, Jonathan Levin, and Neale Mahoney. 2012. “Pricing and Welfare
  in Health Plan Choice.” American Economic Review, 102(7): 3214–48.

Cabral, M., M. Geruso, and N. Mahoney. 2014. “Does Privatized Medicare Benefit
  Patients or Producers? Evidence from Medicare Advantage.” NBER Working Paper 20470.

Cao, Zhun, and Thomas G McGuire. 2003. “Service-level selection by HMOs in Medi-
  care.” Journal of Health Economics, 22(6): 915–931.

Carey, Colleen. 2016. “ Technological Change and Risk Adjustment: Benefit Design In-
  centives in Medicare Part D.” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 9(1).

Chetverikov, Denis, Bradley Larsen, and Christopher Palmer. 2015. “IV Quantile
  Regression for Group-level Treatments, with an Application to the Effects of Trade on the
  Distribution of Wages.” Econometrica, forthcoming.

Crawford, Gregory S. 2012. “Endogenous product choice: A progress report.” Interna-
  tional Journal of Industrial Organization, 30(3): 315–320.

Crocker, Keith J., and John R. Moran. 2003. “Contracting with Limited Commit-
  ment: Evidence from Employment-Based Health Insurance Contract.” RAND Journal of
  Economics, 34(4).

                                            27
Curto, Vilsa, Liran Einav, Jonathan Levin, and Jay Bhattacharya. 2014. “Can
  Health Insurance Competition Work? Evidence from Medicare Advantage.” National Bu-
  reau of Economic Research Working Paper 20818.

Cutler, David M., and Sarah J. Reber. 1998. “Paying for Health Insurance: The Trade-
  Off between Competition and Adverse Selection.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics,
  113(2): 433–466.

Darden, Michael, and Ian M McCarthy. 2014. “The Star Treatment: Estimating the Im-
  pact of Star Ratings on Medicare Advantage Enrollments.” Journal of Human Resources,
  forthcoming.

David Dranove, Daniel Kessler, Mark McClellan, and Mark Satterthwaite. 2003.
  “Is more information better? The effects of Òreport cardsÓ on health care providers.”
  Journal of Political Economy, 111(3): 555–588.

Decarolis, Francesco. 2015. “Medicare Part D: Are Insurers Gaming the Low Income
  Subsidy Design?” American Economic Review, 105(4): 1547–80.

Decarolis, Francesco, Andrea Guglielmo, and Calvin Luscombe. 2016. “Flight to
  Quality in Medicare Plans: Who Switches to Top Quality Plans and Why.” mimeo.

Duggan, Mark, Amanda Starc, and Boris Vabson. forthcoming. “Who Benefits When
  the Government Pays More? Pass-Through in the Medicare Advantage Program.” Journal
  of Public Economics.

Duggan, Mark, Patrick Healy, and Fiona Scott Morton. 2008. “Providing prescription
  drug coverage to the elderly: America’s experiment with Medicare Part D.” The Journal
  of Economic Perspectives, 69–92.

Einav, Liran, Amy Finkelstein, and Jonathan Levin. 2010. “Beyond Testing: Empir-
  ical Models of Insurance Markets.” Annual Review of Economics, 2: 311–336.

Einav, Liran, Amy Finkelstein, and Mark R. Cullen. 2010. “Estimating Welfare
  in Insurance Markets Using Variation in Prices.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics,
  125(3): 877–921.

                                           28
Einav, Liran, and Amy Finkelstein. 2011. “Selection in Insurance Markets: Theory and
  Empirics in Pictures.” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 25(1): 115–138.

Ellis, Randall, and Thomas G. McGuire. 2007. “Predictability and predictiveness in
  health care spending.” Journal of Health Economics, 26(1): 25–48.

Fang, Hanming, Michael Keane, and Dan Silverman. 2008. “Sources of Advantageous
  Selection: Evidence from the Medigap Insurance Market.” Journal of Political Economy,
  116(2): 303–350.

Fan, Ying. 2013. “Ownership consolidation and product characteristics: A study of the US
  daily newspaper market.” American Economic Review, 103(5): 1598–1628.

Farinha Luz, Vitor. 2015. “Dynamic Competitive Insurance.” mimeo.

Frank, Richard G., Jacob Glazer, and Thomas G. McGuire. 2000. “Measuring ad-
  verse selection in managed health care.” Journal of Health Economics, 19(6): 829–854.

Geruso, Michael, and Timothy Layton. 2015. “Upcoding: Evidence from Medicare on
  Squishy Risk Adjustment.” National Bureau of Economic Research.

Glazer, Jacob, and Thomas G. McGuire. 2006. “Optimal quality reporting in markets
  for health plans.” Journal of Health Economics, 25(2): 295–310.

Glazer, Jacob, and Thomas McGuire. 2000. “Optimal Risk Adjustment in Markets
  with Adverse Selection: An Application to Managed Care.” American Economic Review,
  1055–1071.

Guglielmo, Andrea. 2016. “Competition and Costs in Medicare Advantage.” mimeo.

Hendel, Igal, and Alessandro Lizzeri. 2003. “The Role of Commitment in Dynamic Con-
  tracts: Evidence from Life Insurance.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 118(1): 299–
  328.

Ho, Kate, Joseph Hogan, and Fiona Scott Morton. 2014. “The Impact of Consumer
  Inattention on Insurer Pricing in the Medicare Part D Program.” mimeo.

                                           29
Kuziemko, NIlyana, Katherine Meckel, and Maya Rossin-Slater. 2014. “Do Insurers
  Risk-Select Against Each Other? Evidence from Medicaid and Implications for Health
  Reform.” mimeo.

Larsen, Bradley. 2015. “Occupational Licensing and Quality: Distributional and Hetero-
  geneous Effects in the Teaching Profession.”

Layton, Timothy J., and Andrew M. Ryan. 2014. “The Effect of the Medicare Advan-
  tage Quality Based Payment Demonstration on Quality of Care in Medicare.”

Layton, Timothy J., Rndall P. Ellis, and Thomas G. McGuire. 2015. “Assessing
  Incentives for Adverse Selection in Health Plans Payment Systems.” NBER Working Paper
  21531.

Lester, Ben, Ali Shourideh, Venky Venkateswaran, and Ariel Zetlin-Jones. 2015.
  “Screening and Adverse Selection in a Frictional Market.” mimeo.

Lu, SF. 2012. “Information disclosure, multitasking and product quality: Evidence from
  nursing homes.” J. Econom. Management Strategy, v21, 673–705.

Lustig, Joshua. 2012. “The Welfare Effects of Adverse Selection in Privatized Medicare.”
  mimeo.

Madeira, Tarso. 2015. “The Cost of Removing Deadlines: Evidence from Medicare Part
  D.” mimeo.

Mahoney, Neale, and Glen Weyl. 2014. “Imperfect Competition in Selection Markets.”
  mimeo.

McWilliams, J Michael, John Hsu, and Joseph P Newhouse. 2012. “New risk-
  adjustment system was associated with reduced favorable selection in Medicare Advan-
  tage.” Health Affairs, 31(12): 2630–2640.

Newhouse, Joseph P, and Thomas G McGuire. 2014. “How Successful Is Medicare
  Advantage?” Milbank Quarterly, 92(2): 351–394.

                                              30
Newhouse, Joseph P, J Michael McWilliams, Mary Price, Jie Huang, Bruce
  Fireman, and John Hsu. 2013. “Do Medicare Advantage plans select enrollees in higher
  margin clinical categories?” Journal of health economics, 32(6): 1278–1288.

Nosal, Kathleen. 2012. “Estimating Switching Costs for Medicare Advantage Plans.”
  Mimeo.

Polyakova, Maria. 2014. “Regulation of insurance with adverse selection and switching
  costs: Evidence from Medicare Part D.” mimeo.

Reid, Rachel O, Partha Deb, Benjamin L Howell, and William H Shrank. 2013.
  “Association Between Medicare Advantage Plan Star Ratings and EnrollmentStar Ratings
  for Medicare Advantage Plan.” Journal of American Medical Association, 309(3): 267–274.

Rothschild, Michael, and Joseph Stiglitz. 1976. “Equilibrium in Competitive Insurance
  Markets: An Essay on the Economics of Imperfect Information.” Quarterly Journal of
  Economics, 90(4): 629Ð649.

Shepard, Mark. 2016. “Hospital Network Competition and Adverse Selection: Evidence
  from the Massachusetts Health Insurance Exchange.” mimeo.

Song, Z., Landrum M.B., and M.E. Chernew. 2013. “Competitive Bidding in Medicare
  Advantage: Effect of Benchmark Changes on Plan Bids.” Journal of Health Economics,
  32(6): 1301–1312.

Starc, Amanda. 2014. “Insurer pricing and consumer welfare: evidence from Medigap.”
  The RAND Journal of Economics, 45(1): 198–220.

Stockley, K., T.G. McGuire, C. Afendulis, and M.E. Chernew. 2014. “Premium
  Transparency in the Medicare Advantage Market: Implications for Premiums, Benefits
  and Efficiency.” NBER Working Paper No. 20208.

Veiga, Andre, and E. Glen Weyl. 2016. “Product Design in Selection Markets.” Quarterly
  Journal of Economics, 126(4).

                                            31
Werner, Rachel M, R Tamara Konetzka, Elizabeth A Stuart, Edward C Norton,
  Daniel Polsky, and Jeongyoung Park. 2009. “Impact of public reporting on quality
  of postacute care.” Health services research, 44(4): 1169–1187.

Wollman, Thomas. 2014. “Trucks without bailouts: Equilibrium product characteristics
  for commercial vehicles.” Mimeo, Harvard Unicersity.




                                             32
                                         Table 1: Descriptive Statistics for Part C

                                                                                             2009-2011
                                                         Control     Group                                   Treatment Group
                                                 Less 4 Star            4&4.5    Star           Less 4 Star        4&4.5 Star                5 Star
                                               Mean        N          Mean          N         Mean        N      Mean      N              Mean N
  Part C Premium                               356.0    25,569        471.3       5,672       373.5     3,373 450.8       665             757.1 421
  Part D Total Premium                         235.7    25,588        329.4       5,672       223.2     3,375 206.7       665             235.3 421
  Maximum OOP Part C                           4,525     4,021        3,863       1,968       4,253      402     3,820    227             2,771 150
  Part D Deductible                            69.95    25,588        47.46       5,672       71.73     3,375 30.73       665             20.74 421
  Part C OOPC - Excellent Health               937.3    24,664        835.4       5,260       926.6     3,255 788.5       638             797.4 421
  Part C OOPC - Poor Health                    2,234    24,664        1,793       5,260       2,168     3,255 1,775       638             1,623 421
  Drug Access                                  3.199    17,461        4.141       5,341       3.159     2,251 4.157       644             4.953 407
  Customer Service                             2.526    14,556        3.767       4,150       2.365     2,007 3.470       498             4.700 407
  Health Care Quality                          3.102    18,411        4.038       5,345       3.057     2,318 4.019       644             4.749 407

                                                                                             2012-2013
                                                         Control     Group                                   Treatment Group
                                                 Less 4 Star            4&4.5    Star           Less 4 Star        4&4.5 Star                5 Star
                                               Mean        N          Mean          N         Mean        N      Mean      N              Mean N
  Part C Premium                               358.7    10,325        424.0       4,811       296.6     1,022 425.3       464             631.4 270
  Part D Total Premium                         254.6    10,344        305.0       4,811       249.8     1,026 232.1       464             215.4 270
  Maximum OOP Part C                           4,864     8,318        3,739       4,521       4,494      851     3,798    437             3,377 270
  Part D Deductible                            88.52    10,344        45.58       4,811       113.5     1,026 35.35       464             30.61 270
  Part C OOPC - Excellent Health               1,038     9,656        982.9       4,531       979.1      933     949.8    447             988.8 270
  Part C OOPC - Poor Health                    2,649     9,656        2,234       4,531       2,443      933     2,186    447             2,174 270
  Drug Access                                  3.257     7,967        3.912       4,738       2.957      792     3.848    460             4.656 270
  Customer Service                             3.322     8,339        3.926       4,685       2.925      832     3.445    456             4.296 270
  Health Care Quality                          3.729     8,330        4.250       4,734       3.566      837     4.222    459             4.815 270

Notes: the unit of observation is Contract/County/Year. There are 160 treated counties (i.e., counties with at leas one 5-star plan in 2012 or 2013)
and 1,084 control counties (i.e., counties with no 5-star plans, but at least one 4 or 4.5-star plan in 2012 or 2013). The top panel includes observations
from 2009 to 2011. The bottom panel includes observations from 2012 to 2013. The “Treatment” sample includes observation from contract with
5 Star rating in either 2012 or 2013. The “Control” sample include contracts with either 4 star in either 2012 or 2013 in counties without 5-star
contracts. “Premium Part C” is the annual Premium for Part C. “Premium Part D” is the annual Premium for Part D. “Maximum OOP Part C” or
MOOP is the maximum outside of pocket expenditure for in network service, excluding Part D drugs (we observe it starting from 2011). “Part D
Deductible” is the maximum annual amount of initial out of pocket expenses for Part D drugs.“Part C OOPC Excellent (Poor)” is the average yearly
out-of-pocket for individuals with Excellent (Poor) heath status for Part C coverage. “Health Care Quality” is a star rating (1-5), over member’s
evaluation of health care quality (CAHPS Survey). “Customer Service” is a star rating (1-5), over ability of the health plan to provide information
or help when members need it (CAHPS Survey). “Drug Access” is a star rating (1-5) over the ease of getting prescriptions filled when using the plan
(CAHPS Survey). “Health Care Quality”, “Customer Service” and “Drug Access” are measured at contract level. “Premium Part C”, “Premium Part
D”, “Maximum OOP Part C” ’, “Deductible Part D”, “Part C OOPC Excellent (Poor)” and “Drug OOPC Excellent (Poor)” are measured at plan level
and aggregated at contract level as weighted average, with enrollment as weights. Plan with less than 10 enrollees are imputed 5 enrollees.




     ‘
                     Table 2: Domain Measures for Part C and D - Year 2012


                  Managed Care                                             Prescription Drugs

 Staying Healthy: screenings, tests,            12          Drug Plan Customer Service                     3
 vaccines

                                                            Member Complaints, problems get-
 Managing Chronic (long-term) Con-              9                                                          3
                                                            ting services, and improvement in
 ditions
                                                            the drug plan’s performance

 Member Experience with the Health              5           Member Experience with the Drug                3
 Plan                                                       Plan

 Member Complaints, problems get-               3           Patient safety and accuracy of drug            6
 ting services, and improvement in                          pricing
 the health plan’s performance

 Health Plan Customer Service                   2
Notes: The table reports the list of the domain measures used to calculate the Part C and D summary ratings
in 2012. There are 5 domain measures for part C and 4 for Part D. The numbers in the table that follow the
description of each domain measure indicate the number of underlying individual measures.




                    Table 3: Number of 5-star Contracts by Insurer and Year

                  Year                                       2009   2010 2011    2012   2013

                  Baystate Health, Inc.                        3      3      3     3      3
                  Group Health Cooperative                    13     13     13    13     13
                  Gundersen Lutheran Health System Inc.       11     11     11    16     16
                  Humana Inc.                                  0     0      11    30     30
                  Kaiser Foundation Health Plan, Inc.         63     63     64    64     64
                  Marshfield Clinic.                          32     32     32    32     36
                  Martin’s Point Health Care, Inc.            12     15     16    16     18

                  Total                                      134    137    150    174    180

Notes: For each of the seven insurers offering at least one 5-star contract in 2012-2013 (i.e., treated contracts),
the table reports the total number of counties where these treated contracts where offered in all the years from
2009 to 2013.




                                                      34
                                                                                                        Figure 1: Maps of 5-Star Counties




                            5 Star
                            4−4.5 Star
                            < 4 Star


Notes: The heat map reports with the darkest color the set of counties where at least one 5-star plan was
offered in 2012 or 2013. The lightest color counties are those where in the same period no plan got a score of
4 or higher. The remaining counties have at least one plan with a score of al least 4, but no plan with a score
of 5.


                                                                                               Figure 2: Plan Characteristics Overtime
                                           (a) Part C Premium                                                                                            (b) Part D Premium                                                                                            (c) Part D Deductible
         800




                                                                                                                           350




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           120    100
                                                                                                                                   300
                                                                                                                 Part D Tot. Premium
              600




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Part D Deductible
  Part C Premium




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          80
                                                                                                                         250




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  60
 400




                                                                                                               200




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           40
         200




                                                                                                                           150




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           20




                       2009                    2010              2011                 2012            2013                               2009                2010              2011                 2012            2013                                2009                2010              2011                 2012             2013
                                                                 Year                                                                                                          Year                                                                                                           Year

                               Control − Less than 4         Control − 4/4.5 Star                                                               Control − Less than 4      Control − 4/4.5 Star                                                                Control − Less than 4      Control − 4/4.5 Star
                               Treatment − Less than 4       Treatment − 4/4.5 Star     Treatment − 5 Star                                      Treatment − Less than 4    Treatment − 4/4.5 Star     Treatment − 5 Star                                       Treatment − Less than 4    Treatment − 4/4.5 Star     Treatment − 5 Star


                                     (d) Maximum OOP Part C                                                                                 (e) Part C OOPC - Poor Health                                                                (f) Part C OOPC - Excellent Health
               5000




                                                                                                                                  3000




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     3000
                     4500




                                                                                                                                  2500




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     2500
     In Network MOOP




                                                                                                                     Medical OOPC




                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Medical OOPC
               4000




                                                                                                                             2000




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     2000
        3500




                                                                                                                     1500




                                                                                                                                                                                                                             1500
               3000




                                                                                                                                  1000




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     1000
               2500




                                                                                                                                  500




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     500




                            2009                2010              2011                 2012             2013                             2009                 2010              2011                 2012             2013                         2009                    2010              2011                 2012            2013
                                                                  Year                                                                                                          Year                                                                                                         Year

                                   Control − Less than 4      Control − 4/4.5 Star                                                               Control − Less than 4      Control − 4/4.5 Star                                                           Control − Less than 4         Control − 4/4.5 Star
                                   Treatment − Less than 4    Treatment − 4/4.5 Star     Treatment − 5 Star                                      Treatment − Less than 4    Treatment − 4/4.5 Star     Treatment − 5 Star                                  Treatment − Less than 4       Treatment − 4/4.5 Star     Treatment − 5 Star


Notes: The solid lines of different colors represent the average value of the outcome variable across contracts with different star
ratings (5 star; 4 and 4.5 star; less than 4 star) and for different set of counties (treated and control).




                                                                                                                                                                            35
                                                    Figure 3: Quantile Regression Estimates for Plan Characteristics
                                 (a) Part C Premium                                                                                                             (b) Part D Premium                                                                                                                                 (c) Part D Deductible
           100




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              60
                                                                                        1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           1
                                                                                                                     20
                                                                                        .1 .2 .3 .4 .5 .6 .7 .8 .9




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       .1 .2 .3 .4 .5 .6 .7 .8 .9




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           .1 .2 .3 .4 .5 .6 .7 .8 .9
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   40
                   0




                                                                                              Fracton 5 Star Plan




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Fracton 5 Star Plan




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Fracton 5 Star Plan
                                                                                                                     0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Part D Deductible
    Part C Premium
          −100




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         20
                                                                                                                     −20
 −200




                                                                                                                     −40




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              0
           −300




                                                                                                                     −60




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              −20
                                                                                        0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           0
                       10      20      30      40      50      60    70   80    90                                                               10        20        30        40      50      60         70        80        90                                                                          10      20      30      40      50      60    70   80    90
                                                    Percentile                                                                                                                      Percentile                                                                                                                                         Percentile

                       Effect :                           Mean             Percentile                                                            Effect :                                   Mean                     Percentile                                                                           Effect :                           Mean             Percentile
                       Confidence Intervals:                                                                                                     Confidence Intervals:                                                                                                                                    Confidence Intervals:
                       Fraction 5 Star:                   Pre 2012         Post 2012                                                             Fraction 5 Star:                           Pre 2012                 Post 2012                                                                            Fraction 5 Star:                   Pre 2012         Post 2012


                            (d) Maximum OOP Part C                                                                                                 (e) Part C OOPC - Poor Health                                                                                                                (f) Part C OOPC - Excellent Health
           400




                                                                                                                                     200




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              200
                                                                                        1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           1
                                                                                        .1 .2 .3 .4 .5 .6 .7 .8 .9




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     .1 .2 .3 .4 .5 .6 .7 .8 .9




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           .1 .2 .3 .4 .5 .6 .7 .8 .9
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Part C OOPC Excellent
                                                                                                                                           100




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   100
                                                                                              Fracton 5 Star Plan




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Fracton 5 Star Plan




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Fracton 5 Star Plan
                                                                                                                             Part C OOPC Poor
 In Network MOOP
              200




                                                                                                                                     0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           0
     0




                                                                                                                           −100




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  −100
           −200




                                                                                                                                     −200




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              −200
                                                                                        0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           0
                       10      20      30      40      50      60    70   80    90                                                                    10        20        30        40      50      60         70        80    90                                                                         10      20      30      40      50      60    70   80    90
                                                    Percentile                                                                                                                           Percentile                                                                                                                                    Percentile

                       Effect :                           Mean             Percentile                                                                 Effect :                                 Mean                       Percentile                                                                      Effect :                           Mean             Percentile
                       Confidence Intervals:                                                                                                          Confidence Intervals:                                                                                                                               Confidence Intervals:
                       Fraction 5 Star:                   Pre 2012         Post 2012                                                                  Fraction 5 Star:                         Pre 2012                   Post 2012                                                                       Fraction 5 Star:                   Pre 2012         Post 2012


Notes: The solid, dark line is drawn using the coefficient estimated separately for each one of the quantiles (τ = 0.05, 0.1, ..., 0.9,
0.95). The two slid lines around it show the 95% confidence interval. The dark, horizontal, dashed line shows the mean effect, the
lighter lines denotes the 95% confidence interval. Squares measure the share of 5-star plans in the pre-policy period, while circles
measure them in the post-policy period.




                                                                                                                                                                                         36
       Figure 4: Quantile Regression Estimates for Plan Characteristics - Other Characteristics
                                        (a) Health Care Quality                                                                                                         (b) Customer Service                                                                                                                     (c) Drug Access
               .4




                                                                                                                                             .4




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               .4
                                                                                                      1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       1
                                                                                                      .1 .2 .3 .4 .5 .6 .7 .8 .9




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    .1 .2 .3 .4 .5 .6 .7 .8 .9




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       .1 .2 .3 .4 .5 .6 .7 .8 .9
                                                                                                                                                    .2
                     .2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               .2
 Health Care Quality




                                                                                                            Fracton 5 Star Plan




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Fracton 5 Star Plan




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Fracton 5 Star Plan
                                                                                                                                   Customer Service




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Drug Access
                                                                                                                                             0
             0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         0
                                                                                                                                      −.2
    −.2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  −.2
                                                                                                                                             −.4
               −.4




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               −.4
                                                                                                                                             −.6
               −.6




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               −.6
                                                                                                      0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       0
                                  10     20     30     40      50      60     70       80     90                                                                10     20     30     40      50      60     70       80     90                                                                     10     20     30     40      50      60     70       80     90
                                                            Percentile                                                                                                                    Percentile                                                                                                                         Percentile

                              Effect :                            Mean                   Percentile                                                         Effect :                            Mean                   Percentile                                                              Effect :                            Mean                   Percentile
                              Confidence Intervals:                                                                                                         Confidence Intervals:                                                                                                              Confidence Intervals:
                              Fraction 5 Star:                    Pre 2012               Post 2012                                                          Fraction 5 Star:                    Pre 2012               Post 2012                                                               Fraction 5 Star:                    Pre 2012               Post 2012


                                        (d) Health Care Quality                                                                                                          (e) Customer Service                                                                                                                    (f) Drug Access
             5




                                                                                                                                            5




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              5       4.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 (mean) LagDrugAccessStar
                     4.5
  Health Care Quality




                                                                                                                                   Customer Service
                                                                                                                                                 4




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                4
           4




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        3.5
                                                                                                                                    3
 3.5




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  3
             3




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              2.5
                                                                                                                                            2




                           2009                2010              2011                 2012                   2013                                        2009                2010              2011                 2012                   2013                                             2009                2010              2011                 2012                   2013
                                                                 Year                                                                                                                          Year                                                                                                                               Year

                                  Control − Less than 4      Control − 4/4.5 Star                                                                               Control − Less than 4      Control − 4/4.5 Star                                                                                    Control − Less than 4      Control − 4/4.5 Star
                                  Treatment − Less than 4    Treatment − 4/4.5 Star     Treatment − 5 Star                                                      Treatment − Less than 4    Treatment − 4/4.5 Star     Treatment − 5 Star                                                           Treatment − Less than 4    Treatment − 4/4.5 Star     Treatment − 5 Star


Notes: For plot (a)-(c) the structure of the figure is analogous to what described for Figure 3, only the outcomes differ as here we
consider thee components of the star rating system: Health Care Quality, Customer Service and Drug Access. Similarly, for plot
(d)-(f) the structure of the figure is analogous to what described for Figure 2.




                                                                                                                                                                                            37
                                                   Figure 5: Quantile Regression Estimates - Monopoly and Duopoly Counties
                                                                                                                             Part I: 5-Star Monopoly Counties
                                                      (a) Part C Premium                                                                                                                    (b) Part D Premium                                                                                                                     (c) Part D Deductible
     −400 −300 −200 −100 0 100 200 300




                                                                                                                                                    90




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          60
                                                                                                                       1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 1
                                                                                                                       .1 .2 .3 .4 .5 .6 .7 .8 .9




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           .1 .2 .3 .4 .5 .6 .7 .8 .9




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 .1 .2 .3 .4 .5 .6 .7 .8 .9
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                40
                                                                                                                                                    45
                                                                                                                             Fracton 5 Star Plan




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Fracton 5 Star Plan




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Fracton 5 Star Plan
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Part D Deductible
                 Part C Premium




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      20
                                                                                                                                                    0
                                                                                                                                                    −45




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          −20
                                                                                                                                                    −90
                                                                                                                       0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 0
                                          10      20      30      40       50      60    70   80        90                                                                   10        20        30        40      50      60      70    80       90                                                                      10      20      30       40      50      60     70   80       90
                                                                        Percentile                                                                                                                              Percentile                                                                                                                              Percentile

                                          Effect :                            Mean                 Percentile                                                                Effect :                                 Mean                Percentile                                                                      Effect :                           Mean               Percentile
                                          Confidence Intervals:                                                                                                              Confidence Intervals:                                                                                                                        Confidence Intervals:
                                          Fraction 5 Star:                    Pre 2012             Post 2012                                                                 Fraction 5 Star:                         Pre 2012            Post 2012                                                                       Fraction 5 Star:                   Pre 2012           Post 2012


                                              (d) Maximum OOP Part C                                                                                              (e) Part C OOPC - Excellent Health                                                                                                                      (f) Part C OOPC - Poor Health
                                                                                                                                                                 400




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               400
               400




                                                                                                                1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        1
                                                                                                                .1 .2 .3 .4 .5 .6 .7 .8 .9




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  .1 .2 .3 .4 .5 .6 .7 .8 .9




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        .1 .2 .3 .4 .5 .6 .7 .8 .9
                                                                                                                                                     Part C OOPC Excellent
                                                                                                                                                                      200




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    200
                                                                                                                      Fracton 5 Star Plan




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Fracton 5 Star Plan




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Fracton 5 Star Plan
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Part C OOPC Poor
              200
 In Network MOOP




                                                                                                                                                              0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              0
     0




                                                                                                                                                     −200




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    −200
               −200




                                                                                                                                                                 −400




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               −400
                                                                                                                0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        0
                                         10      20      30       40      50      60     70   80       90                                                                         10        20        30    40       50      60     70    80       90                                                                      10      20      30      40       50      60    70   80        90
                                                                       Percentile                                                                                                                                 Percentile                                                                                                                             Percentile

                                         Effect :                           Mean               Percentile                                                                      Effect :                                 Mean                  Percentile                                                                   Effect :                            Mean                 Percentile
                                         Confidence Intervals:                                                                                                                 Confidence Intervals:                                                                                                                       Confidence Intervals:
                                         Fraction 5 Star:                   Pre 2012           Post 2012                                                                       Fraction 5 Star:                         Pre 2012              Post 2012                                                                    Fraction 5 Star:                    Pre 2012             Post 2012




                                                                                                                                   Part II: 5-Star Duopoly Counties
                                                      (g) Part C Premium                                                                                                                    (h) Part D Premium                                                                                                                     (i) Part D Deductible
     −400 −300 −200 −100 0 100 200 300




                                                                                                                                                    90
                                                                                                                       1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          100
                                                                                                                       .1 .2 .3 .4 .5 .6 .7 .8 .9




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           .1 .2 .3 .4 .5 .6 .7 .8 .9




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 .1 .2 .3 .4 .5 .6 .7 .8 .9
                                                                                                                                                    45
                                                                                                                             Fracton 5 Star Plan




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Fracton 5 Star Plan




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Fracton 5 Star Plan
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Part D Deductible
                 Part C Premium




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           50
                                                                                                                                                    0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                0
                                                                                                                                                    −45
                                                                                                                                                    −90




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          −50
                                                                                                                       0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 0
                                          10      20      30      40       50      60    70   80        90                                                                   10        20        30        40      50      60      70    80       90                                                                      10      20      30       40      50      60     70   80       90
                                                                        Percentile                                                                                                                              Percentile                                                                                                                              Percentile

                                          Effect :                            Mean                 Percentile                                                                Effect :                                 Mean                Percentile                                                                      Effect :                           Mean               Percentile
                                          Confidence Intervals:                                                                                                              Confidence Intervals:                                                                                                                        Confidence Intervals:
                                          Fraction 5 Star:                    Pre 2012             Post 2012                                                                 Fraction 5 Star:                         Pre 2012            Post 2012                                                                       Fraction 5 Star:                   Pre 2012           Post 2012


                                              (j) Maximum OOP Part C                                                                                             (k) Part C OOPC - Excellent Health                                                                                                                       (l) Part C OOPC - Poor Health
               1000




                                                                                                                                                                 400




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               400
                                                                                                                1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        1
                                                                                                                .1 .2 .3 .4 .5 .6 .7 .8 .9




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  .1 .2 .3 .4 .5 .6 .7 .8 .9




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        .1 .2 .3 .4 .5 .6 .7 .8 .9
                                                                                                                                                     Part C OOPC Excellent
                                                                                                                                                                      200




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    200
                                                                                                                      Fracton 5 Star Plan




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Fracton 5 Star Plan




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Fracton 5 Star Plan
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Part C OOPC Poor
              500
 In Network MOOP




                                                                                                                                                              0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              0
     0




                                                                                                                                                     −200




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    −200
               −500




                                                                                                                                                                 −400




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               −400
                                                                                                                0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        0




                                         10      20      30       40      50      60     70   80       90                                                                         10        20        30    40       50      60     70    80       90                                                                      10      20      30      40       50      60    70   80        90
                                                                       Percentile                                                                                                                                 Percentile                                                                                                                             Percentile

                                         Effect :                           Mean               Percentile                                                                      Effect :                                 Mean                  Percentile                                                                   Effect :                            Mean                 Percentile
                                         Confidence Intervals:                                                                                                                 Confidence Intervals:                                                                                                                       Confidence Intervals:
                                         Fraction 5 Star:                   Pre 2012           Post 2012                                                                       Fraction 5 Star:                         Pre 2012              Post 2012                                                                    Fraction 5 Star:                    Pre 2012             Post 2012


Notes: The structure of the table is analogous to that of Table 3. The top panel includes as treated counties only those with one
insurer offering all 5-star plans. Bottom panel includes as treated counties only those with two insurers offering all 5-star plans.




                                                                                                                                                                                                                  38
          For Publication on the Authors’ Web Page
                           Insurers’ Response to Selection Risk:
                      Evidence from Medicare Enrollment Reforms


                                      Web Appendix

A. Data and Institutions
The dataset was assembled from data made publicly available by CMS (Center for Medicare
and Medicaid Services). In particular, data on monthly enrollment for the years 2009-2013
at plan level was downloaded from:

           http://www.cms.gov/Research-Statistics-Data-and-Systems/
        Statistics-Trends-and-Reports/MCRAdvPartDEnrolData/index.html.

The Crosswalk Files available from the same web site were used to link plans through the
years. Premiums and plan financial characteristics are from the Premium Files:

            http://www.cms.gov/Medicare/Prescription-Drug-Coverage/
                        PrescriptionDrugCovGenIn/index.html.

Plans formulary and pharmacy network are from the FRF (Formulary Reference Files):

       https://www.cms.gov/PrescriptionDrugCovContra/03_RxContracting_
                                FormularyGuidance.asp

Part C and D performance data determining the star ratings were obtained from:

           https://www.cms.gov/medicare/prescription-drug-coverage/
                  prescriptiondrugcovgenin/performancedata.html

Demographic characteristics for the geographic areas are the only ancillary data source and
were obtained from:

                         http://ahrf.hrsa.gov/download.htm.


                                             i
    The calculation of the star rating described in the main text is illustrated below in greater
details for the case of the Part D rating for year 2012. A weighted average of the scores earned
on each of the individual measures determines the final score.


                      Table A.1: Rating Calculation for Part D - Year 2012
                         Individual Measures                                     Domain          Summary
  Definition                                 Type of Data           Weights      Measures        Measures
  D01 Call Center - Hold Time                Call Center Monitored   1.5
                                             by CMS
                                                                            Domain 1
  D02 Call Center - Foreign Language In- Call Center Monitored       1.5
                                                                            Drug Plan Cus-
  terpreter                                  by CMS
                                                                            tomer Service
  D03 Appeals Auto-Forward                   Independent Review      1.5
                                             Entity
  D04 Appeals Upheld                         Independent Review      1.5
                                             Entity
  D05 Enrollment Timeliness                  Medicare Advantage       1                        Summary
                                             Prescription     Drug                             Rating
                                             System (CMS)
  D06 - Complaints about the Drug Plan       Complaint Tracking      1.5    Domain 2
                                             System (CMS)                   Member Com-
  D07 - Beneficiary Access and Performance CMS Administrative        1.5    plaints,    Prob-
  Problems                                   Data                           lems      Getting
  D08 - Members Choosing to Leave the Medicare Beneficiary           1.5    Services,    and
  Plan                                       Database Suite of Sys-         Choosing       to
                                             tems (CMS)                     Leave the Plan
  D09 - Getting Information From Drug CAHPS Survey                   1.5    Domain 3
  Plan                                                                      Experience with
  D10 - Rating of Drug Plan                  CAHPS Survey            1.5    Drug Plan
  D11 - Getting Needed Prescription Drugs CAHPS Survey               1.5
  D12 - MPF Composite                        Prescription     Drug    1
                                             Event, Medicare Plan
                                             Finder, Health Man-
                                             agement Plan System            Domain 4
                                             and Medispan                   Drug      Pricing
  D13 - High Risk Medication                 Prescription     Drug    3     and       Patient
                                             Event                          Safety
  D14 - Diabetes Treatment                   Prescription     Drug    3
                                             Event
  D15 - Part D Medication Adherence for Prescription          Drug    3
  Oral Diabetes Medications                  Event
  D16 - Part D Medication Adherence for Prescription          Drug    3
  Hypertension (ACEI or ARB)                 Event
  D17 - Part D Medication Adherence for Prescription          Drug    3
  Cholesterol (Statins)                      Event
Notes: The table reports the details of how the 2012 summary rating is calculated for Part D. There are
three sets of measures: individual measures (17 measures, reported in the first column), domain measures (4
measures, reported in the fourth column) and the final summary rating (fifth column). The third column
describes the weights associated to each of 17 the individual measures in the calculation of the corresponding
domain measures. The 4 domain measures are equally weighted in the calculation of the summary rating.




                                                     ii
C. Matched Sample: Probit Estimates


   We report in Table A.2 the probit estimates used for the construction of the matched
DID estimates. Table A.2 reports the estimates for four model specifications (i.e., columns
1-2, 3-4, 5 and 6) where we gradually increase the set of controls. All controls are county-
level demographic characteristics collected from the AHRF files of the Health Resources and
Services Administration. The estimates reported in column 2 and 4 differ from those in
columns 1 and 3, respectively, for the sample of counties included: due to missing data for
some characteristics, for columns 2 and 4 we use a smaller sample than that used for columns
1 and 3. The sample used for columns 2 and 4 is the same used for columns 5 and 6. The
matched DID reported in the main text are based on the estimates in column 6 of Table A.2.

             Table A.2: Probit Results - Probability of County Having 5 Star Plan
                                    (1)             (2)             (3)             (4)             (5)             (6)
                               5 Star County   5 Star County   5 Star County   5 Star County   5 Star County   5 Star County

      MA Enrollees                2.981***        2.334***        2.858***        2.268***        2.234***        2.255***
                                   (0.448)         (0.484)          (0.454)        (0.487)         (0.513)         (0.518)
      Pop. Male > 65            0.000951***     0.00126***      0.000896***     0.00120***        0.00100*       0.00105*
                                 (0.000333)      (0.000461)      (0.000317)     (0.000456)      (0.000555)      (0.000600)
      Pop. Female > 65         -0.000787***    -0.000973***    -0.000747***    -0.000921***    -0.000836**     -0.000878**
                                 (0.000245)      (0.000328)      (0.000236)     (0.000324)      (0.000392)      (0.000430)
      Pop. White-Male > 65      -0.000890**     -0.00119**      -0.000851**     -0.00114**       -0.00111*       -0.00118*
                                 (0.000361)      (0.000489)      (0.000344)     (0.000484)      (0.000592)      (0.000645)
      Pop. White-Female > 65    0.000573**      0.000780**      0.000542**      0.000739**        0.000653        0.000705
                                 (0.000255)      (0.000348)      (0.000242)     (0.000344)      (0.000413)      (0.000451)
      Medicare Eligibles        8.13e-05***     6.55e-05***     8.25e-05***     6.47e-05**     0.000149***     0.000150***
                                 (2.38e-05)      (2.53e-05)      (2.46e-05)      (2.62e-05)     (3.80e-05)      (4.09e-05)
      Unemployment                                                0.0519**        0.0488*          0.0305           0.0289
                                                                   (0.0254)       (0.0267)        (0.0285)        (0.0289)
      Poverty Rate                                                -0.0321**        -0.0241         -0.0110         -0.0104
                                                                   (0.0148)       (0.0155)        (0.0159)        (0.0162)
      # Medicare Cert Hosp.                                                                       0.216***          0.110
                                                                                                  (0.0660)         (0.256)
      # Hosp. Med Patients                                                                     -2.32e-05***    -2.63e-05***
                                                                                                (4.15e-06)      (4.87e-06)
      # Outpatients Visits                                                                        1.50e-07        1.03e-07
                                                                                                (2.17e-07)      (2.41e-07)
      Hosp. Util. Rate 0-39                                                                                        -0.0999
                                                                                                                   (0.270)
      Hosp. Util. Rate 40-59                                                                                        0.144
                                                                                                                   (0.262)
      Hosp. Util. Rate 60-79                                                                                        0.296
                                                                                                                   (0.262)
      Hosp. Util. Rate >80                                                                                          0.330
                                                                                                                   (0.283)
      Constant                   -1.762***       -1.588***       -1.756***        -1.681***      -1.960***       -1.922***
                                  (0.109)         (0.120)         (0.241)          (0.268)        (0.291)          (0.295)

      Observations                 987             841              987             841            841             841
                                                 Standard errors in parentheses
                                                *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                               iii
D. Evidence on Additional Outcomes: Baseline Estimates and Robustness Checks


   This section presents three sets of additional estimates that complement those reported
in the quantile estimates in the main text.


   • In Figure A.1, we complement the estimates in Figure 3 in the main text by showing the
     baseline quantile estimates for four additional outcome variables: the OOPC for drugs
     for enrollees in poor health, panel (a); the OOPC for drugs for enrollees in excellent
     health, panel (b); the risk score relative to Part C, panel (c); and, finally, the risk score
     relative to Part D, panel (d).

   • In Figure A.2, we report the estimates the robustness check analysis using a control
     group that matches the treatment group on observable characteristics.

   • In Figure A.3, we report the estimates the robustness check analysis using using
     equally-weighted plans, instead of enrollment-weighted plans as in the analysis in the
     main text.




                                               iv
Figure A.1: Baseline Estimates: Additional Contract Characteristics
                          (a) Drug OOPC - Poor Health                                                                                               (b) Drug OOPC - Excellent Health




              400




                                                                                                                                        400
                                                                                           1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                       1
                                                                                           .1 .2 .3 .4 .5 .6 .7 .8 .9




                                                                                                                                                                                                                       .1 .2 .3 .4 .5 .6 .7 .8 .9
                    200




                                                                                                                                             200
                                                                                                                             Drug OOPC Excellent
                                                                                                 Fracton 5 Star Plan




                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Fracton 5 Star Plan
       Drug OOPC Poor
             0




                                                                                                                                     0
    −200




                                                                                                                            −200
              −400




                                                                                                                                        −400
                                                                                           0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                       0
                          10      20      30      40      50      60    70   80    90                                                                 10      20      30      40      50      60    70   80    90
                                                       Percentile                                                                                                                  Percentile

                          Effect :                           Mean             Percentile                                                              Effect :                           Mean             Percentile
                          Confidence Intervals:                                                                                                       Confidence Intervals:
                          Fraction 5 Star:                   Pre 2012         Post 2012                                                               Fraction 5 Star:                   Pre 2012         Post 2012


                                        (c) N. Top Drugs                                                                                                   (d) N. Unrestricted Drugs




                                                                                                                                        40
                                                                                           1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                       1
               10




                                                                                           .1 .2 .3 .4 .5 .6 .7 .8 .9




                                                                                                                                                                                                                       .1 .2 .3 .4 .5 .6 .7 .8 .9
               8




                                                                                                                                               20
                                                                                                 Fracton 5 Star Plan




                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Fracton 5 Star Plan
                                                                                                                              Unrestricted Drugs
    Top Drugs
           6




                                                                                                                                       0
     4




                                                                                                                            −20
               2




                                                                                                                                        −40
               0




                                                                                           0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                       0
                          10      20      30      40      50      60    70   80    90                                                                 10      20      30      40      50      60    70   80    90
                                                       Percentile                                                                                                                  Percentile

                          Effect :                           Mean             Percentile                                                              Effect :                           Mean             Percentile
                          Confidence Intervals:                                                                                                       Confidence Intervals:
                          Fraction 5 Star:                   Pre 2012         Post 2012                                                               Fraction 5 Star:                   Pre 2012         Post 2012




                                                                                                                        v
                 Figure A.2: Quantile Regression Estimates for Plan Characteristics - Matched Samples
                                        (a) Part C Premium                                                                                                                          (b) Part D Premium                                                                                                                     (c) Maximum OOP Part C




                                                                                                                                      20
                                                                                                        1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     400
                 100




                                                                                                        .1 .2 .3 .4 .5 .6 .7 .8 .9




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    .1 .2 .3 .4 .5 .6 .7 .8 .9




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   .1 .2 .3 .4 .5 .6 .7 .8 .9
                                                                                                                                      0
                                                                                                              Fracton 5 Star Plan




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Fracton 5 Star Plan




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Fracton 5 Star Plan
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        In Network MOOP
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    200
                     0
        Part C Premium




                                                                                                                                      −20
            −100




                                                                                                                                      −40




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            0
     −200




                                                                                                                                      −60




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     −200
                 −300




                                                                                                                                      −80
                                                                                                        0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   0
                            10      20     30       40       50      60    70   80        90                                                                         10        20        30        40       50      60      70    80       90                                                                         10       20        30        40       50      60     70    80       90
                                                          Percentile                                                                                                                                     Percentile                                                                                                                                      Percentile

                           Effect :                             Mean                 Percentile                                                                      Effect :                                  Mean                Percentile                                                                        Effect :                                  Mean               Percentile
                           Confidence Intervals:                                                                                                                     Confidence Intervals:                                                                                                                           Confidence Intervals:
                           Fraction 5 Star:                     Pre 2012             Post 2012                                                                       Fraction 5 Star:                          Pre 2012            Post 2012                                                                         Fraction 5 Star:                          Pre 2012           Post 2012


                          (d) Part C OOPC - Poor Health                                                                                              (e) Part C OOPC - Excellent Health                                                                                                                               (f) Drug OOPC - Poor Health
      200




                                                                                                                                      200




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         400
                                                                                                        1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   1
                                                                                                        .1 .2 .3 .4 .5 .6 .7 .8 .9




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    .1 .2 .3 .4 .5 .6 .7 .8 .9




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   .1 .2 .3 .4 .5 .6 .7 .8 .9
      100




                                                                                                                                      100




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         200
                                                                                                              Fracton 5 Star Plan




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Fracton 5 Star Plan




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Fracton 5 Star Plan
      0




                                                                                                                                      0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         0
      −100




                                                                                                                                      −100




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         −200
      −200




                                                                                                                                      −200




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         −400
                                                                                                        0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   0
                          10      20      30       40       50      60     70   80        90                                                                         10        20        30        40       50      60      70    80       90                                                                       10        20        30        40       50      60      70    80       90
                                                         Percentile                                                                                                                                      Percentile                                                                                                                                     Percentile

                          Effect :                             Mean              Percentile                                                                          Effect :                                  Mean                Percentile                                                                       Effect :                                  Mean                Percentile
                          Confidence Intervals:                                                                                                                      Confidence Intervals:                                                                                                                          Confidence Intervals:
                          Fraction 5 Star:                     Pre 2012          Post 2012                                                                           Fraction 5 Star:                          Pre 2012            Post 2012                                                                        Fraction 5 Star:                          Pre 2012            Post 2012


                         (g) Drug OOPC - Excellent Health                                                                                                                       (h) Part D Deductible                                                                                                                                   (i) N. Top Drugs
      400




                                                                                                                                                    60




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     15
                                                                                                        1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    1
                                                                                                        .1 .2 .3 .4 .5 .6 .7 .8 .9




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    .1 .2 .3 .4 .5 .6 .7 .8 .9




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    .1 .2 .3 .4 .5 .6 .7 .8 .9
      200




                                                                                                                                                      40
                                                                                                              Fracton 5 Star Plan




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Fracton 5 Star Plan




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Fracton 5 Star Plan
                                                                                                                                     Part D Deductible




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 10
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Top Drugs
                                                                                                                                            20
      0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     5
      −200




                                                                                                                                                    0
      −400




                                                                                                                                                    −20
                                                                                                        0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    0
                          10      20      30       40       50      60     70   80        90                                                                           10       20        30        40       50      60     70    80       90                                                                         10       20        30        40       50      60     70    80       90
                                                         Percentile                                                                                                                                       Percentile                                                                                                                                     Percentile

                          Effect :                             Mean              Percentile                                                                           Effect :                                  Mean               Percentile                                                                        Effect :                                  Mean               Percentile
                          Confidence Intervals:                                                                                                                       Confidence Intervals:                                                                                                                          Confidence Intervals:
                          Fraction 5 Star:                     Pre 2012          Post 2012                                                                            Fraction 5 Star:                          Pre 2012           Post 2012                                                                         Fraction 5 Star:                          Pre 2012           Post 2012


                                 (j) N. Unrestricted Drugs                                                                                                                      (k) Health Care Quality                                                                                                                             (l) Customer Service
            40




                                                                                                                                                           .4




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           .4
                                                                                                  1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          1
                                                                                                  .1 .2 .3 .4 .5 .6 .7 .8 .9




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           .1 .2 .3 .4 .5 .6 .7 .8 .9




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          .1 .2 .3 .4 .5 .6 .7 .8 .9
                   20




                                                                                                                                                                .2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               .2
                                                                                                                                            Health Care Quality
                                                                                                        Fracton 5 Star Plan




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Fracton 5 Star Plan




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Fracton 5 Star Plan
Unrestricted Drugs




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Customer Service
             0




                                                                                                                                                        0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        0
   −20




                                                                                                                                               −.2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 −.2
            −40




                                                                                                                                                           −.4




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           −.4
            −60




                                                                                                                                                           −.6




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           −.6
                                                                                                  0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          0




                           10      20     30       40       50      60     70   80       90                                                                               10        20        30    40        50      60     70    80       90                                                                           10        20        30    40        50      60     70    80       90
                                                         Percentile                                                                                                                                        Percentile                                                                                                                                     Percentile

                          Effect :                             Mean              Percentile                                                                            Effect :                                  Mean                  Percentile                                                                     Effect :                                  Mean                  Percentile
                          Confidence Intervals:                                                                                                                        Confidence Intervals:                                                                                                                          Confidence Intervals:
                          Fraction 5 Star:                     Pre 2012          Post 2012                                                                             Fraction 5 Star:                          Pre 2012              Post 2012                                                                      Fraction 5 Star:                          Pre 2012              Post 2012


                                          (m) Drug Access                                                                                                                           (n) Risk Score Part C                                                                                                                          (o) Risk Score Part D
                                                                                                                                                    .05




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     .05
                 .4




                                                                                                        1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   1
                                                                                                        .1 .2 .3 .4 .5 .6 .7 .8 .9




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    .1 .2 .3 .4 .5 .6 .7 .8 .9




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   .1 .2 .3 .4 .5 .6 .7 .8 .9
                                                                                                                                                           .025
                 .2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           .025
                                                                                                              Fracton 5 Star Plan




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Fracton 5 Star Plan




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Fracton 5 Star Plan
                                                                                                                                         Risk Score Part C




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Risk Score Part D
     Drug Access




                                                                                                                                                     0
             0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   0
                                                                                                                                     −.05 −.025
      −.2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        −.025
                 −.4




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     −.05
                 −.6




                                                                                                        0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   0




                            10      20     30       40       50      60    70   80        90                                                                           10       20        30        40       50      60     70    80       90                                                                         10       20        30        40       50      60     70    80       90
                                                          Percentile                                                                                                                                      Percentile                                                                                                                                     Percentile

                           Effect :                             Mean                 Percentile                                                                       Effect :                                  Mean               Percentile                                                                        Effect :                                  Mean               Percentile
                           Confidence Intervals:                                                                                                                      Confidence Intervals:                                                                                                                          Confidence Intervals:
                           Fraction 5 Star:                     Pre 2012             Post 2012                                                                        Fraction 5 Star:                          Pre 2012           Post 2012                                                                         Fraction 5 Star:                          Pre 2012           Post 2012
Figure A.3: Quantile Regression Estimates for Plan Characteristics - Mean Characteristics
                                     (a) Part C Premium                                                                                                         (b) Part D Premium                                                                                                 (c) Maximum OOP Part C
             100




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 600
                                                                                                                          20
                                                                                            1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                       1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               1
                                                                                            .1 .2 .3 .4 .5 .6 .7 .8 .9




                                                                                                                                                                                                                       .1 .2 .3 .4 .5 .6 .7 .8 .9




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               .1 .2 .3 .4 .5 .6 .7 .8 .9
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   400
                   0




                                                                                                  Fracton 5 Star Plan




                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Fracton 5 Star Plan




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Fracton 5 Star Plan
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     In Network MOOP
                                                                                                                          0
    Part C Premium
         −100




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            200
                                                                                                                          −20
 −200




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    0
                                                                                                                          −40
             −300




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 −200
                                                                                            0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                       0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               0
                           10      20      30      40      50      60    70   80    90                                                             10      20      30       40       50      60     70   80     90                                                            10      20      30      40      50      60    70   80    90
                                                        Percentile                                                                                                                Percentile                                                                                                               Percentile

                           Effect :                           Mean             Percentile                                                          Effect :                             Mean              Percentile                                                          Effect :                           Mean             Percentile
                           Confidence Intervals:                                                                                                   Confidence Intervals:                                                                                                      Confidence Intervals:
                           Fraction 5 Star:                   Pre 2012         Post 2012                                                           Fraction 5 Star:                     Pre 2012          Post 2012                                                           Fraction 5 Star:                   Pre 2012         Post 2012


                          (d) Part C OOPC - Poor Health                                                                                (e) Part C OOPC - Excellent Health                                                                                                     (f) Drug OOPC - Poor Health
             200




                                                                                                                                      200




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 400
                                                                                            1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                       1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               1
                                                                                            .1 .2 .3 .4 .5 .6 .7 .8 .9




                                                                                                                                                                                                                       .1 .2 .3 .4 .5 .6 .7 .8 .9




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               .1 .2 .3 .4 .5 .6 .7 .8 .9
                 100




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   200
                                                                                                                         Part C OOPC Excellent
                                                                                                                                          100
                                                                                                  Fracton 5 Star Plan




                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Fracton 5 Star Plan




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Fracton 5 Star Plan
  Part C OOPC Poor




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Drug OOPC Poor
           0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             0
                                                                                                                                  0
 −100




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    −200
                                                                                                                         −100
             −200




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 −400
                                                                                                                                      −200
                                                                                            0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                       0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               0
                           10      20      30      40      50      60    70   80    90                                                               10      20     30       40       50      60    70   80     90                                                            10      20      30      40      50      60    70   80    90
                                                        Percentile                                                                                                                 Percentile                                                                                                              Percentile

                           Effect :                           Mean             Percentile                                                           Effect :                             Mean             Percentile                                                          Effect :                           Mean             Percentile
                           Confidence Intervals:                                                                                                    Confidence Intervals:                                                                                                     Confidence Intervals:
                           Fraction 5 Star:                   Pre 2012         Post 2012                                                            Fraction 5 Star:                     Pre 2012         Post 2012                                                           Fraction 5 Star:                   Pre 2012         Post 2012


                         (g) Drug OOPC - Excellent Health                                                                                                    (h) Part D Deductible                                                                                                          (i) N. Top Drugs
             400




                                                                                                                                      40
                                                                                            1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                       1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 10
                                                                                            .1 .2 .3 .4 .5 .6 .7 .8 .9




                                                                                                                                                                                                                       .1 .2 .3 .4 .5 .6 .7 .8 .9




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               .1 .2 .3 .4 .5 .6 .7 .8 .9
                  200




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 8
  Drug OOPC Excellent




                                                                                                  Fracton 5 Star Plan




                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Fracton 5 Star Plan




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Fracton 5 Star Plan
                                                                                                                         Part D Deductible
                                                                                                                                      20




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Top Drugs
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           6
          0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     4
                                                                                                                          0
 −200




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 2
             −400




                                                                                                                                      −20




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 0
                                                                                            0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                       0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               0
                           10      20      30      40      50      60    70   80    90                                                               10      20     30       40       50      60    70   80     90                                                            10      20      30      40      50      60    70   80    90
                                                        Percentile                                                                                                                 Percentile                                                                                                              Percentile

                           Effect :                           Mean             Percentile                                                           Effect :                             Mean             Percentile                                                          Effect :                           Mean             Percentile
                           Confidence Intervals:                                                                                                    Confidence Intervals:                                                                                                     Confidence Intervals:
                           Fraction 5 Star:                   Pre 2012         Post 2012                                                            Fraction 5 Star:                     Pre 2012         Post 2012                                                           Fraction 5 Star:                   Pre 2012         Post 2012


                                (j) N. Unrestricted Drugs                                                                                                       (k) Risk Score Part C                                                                                                  (l) Risk Score Part D
                                                                                                                                      .05




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 .05
             40




                                                                                            1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                       1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               1
                                                                                            .1 .2 .3 .4 .5 .6 .7 .8 .9




                                                                                                                                                                                                                       .1 .2 .3 .4 .5 .6 .7 .8 .9




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               .1 .2 .3 .4 .5 .6 .7 .8 .9
                                                                                                                                            .025




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       .025
                    20




                                                                                                  Fracton 5 Star Plan




                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Fracton 5 Star Plan




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Fracton 5 Star Plan
   Unrestricted Drugs




                                                                                                                            Risk Score Part C




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Risk Score Part D
                                                                                                                                    0
            0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               0
                                                                                                                         −.025




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    −.025
 −20




                                                                                                                                      −.05




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 −.05
             −40




                                                                                            0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                       0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               0




                           10      20      30      40      50      60    70   80    90                                                               10      20     30       40       50      60    70   80     90                                                            10      20      30      40      50      60    70   80    90
                                                        Percentile                                                                                                                 Percentile                                                                                                              Percentile

                           Effect :                           Mean             Percentile                                                           Effect :                             Mean             Percentile                                                          Effect :                           Mean             Percentile
                           Confidence Intervals:                                                                                                    Confidence Intervals:                                                                                                     Confidence Intervals:
                           Fraction 5 Star:                   Pre 2012         Post 2012                                                            Fraction 5 Star:                     Pre 2012         Post 2012                                                           Fraction 5 Star:                   Pre 2012         Post 2012




                                                                                                                                                                                    vii
