                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




        AMBIGUITY AND THE TRADEOFF THEORY OF CAPITAL STRUCTURE

                                      Yehuda Izhakian
                                      David Yermack
                                      Jaime F. Zender

                                     Working Paper 22870
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w22870


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                          November 2016, Revised May 2017




Part of this paper was written while Yermack was a vistiting Professor at Erasmus University
Rotterdam. We are indebted to Tony Cookson, Ed Van Wesep and Rob Dam for valuable
discussions and seminar participants at the University of Minnesota for helpful comments. The
views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2016 by Yehuda Izhakian, David Yermack, and Jaime F. Zender. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Ambiguity and the Tradeoff Theory of Capital Structure
Yehuda Izhakian, David Yermack, and Jaime F. Zender
NBER Working Paper No. 22870
November 2016, Revised May 2017
JEL No. C65,D81,D83,G32

                                         ABSTRACT

We examine the importance of ambiguity, or Knightian uncertainty, in the capital structure
decision. We develop a static tradeoff theory model in which agents are both risk averse and
ambiguity averse. The model confirms the usual idea that increased risk—the uncertainty over
known possible outcomes—leads firms to use less leverage. Conversely, greater ambiguity—the
uncertainty over the probabilities associated with the outcomes—leads firms to increase leverage.
Using a theoretically motivated measure of ambiguity, our empirical analysis provides results
consistent with these predictions.

Yehuda Izhakian                                 Jaime F. Zender
Zicklin College of Business                     Leeds School of Finance
One Bernard Baruch Way                          University of Colorado at Boulder
New York, NY 10010                              419 UCB
yud@stern.nyu.edu                               Boulder, Colorado 80309-0419
                                                jaime.zender@colorado.edu
David Yermack
Stern School of Business
New York University
44 West Fourth Street, Suite 9-160
New York, NY 10012
and NBER
dyermack@stern.nyu.edu
1        Introduction
Every significant financial decision is subject to ambiguity.1 In an influential paper, Ellsberg (1961)
demonstrates that individuals act as if they are averse to ambiguity.2 Nevertheless, the canonical
results in finance theory have been developed using expected utility theory, a theory that can be
interpreted as either ignoring ambiguity or assuming that individual preferences are neutral to this
aspect of uncertainty.
        In order to address this limitation and to develop a more complete understanding of the leverage
decisions made by corporations, we incorporate ambiguity and ambiguity aversion into the static
tradeoﬀ theory of corporate capital structure. Developing an understanding of the way in which
the ambiguity aversion of decision makers interacts with the uncertainty in their environments may
provide new insights into capital structure decisions. While the nature of the market’s pricing of
financial assets is often ignored in models of capital structure choice, the capital structure question is
inherently about agents making decisions in the context of the financial market. Examining leverage
decisions through the lens of a financial market with ambiguity averse investors may serve to further
enhance our understanding of decision making within corporations. Most empirical studies of leverage,
including literature standards such as Titman and Wessels (1988), take no account of ambiguity. We
adapt recent emprical tests of the static tradeoﬀ theory of corporate captial structure in order to
examine the eﬀect of ambiguity on observed decisions.
        Modigliani and Miller’s (1958) famous theorem asserts that, under perfect capital markets assump-
tions, two firms generating the same distribution of future cash flow will have the same market value
regardless of their financing choices. Standard tradeoﬀ theory frictions have been used to establish an
interior optimum (e.g., Kraus and Litzenberger (1973)) for the financing decision. We extend these
theories by introducing ambiguity and ambiguity aversion to the standard model. We show that when
there are no taxes or bankruptcy costs, and no asymmetric information, Modigliani-Miller’s irrelevance
is maintained under ambiguity aversion. This can be seen using the familiar argument that buying
the debt and the equity of a levered firm results in the investor obtaining claim to cash flow that is
equivalent to the equity cash flow of an unlevered firm. Stated in an alternative way, while the cost of
debt and the cost of equity capital both increase with an increase in ambiguity, the weighted average
    1
     Risk is defined as a condition in which the event to be realized is a-priori unknown, but the odds of all the possible
events are perfectly known. Ambiguity, or Knightian uncertainty, refers to the case where not only is the event to
be realized a-priori unknown, but also the odds of all possible events are either unknown or not uniquely assigned.
Throughout the paper the term “uncertainty” is used to refer to the aggregation of risk and ambiguity.
   2
     Ellsberg (1961) demonstrates that in the presence of ambiguity, individuals typically violate the independence (or
“Sure-Thing Principle”) axiom of expected utility theory.



                                                            2
cost of capital remains invariant to changes in leverage for any given level of ambiguity.
   The increase in the cost of equity (a lower valuation for levered equity with a given face value of
debt) that accompanies an increase in ambiguity can be used to highlight a second standard concern
in the capital structure literature: the over-investment problem. For a given debt level, increasing
the risk of the cash flows increases the value of the levered equity following the usual intuition from
option pricing. This suggests that decision-makers who maximize the value of levered equity will
trade oﬀ the (net present) value of an investment opportunity against its risk. This tradeoﬀ has been
argued to motivate negative net present value investment in projects with suﬃcient levels of risk. With
an increase in ambiguity the opposite occurs, an increase in ambiguity reduces the value of levered
equity. Net present value will be sacrificed only if the investment achieves a reduction in ambiguity;
alternatively, an increase in ambiguity may result in an under-investment problem. Investments that
increase both risk and ambiguity may not be attractive to decision-makers seeking to maximize the
value of the levered equity. Ambiguity aversion may therefore mitigate over-investment incentives of
managers acting in the interests of shareholders.
   When taxes and bankruptcy costs are introduced into the model, the theory predicts that while
an increase in the level of risk results in a reduction in the use of debt financing, an increase in the
level of ambiguity is associated with an increase in the use of debt. The standard intuition explaining
why higher risk is associated with less extensive use of leverage is maintained in the model with
ambiguity aversion. Consider a firm at its optimal leverage ratio for a given level of risk. At the
optimal leverage the marginal cost of bankruptcy equals the marginal tax benefit to the use of debt.
The first order eﬀect of an increase in the level of risk associated with the firm’s cash flows is that it
increases the marginal cost at the former optimum. Obtaining the new optimum, therefore, entails a
reduction in the use of debt. The intuition for the result that increased ambiguity results in higher
optimal leverage can be explained in a similar way. An increase in ambiguity results in ambiguity
averse agents becoming more pessimistic (as if probability is shifted from high cash flow states to low
cash flow states). This implies that the probability of bankruptcy at the former optimum decreases,
lowering the marginal cost of the use of debt. The result is an increase in leverage in response to an
increase in ambiguity.
   To test the predictions of our model, we investigate whether a firm’s current leverage is related to
the level of ambiguity and and the level of risk the firm is exposed to in the previous year. In order to
account for the unobservable firm specific component of leverage identified by Lemmon et al. (2008),
we also test whether changes in the levels of ambiguity or risk are followed by a change in the use of


                                                    3
leverage in the subsequent year. We study these relations using both the book leverage ratio and the
market leverage ratio. We use firms’ realized ambiguity and risk measures computed directly from
stock trading data, and we also employ measures of expected ambiguity and risk as predicted by an
ARMA model. The empirical results are consistent with the predictions of the model.
       Previous studies of ambiguity have focused mainly on its theoretical aspects, while not testing
their models empirically.3,4 In general, these studies employ decision models that do not provide the
appropriate separations between risk and ambiguity and between tastes and beliefs that are crucial
for a straightforward measurement of ambiguity.5 The main idea of the decision-making model we
employ, Izhakian (2017), is that preferences for ambiguity are applied directly to probabilities such that
attitude toward ambiguity is defined as attitude toward mean-preserving spreads in probabilities—
analogous to the Rothschild-Stiglitz risk attitude toward mean-preserving spreads in outcomes. As
such, the degree of ambiguity can be measured by the variance of probabilities, just as the degree
of risk can be measured by the variance of outcomes.6 We employ the same methodology used by
Brenner and Izhakian (2016) and Izhakian and Yermack (2017) to estimate ambiguity from stock
market data. The extensive tests conducted by Brenner and Izhakian (2016) rule out the concern that
our ambiguity measure captures other well-known dimensions of uncertainty. Our own robustness tests
document that the same is true in the present environment. We find that ambiguity and volatility
measure distinctly separate aspects of financial uncertainty, as they have a simple correlation across
   3
      Special attention has been given to the implications of ambiguity for the equity premium; e.g., Cao et al. (2005), Nau
(2006), Epstein and Schneider (2008) and Izhakian and Benninga (2011). Other studies attempt to provide explanations
for puzzling asset pricing phenomena by introducing ambiguity into conventional asset pricing models. For example,
Pflug and Wozabal (2007) and Boyle et al. (2011) suggest extensions of the mean-variance approach to incorporate
ambiguity. Additional papers have developed extensions of the capital asset pricing model that incorporate ambiguity,
such as Chen and Epstein (2002) and Izhakian (2012).
    4
      Parameter uncertainty (known unknowns) assumes that the set of events is known, the nature of the probability
distribution is known, but the parameters governing the distribution are unknown and the decision maker maximizes
utility using posterior parameters that generate a set of priors, which can be viewed as reflecting both information
(beliefs) and tastes for ambiguity; e.g., Bawa et al. (1979), Barry and Brown (1984), Coles and Loewenstein (1988),
and Coles et al. (1995). Therefore, parameter uncertainty may be viewed as special case of ambiguity, in which the
nature of the probability distributions is known. In this view, model uncertainty is also a special case of ambiguity.
This class of models assumes an uncertainty about the true probability law governing the realization of states, and a
decision maker, with her concerns about misclassification, looks for a robust decision-making process; e.g., Hansen et al.
(1999), and Hansen and Sargent (2001). Other studies take an empirical view of model uncertainty (or model risk ). In
this perspective, while estimating an empirical model, there is uncertainty about the true set of predictive variables. To
account for such a model misspecification, a Bayesian (predictive distribution) approach may be taken by assigning each
set of variables (or model) a posterior probability; e.g., Pastor (2000), Pastor and Stambaugh (2000), Avramov (2002),
and Cremers (2002).
    5
      Earlier literature dealt with this limitation either by model calibration (e.g., Drechsler (2012)) or by attributing the
disagreement of professional forecasters to ambiguity (e.g., Anderson et al. (2009)).
    6
      Some studies use proxies for ambiguity like disagreement among analysts; e.g., Anderson et al. (2009) and Antoniou
et al. (2015). Most empirical (behavioral) studies about ambiguity use data collected in designed experiments and focus
on individuals’ attitudes toward ambiguity rather than on the implications of ambiguity itself. A very few studies use
field data such as stock market trading data; e.g., Williams (2015), Ulrich (2013) and Thimmea and Volkertb (2015).



                                                              4
firms that is weakly negative but very near zero. We also show that other previously used proxies
for ambiguity (variance of mean, variance of variance, dispersion of analyst forecasts, etc.) are not
significantly related to leverage.
        Lee (2014) considers a similar question to that posed here and finds (theoretically and empirically)
that increased ambiguity leads to a reduction in leverage. His model assumes risk neutrality, so it
cannot consider the impact of risk. Furthermore, his model assumes that while the firm’s manager is
ambiguity averse, market participants are (and so market pricing is) ambiguity neutral. This appears
to be the main cause of the diﬀerence between his theoretical predictions and ours. Lee’s empirical
results are based on an event (the 1982 Voluntary Restraint Agreement on steel import quotas) that
almost certainly conflates risk and ambiguity making interpretation of his estimates diﬃcult.
        The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents a theoretical discussion
of ambiguity and develops the model. Section 3 discusses the sample selection and empirical tests.
Section 4 presents regression analysis of capital structure, and Section 5 concludes the paper. All
proofs are provided in the Appendix.


2        The model

2.1       The decision theoretic framework
Ambiguity, or Knightian uncertainty, has provided the basis for a rich literature in decision theory.7
This literature takes a variety of approaches to modeling decision-making under ambiguity (i.e., the
max-min expected utility of Gilboa and Schmeidler (1989), the Choquet expected utility (CEU) of
Schmeidler (1989), and many others). A fundamental issue these models have tried to address is the
need for an applicable framework that can be used in empirical explorations. The key to satisfying
this need is a complete separation between risk and ambiguity and between tastes and beliefs. Only
when this separation is accomplished will we be able to measure the extent of ambiguity regarding
a specific decision without confounding this measure with preferences over ambiguity, the amount of
    7
     Knight (1921) defines the concept of Knightian uncertainty as distinct from risk as conditions under which the set
of events that may occur is a priori unknown, and the odds of these events are also either not unique or are unknown.
Roughly speaking, this concept can be viewed as underpinning two branches of literature. The first is the “unawareness”
literature, which assumes that decision makers may not be aware of a subset of events—formally the state space is
updated consequentially to reflect learning about new states of nature (e.g., Karni and Vierø (2013)). The second is
the ambiguity literature, which assumes that the set of events is perfectly known but their probabilities are either not
unique or are unknown (e.g., Gilboa and Schmeidler (1989) and Schmeidler (1989)). These two literatures can be viewed
as overlapping when dealing with monetary outcomes (real numbers). In these outcomes, the “uncertain”—risky and
ambiguous—variable is defined by a measurable function from states into the real numbers such that there is no real
monetary outcome that the decision maker is not aware of. It is possible that the decision maker is not aware of some
events (the so-called black swans), which aﬀects the uncertainty about the probabilities of some outcomes. But such
uncertainty is taken into account by ambiguity—the uncertainty about the probabilities of outcomes.



                                                           5
risk, and/or preferences regarding risk. The models identified above have not achieved this separation.
       We distinguish the concepts of risk and ambiguity by using the theoretical framework of expected
utility with uncertain probabilities (EUUP), proposed by Izhakian (2017). Under EUUP individuals
are thought to act as if they solve a two-stage decision-making problem. In the first stage, the
decision maker forms a representation of her perceived probabilities for each relevant event. The
perceived probabilities are determined by the ambiguity that is present and the decision maker’s tastes
regarding ambiguity. In the second stage of the process the decision maker considers the expected
utility associated with a set of possible outcomes, where the expectation is taken with respect to the
perceived probabilities. This structure accomplishes the desired separation between risk and ambiguity
and between tastes and beliefs and facilitates theoretical and empirical analyses.
       The main idea of EUUP is that in the presence of ambiguity, i.e., when probabilities are uncer-
tain, preferences concerning ambiguity are applied solely to the probabilities such that aversion to
ambiguity is defined as aversion to mean-preserving spreads in probabilities. As such, the Rothschild
and Stiglitz (1970) approach, which is typically applied to outcomes when examining risk, can also be
applied to probabilities when examining ambiguity, independently of risk. Thereby, as Izhakian (2016)
shows, the degree of ambiguity can be measured by the volatility of probabilities—just as the degree
of risk can be measured by the volatility of outcomes.8 Unlike other proposed measures of ambiguity,
which are risk-dependent and consider only the variance of a single moment of the outcome distri-
bution (i.e., the variance of the mean or the variance of variance) the measure derived by Izhakian
(2016) is risk-independent and conceptually accounts for the variance of all moments of the outcome
distribution. The measure of ambiguity proposed by EUUP can be employed in empirical studies and
may be implemented using equity market data. This measure has, for example, been used in studies
of the risk–ambiguity–return relationship in the equity markets (Brenner and Izhakian, 2016) and of
the role ambiguity plays in employees’ decisions of whether to exercise their options (Izhakian and
Yermack, 2017).
       Formally, let S be an infinite, nonempty state space, and let X : S → R be a measurable function
describing consumption.9 An investor, who doesn’t know the precise probabilities of the relevant
outcomes, holds a set P of possible (additive) probability measures P on S. In addition, she holds a
   8
      Other models do not permit such a derivation since either ambiguity is not distinguished from aversion to ambiguity
(e.g., Schmeidler (1989), and Gilboa and Schmeidler (1989)) or aversion to ambiguity is defined as aversion to mean-
preserving spreads in certainty equivalent utilities, which are subject to risk and preferences for risk (e.g., Chew and Sagi
(2008)).
    9
      We consider an economy with an infinite state space and an infinite set of outcomes. All our results, however, may
also be applied to an economy with a finite state space. Because the model’s intuition is illustrated more naturally in a
finite state space setting, we introduce this presentation below and more completely in Appendix A.1.



                                                             6
second-order belief (a probability measure on P), denoted ξ. Using the EUUP theory, the expected
utility of the investor, who does not distort perceived probabilities, can be represented by
                                 ∫    [     (∫                          )    ]
                      V (X) =          Υ−1       Υ (PX (U (x) ≥ z)) dξ − 1 dz +                       (1)
                                  z≤0          P
                                 ∫         (∫                          )
                                        −1
                                      Υ         Υ (PX (U (x) ≥ z)) dξ dz,
                                   z≥0        P

where U is a (von Neumann-Morgenstern) utility function; and Υ is an outlook function, capturing
attitude toward ambiguity. As usual, a concave U characterizes risk-averse behavior, and a convex
U characterizes risk-loving behavior. Similarly, a concave Υ characterizes ambiguity-averse behavior,
and a convex Υ characterizes ambiguity-loving behavior. The utility function is normalized such that
U (k) = 0, for some reference point k. That is, any outcome x ≤ k is considered unfavorable (a loss)
and any outcome x ≥ k is considered favorable (a gain).
   To illustrate the intuition of Equation (1), it can be helpful to write it for a discrete state space
S and for finitely many probability measures in P. In this case the outcomes of X can be written
X = (x1 , . . . , xn ), where xs stands for the outcome at state s ∈ S and x1 , . . . , xn are listed in a
non-decreasing order. The expected utility representation of the investor’s preferences is then written
                      ∑           [                   ]   ∑             [                    ]
        V (X) =           QX (xs ) U (xs ) − U (xs+1 ) +        QX (xs ) U (xs ) − U (xs−1 ) ,      (2)
                       0<s≤k                                    k<s≤n

where
                                                (                              )
                                                    ∑
                               QX (xs ) = Υ−1             Υ (PX (xs )) ξ ({PX })                      (3)
                                                    P∈P

and PX (xs ) stands for P (X ≥ xs ), i.e., the probability
                                                       (∫ of the outcome being) greater than xs . The
term QX (xs ) is the discrete equivalent of the Υ−1        Υ (PX U (x) ≥ z) dξ in Equation (1) and
                                                               P
represents the perceived probability that the outcome is greater than or equal to xs . Intuitively,
the perceived probability is the unique certain probability value that the decision maker is willing to
accept in exchange for the uncertain probability of a given event. The terms in square brackets in
Equation (2) are equivalent to the dz terms in Equation (1), capturing the change in utility from one
outcome to the next.
   If the perceived probabilities are additive, Equation (2) could be written in a more familiar form
as the perceived probability of state s times the utility of the outcome in state s summed over the
n states. However, because the perceived probability of state s (QX (xs ) which is used for assessing
expected utility under ambiguity aversion rather than the probability of that outcome) may be non-
additive, expected utility cannot generally be written in this manner. However, this version of the



                                                      7
preference representation makes it clear that EUUP contains expected utility theory as a special
case. When Υ is linear the preceived probabilities become the expected probabilities (the reduction
of compound lotteries). The descrete version of the model also makes it clear that EUUP can be
viewed as a version of CEU (Schmeidler, 1989) where Schmeidler’s “capacities” are structured as
perceived probabilities. The important distinction is that Izhakian’s (2017) axiomatic development
of the preceived probabilities implies that EUUP accomplishes the necessary separation between risk
and ambiguity and between beliefs and tastes that is not accomplished in CEU. This separation allows
us to consider the comparative static response of leverage to a change in ambiguity from a theoretical
perspective and also allows the development of a measure of ambiguity that may be used in empirical
investigations. The apparent complexity of Equation (1) lies in the need to use Choquet integration
(as in CEU) due to the potential non-additivity of the perceived probabilities.
       Referring again to Equation (1), suppose that the outlook function is twice diﬀerentiable and
satisfies
                                       Υ′′ (E [PX (x)])                  1
                                                               ≤                ,                                   (4)
                                       Υ′ (E [PX (x)])             Var [φX (x)]
for every x, where φX (x) is the marginal probability function (density or mass function) of X associ-
ated with P ∈ P; and E [·] and Var [·] are respectively the expectation and the variance of probabilities
taken using the second order probability measure ξ. Namely,
                      ∫                                      ∫
                                                               [                   ]2
        E [PX (x)] =     PX (x) dξ     and    Var [φX (x)] =    φX (x) − E [φX (x)] dξ.                             (5)
                            P                                                P

Condition (4) bounds the level of aversion to ambiguity (the concavity of Υ) and the level of love
for ambiguity (the convexity of Υ) to assure that the approximated marginal perceived probabilities
(derived below) are nonnegative and that the approximated perceived probability of each event is not
smaller than the perceived probability of any of its sub-events. By Izhakian (Theorem 2, 2016), the
dual representation of the expected utility in Equation (1), can then be approximated as10
                          ∫                     (                                  )
                                                      Υ′′ (E [PX (x)])
             W (X) ≈            U (x) E [φX (x)] 1 − ′                 Var [φX (x)] dx +                            (6)
                            x≤k                       Υ (E [PX (x)])
                          ∫                     (                                  )
                                                      Υ′′ (E [PX (x)])
                                U (x) E [φX (x)] 1 + ′                 Var [φX (x)] dx.
                            x≥k                       Υ (E [PX (x)])
To simplify notation, henceforth the subscript X, designating the random variable, is omitted. In
addition, since X is a measurable function, we abuse the notation and write the outcome x in state s
                                                        ∫                                ∫
                                                       (     [                 ]    )
  10
    The remainder of this approximation is of order o E |φ (x) − E [φ (x)]|3 xdx as        |φx (x) − E [φx (x)]| dx → 0.
                                              ( [           3 ])
This is equivalent to a cubic approximation, o E |x − E [x]| , in which the fourth and higher absolute central moments
of outcomes X are of strictly smaller order than the third absolute central moment as |x − E [x]| → 0, and are therefore
negligible.


                                                           8
instead of state s itself. With this notation in place, the marginal perceived probability (density) of x
can be written
                                                    (                         )
                                                             (           )
                                    
                                         E [φ (x)] 1 + η E [P (x)] Var [φ (x)] , x ≤ k
                      π (x) =                      (                           )        ,                                  (7)
                                                        (         )
                                    
                                         E [φ (x)] 1 − η E [P (x)] Var [φ (x)] , x > k

                  Υ′′ (·)
where η (·) = −           and, by Condition (4), π(x) is always positive.
                  Υ′ (·)
       Based upon the functional form in Equation (6), the degree of ambiguity can be measured by the
expected volatility of probabilities, across the relevant events. Formally, the measure of ambiguity is
given by11
                                                       ∫
                                        f [X] =
                                          2
                                                           E [φ (x)] Var [φ (x)] dx,                                       (8)

where x is assumed to be symmetrically distributed as defined by Izhakian (Definition 7, 2016).12 The
main advantage of this measure is that it can be computed from the data and can be employed in
empirical tests; e.g., Brenner and Izhakian (2016) and Izhakian and Yermack (2017). Risk indepen-
dence is another major advantage of f2 (mho2 ); unlike risk measures, it does not depend upon the
magnitudes of the associated consequences.

2.2      The asset pricing framework
The decision theoretic framework of the previous section enables the formalization of an ambiguous
economy. We use a common market structure where the only variation in our analysis is the specifica-
tion of probabilities. We assume markets are complete and an absence of arbitrage opportunities (the
law of one price holds). There are two dates, 0 and 1. The development of the capital structure model
in the next section is not dependent on the simple assumptions made regarding the market structure,
and the two-period utility function employed here can be generalized to a dynamic structure following
the approach taken in prior papers. The state at date 0 is known, and the states at date 1 are ordered
from the lowest consumption level to the highest.
       To develop the asset pricing framework, consider a representative investor, with a twice diﬀeren-
tiable utility function U, whose initial wealth is w0 and whose wealth at time 1 is w1 .13 The uncertain
outcomes of the single product in the economy are defined by the set of outcomes X, where x ∈ X is
the time 1 outcome in some state s ∈ S. Since, the asset pricing framework is used only to extract
                                                                                        ∑
  11
      The measure f2 is also applicable in finite state space. In this case, f2 [X] = i E [φ (xi )] Var [φ (xi )] , where φ (·)
is a probability mass function.
   12
      Formally, outcomes are said to be symmetrically distributed around a point of symmetry k if for any x, y ∈ X that
satisfy |x − k| = |y − k|, both E [φ (x)] = E [φ (y)] and Var [φ (x)] = Var [φ (y)] hold.
   13
      À la Constantinides (1982), a representative investor can be defined as one whose tastes and beliefs are such that, if
all investors in the economy had identical tastes and beliefs, the equilibrium in the economy would remain unchanged.


                                                              9
state prices, for simplicity, we assume a single product in the economy. However, the extension to
multiple assets is straightforward.
       The objective function of an individual agent is standard and can then be written

                                              max W (c0 ) + W (c1 )                                                    (9)
                                               c0 ,θ

subject to the budget constraints
                                              ∫
                               c0 = w0 − θ         q(x)xdx        and        c1 = w1 + θx,

where q(x) is the date 0 price of the contingent claim on state s with consumption x and θ is the
holding of the single asset X.14 Using the functional form of expected utility in Equation (6), the
state prices can be extracted as follows.

Theorem 1 Suppose a time-separable utility function and an outlook function Υ satisfying the con-
ditions of Izhakian (Theorem 2, 2016).15 The state price of state x is then
                                                                    ∂x U
                                                  q(x) = π (x)           ,                                            (10)
                                                                    ∂0 U
where q(x) is always positive.

       The state price q(x) is the price of a pure state contingent claim or Arrow security of state s
with outcome x.16 In other words, it is the price of a claim to one unit of consumption contingent
on the occurrence of state s. Since markets are complete and the law of one price holds, the payoﬀ
pricing functional assigns a unique price to each state contingent claim. When there is no ambiguity,
i.e., probabilities are perfectly known, the state price q(x) reduces to the conventional state price
              ∂x U 17
q(x) = φ (x)       . The following corollary is an immediate consequence of Theorem 1.
              ∂0 U
Corollary 1 The risk neutral probability of state x is
                                                   q(x)           π (x) ∂∂x0 U
                                                                             U
                                     π ∗ (x) = ∫             =∫                     ,                                 (11)
                                                   q(x)dx         π (x) ∂∂x0 U
                                                                             U
                                                                               dx

  14
      Formally, the consumptions, c0 and c1 , need not be restricted to positive values, since in the EUUP’s setting, as in
cumulative prospect theory (Tversky and Kahneman, 1992), the utility function can obtain negative values.
   15
      As in Equation (4), Theorem 2 in Izhakian (2016) bounds the concavity and the convexity of Υ to assure that the
approximated marginal perceived probabilities are always positive and that they satisfy set monotonicity.
   16
      In a related study, Chapman and Polkovnichenko (2009) extracts the state prices in a rank-dependent expect utility
framework.
   17
      Similarly, in the presence of ambiguity but with ambiguity neutral agents the state price q(x) reduces to q(x) =
           ∂x U
E [φ (x)]       .
           ∂0 U




                                                             10
and the risk-free rate of return is
                                        1                        1
                            rf = ∫               −1 = ∫                        − 1.                    (12)
                                                                     ∂x U
                                       q(x)dx             π (x)      ∂0 U dx

   The definition of the risk-neutral probabilities and the risk-free rate of return in an ambiguous
economy allows us to define the price of an asset as its discounted expected payoﬀ. That is,
                         ∫                      ∫
                                           1                        1
                   p =     q(x)xdx =               π ∗ (x)xdx =          E∗ [x] ,                      (13)
                                         1 + rf                   1 + rf
where E∗ is the expectation taken with respect to the risk neutral probabilities, π ∗ , defined in Corol-
lary 1. Notice that the double-struck capital font is used to designate expectation or variance of
outcomes, taken with respect to the expected probabilities or with respect to risk-neutral probabili-
ties, while the regular straight font is used to designate expectation or variance of probabilities, taken
with respect to the second-order probabilities.

2.3   The capital structure decision in a perfect capital market
The capital structure model used here is based on the canonical tradeoﬀ theory model of Kraus and
Litzenberger (1973). Consider a one-period project that requires a capital investment I at time 0.
The payoﬀ of this project, obtained at time 1, is given by the risky and ambiguous variable X, having
a bounded support. For simplicity, it is assumed that the information possessed by the owner of
the project and investors is symmetric in the sense that all agents face the same level of ambiguity.
Specifically, it is assumed that the owner of the project is a representative investor, whose set of priors,
the set of possible probability distributions P for X is identical to the set of priors of each investor in
the economy, and her belief (second-order probability distribution) over P is also identical to that of
each investor. Therefore, all agents also agree on the expected probability of any specific payoﬀ x.
   At time t = 0, a decision to invest in a project is made if and only if
                                              1
                                                   E∗ [X] > I.
                                            1 + rf
Given the decision to invest in the project, its owner must decide at time 0 what mix of debt and
equity financing the firm will maintain to run the project. The objective of this decision is to maximize
the value of the firm:

                               max           S0 (F ) + D0 (F )
                                 F
                                                 1
                                s.t.   S0    =        E∗ [max (X − F , 0)]
                                               1 + rf
                                                 1
                                       D0    =        E∗ [min (F , X)] ,
                                               1 + rf


                                                     11
where S0 is the market value of the common shares; D0 is the market value of debt and F is the debt’s
face value. Without loss of generality the debt is assumed to be a one-period zero-coupon bond. The
optimization problem can be written more explicitly as

                   max          S0 (F ) + D0 (F )
                    F
                                          ∫ ∞
                                     1
                    s.t.   S0   =              π ∗ (x) (x − F ) dx
                                   1 + rf F
                                          (∫ k                ∫ F               ∫ ∞            )
                                     1
                           D0   =               π ∗ (x)xdx +       π ∗ (x)xdx +     π ∗ (x)F dx .
                                   1 + rf    0                  k                F

Any x < F is considered a default state and the reference point is assumed to satisfy k < F . In this
                                         {              }
maximization problem, the default states x | k ≤ x ≤ F are still considered favorable in the view of
the representative investor. This assumption is consistent with the notion that corporate debt is not
riskless. Assuming that k < F is required in our analysis, since otherwise, no rational decision maker
would consider investing in the firm’s debt.

Theorem 2 Suppose that there are no taxes, no bankruptcy costs and no asymmetric information.
Modigliani-Miller’s capital structure irrelevance proposition is maintained under ambiguity.

      Proposition 1 in Modigliani and Miller (1958) shows that, in an economy without taxes, bankruptcy
costs or asymmetric information, the capital-structure choice of a firm is irrelevant to its market value.
Their proof is based on the idea the an investor can generate the return to holding the levered firm’s
equity by holding the equity of an equivalent unlevered firm and a loan in the same proportion as the
leverage ratio of the levered firm. The same argument holds true in an ambiguous economy in which
agents are ambiguity averse.

2.4      The over-investment problem
In their seminal paper, Jensen and Meckling (1976) introduced the “over-investment” problem. Con-
sistent with the existing literature, in this area, we maintain the assumptions of no taxes or bankruptcy
costs. Central to Jensen and Meckling’s argument is the simple notion that in the equity holders’ view,
levered equity can be described as a call option, where the exercise price is the face value of the debt.18
Formally, in the present model, the value of the equity is the expected value of the future equity payoﬀ
(using the risk neutral probabilities) discounted at the risk free rate,
                                                 ∫ ∞
                                             1
                                 S0 =                 π ∗ (x) (x − F ) dx.                            (14)
                                           1 + rf F
This value is aﬀected by ambiguity through π ∗ (x) and by risk through the magnitude of x.
 18
      See, for example, Merton (1974).


                                                         12
   Assume a given face value of debt, F . The following proposition establishes that the standard
relation between the value of levered equity and the level of risk holds in this setting. As in Rothschild
and Stiglitz (1970), we consider an asset as being risker if its payoﬀs at time t can be written as
mean-preserving spread of its outcomes at time t − 1.

Proposition 1 Assume that the reference point of all investors satisfies k < F . For a given face
value of debt, the higher is the degree of risk, the higher is the value of the levered equity.

   The fact that the value of levered equity is increasing in the risk of the underlying payoﬀs implies
that levered equityholders have an incentive to increase the risk of the firm’s cash flows. The over-
investment problem is the notion that levered equityholders will benefit from an increase in risk even
at the expense of a reduction in the value of the cash flows (levered equityholders will prefer to pursue
a negative net present value investment if the investment provides a suﬃcient increase in the risk of
the firm’s cash flows). The next proposition shows that this incentive becomes more complex in a
setting with ambiguity and ambiguity averse agents. In Proposition 2 an increase in ambiguity occurs
when the set of possible probabilies associated with a given outcome at time t can be written as a
mean preserving spread of the possible probabilities at time t − 1

Proposition 2 Assume that the reference point for all investors satisfies k < F . For a given face
value of debt, the higher is the degree of ambiguity, the lower is the value of the levered equity.

   Levered equity holders, therefore, see a loss in value from an increase in ambiguity; i.e., ambiguity
aversion implies there is a three way tradeoﬀ between value, risk, and ambiguity. Therefore the
incentive of levered equity holders regarding an investment that increases uncertainty (the combination
of risk and ambiguity) is not unambiguous (no pun intended). A common example of the over-
investment problem that is often cited is the incentive of a firm’s manager’s to pursue firm value
reducing M&A activities due to their potential to increase the risk of the firm’s cash flow. However,
it is plausible that while a given merger may increase the level of risk of a firm’s cash flow, the merger
will also increase the level of ambiguity associated with the firm’s cash flow. In this case, the incentive
of a manager acting in the interests of the levered equity holders is unclear and the manager may
actually avoid such a merger, even if it increases firm value.

2.5   Taxes and bankruptcy costs
Consider now an economy with corporate taxes and bankruptcy costs. Suppose that any state x < F
is considered a default state. Bankruptcy costs are assumed to be proportional to the firm’s output

                                                    13
in the event of default
                                                          
                                                           αx, x < F
                                              B (x; F ) =             ,
                                                           0,  x≥F
where 0 < α < 1. The tax benefit associated with the use of debt is, for simplicity, based on the entire
debt service in non-default states,19
                                                          
                                                           0,   x<F
                                              T (x; F ) =              ,
                                                           τ F, x ≥ F

where τ is the corporate income tax rate. In such an economy, firm value is a function of the chosen
capital structure, in particular the amount of debt F issued, and can be written

         V (F ) = S0 (F ) + D0 (F )                                                                             (15)
                           ∫ ∞                                                                            
                                  π ∗ (x) (1 − τ ) (x − F ) dx+
                     1    ∫Fk
                                                                                                           
                                                                                                           .
                =                                        ∫ F                      ∫
                  1 + rf                                                                                  
                                                                                        ∞
                                   ∗                           ∗
                                 π (x) (1 − α) xdx +          π (x) (1 − α) xdx +            π ∗ (x)F dx
                                      0                            k                    F
For a firm value maximizing decision maker the capital structure choice problem can be written

                         max              S0 (F ) + D0 (F )
                          F
                                              1       [     (                           )]
                          s.t.   S0       =        E∗ max (1 − τ ) x − F + T (x; F ) , 0
                                            1 + rf
                                              1
                                 D0       =        E∗ [min (F , x − B (x; F ))] .
                                            1 + rf
Notice that S0 can be written explicitly
                                                1      [   (                     )]
                                 S0 =                E∗ max (1 − τ ) (x − F ) , 0 .
                                              1 + rf
With the capital structure choice problem defined as above, the next theorem identifies the optimal
level of leverage for the firm.

Theorem 3 The optimal leverage satisfies
                                                                   ∫   ∞
                                                          τ
                                              F   =     ∗
                                                                           π ∗ (x)dx.                           (16)
                                                       π (F )α     F

      We turn now to analyze the determinants of the optimal leverage. It can be immediately observed
from Equation (16) that a higher tax rate (τ ) or a lower bankruptcy cost (α) positively aﬀect the
use of leverage. Our focus is, however, on the implications of changes in the components of uncer-
tainty (ambiguity and risk) for capital structure choice. Proposition 3 describes the consequence of a
comparative static change in ambiguity.
 19
      See for example, Kraus and Litzenberger (1973).


                                                              14
Proposition 3 The higher is the degree of ambiguity, the higher is the optimal leverage.

       Similarly to the comparative static concerning the eﬀect of ambiguity on the optimal leverage, we
may also study the eﬀect of a change in risk. To this end, the notation ∂xxx U stands for the third
derivative of U with respect to x. It is important to note that risk, denoted R, is not assumed to
be measured by the variance of returns or payoﬀs, since it is not assumed that returns are normally
distributed or that utility is quadratic. As in Rothschild and Stiglitz (1970), an asset is said to become
risker if its payoﬀs at time t can be written as mean-preserving spread of its outcomes at time t − 1.

Proposition 4 Suppose ∂xxx U ≥ 0.20 Then the higher is the degree of risk, the lower is the optimal
leverage.

       Propositions 3 and 4 demonstrate that increased ambiguity has a positive eﬀect on the chosen level
of leverage, while increased risk has a negative eﬀect. The intuition for the result in Proposition 4
is standard: Greater volatility in the project payoﬀ has a symmetric eﬀect, pushing probability mass
from the center of the distribution to its tails. The change in volatility has the eﬀect of increasing
the expected marginal cost of bankruptcy. This eﬀect is illustrated in left panel of Figure 1. With a
fixed cost of bankruptcy the change in the marginal cost is reflected by the diﬀerence in value of the
probability density functions at the optimal leverage F . The increase in this value due to an increase
in volatility illustrates the rise in the marginal cost of bankruptcy. The marginal benefit of the tax
shield, due to its direct dependance on F , will see a relatively small decrease. A reduction in the use
of debt, to F ′ , is required to once again equate the cost and benefit of the use of debt financing at the
margin. It can be tempting to suggest that this intuition can be applied to an increase in ambiguity
as well; as more uncertainty regarding future cash flow may be thought to have the same eﬀect.
An increase in ambiguity, however, represents an increased uncertainty regarding probabilities. This
increased uncertainty is stake independent (unlike an increase in risk) which implies the standard
intuition cannot be applied. A more appropriate intuition comes from the eﬀect of ambiguity and
ambiguity aversion that is common across most models of ambiguity averse preferences; agents act as
if they are more pessimistic, i.e., as if they put more weight on “worse” outcomes and less on “better”
outcomes. In the context of the present model, an increase in ambiguity has an asymmetric aﬀect on
the preceived probability distribution. This is illustrated in the right panel of Figure 1. Specifically,
the preceived probabilities are reduced for outcomes above the reference point k and the preceived
  20
    This property is satisfied by many well known utility functions including constant relative risk aversion (CRRA) and
constant absolute risk aversion (CARA).


                                                          15
probabilities for outcomes below the reference point are increased. Because F > k this implies that
the marginal cost of debt decreases at the original optimum after an increase in ambiguity. Again
the marginal benefit of debt sees a small reduction, and the result is that an increase in leverage is
required to attain the new optimum.

                                             [ Figure 1 ]



3     Empirical design
We turn now to test the statements of Propositions 3 and 4 empirically. For consistency with the
majority of the empirical capital structure literature, we examine how annual measures of levels and
changes in firms’ leverage ratios are aﬀected by annual measures of risk and ambiguity.

3.1   Sample selection
We estimate the relation between ambiguity and the leverage ratio using a sample of all nonfinancial
firm-year observations in the annual Compustat database between 1993-2016. The time window 1993-
2016 is dictated by the intraday stock data available on TAQ. This data is used for estimating the
degree of ambiguity associated with each firm. After a process of data cleaning and filtering described
below, we analyze 56, 325 annual observations for 11, 527 unique firms over the 23 years between 1993
and 2016.
    To construct our sample, we begin with a download of all records from the Compustat fundamentals
annual database. We drop all financial firms as well as all government entities. We also drop all
observations missing one of the following descriptors: fiscal year end (FYR), total assets (AT), debt
in current liabilities (DLC), long-term debt (DLTT) or stock price (PRCC). Finally, we drop all
observations with negative values for sales, total assets or debt, and all observations with a negative
leverage ratio or leverage ratio greater than 100% (book or market). This leaves us with 88, 209
observations. In addition, we drop all duplicate records or records for which we are unable to match
identifiers to the CRSP or TAQ stock price databases. All observations for which the annual degree
of ambiguity or risk cannot be estimated are also dropped, which leaves us with 56, 325 observations
for regression analysis.
    We estimate the annual degree of ambiguity and risk for each firm and each month as detailed
below. We then use their average over the fiscal year as the annual risk and ambiguity associated with
each firm-year observation. We apply the same method for estimating the annual expected ambiguity
and risk. That is, for each firm and each month we estimate the expected values based on only the


                                                  16
preceding 36 months, as detailed below, and then take the average of these values over the fiscal year.
To check for robustness against potential biases that might be caused by outlier observations, we test
all our hypotheses while winsorizing all variables at the lowest and the highest 5% level.

3.2    Estimating ambiguity
To assess the monthly ambiguity of a firm we estimate the ambiguity of its equity. To estimate
the ambiguity of an asset using the model in Equation (8), one first needs to elicit the possible
probability distributions of returns. To do so, we assume a representative agent whose set of priors is
an aggregation of the sets of priors of all investors in the economy, and who acts as if all priors within
that set are equally likely. Intraday observed returns on an asset in the market are assumed to be a
realization of one prior out of the set of priors. That is, each day is assumed to be characterized by a
diﬀerent distribution of returns, and the set of these distributions over a month represents the agent’s
set of priors.
   To estimate the probabilities of returns from trading data, one must make assumptions about the
nature of the distribution of returns. We assume that returns on assets are normally distributed;
therefore, the degree of ambiguity of the return rj on the equity of firm j can be measured by
                                     ∫
                          f [rj ] =
                           2
                                        E [ϕ (rj ; µj , σj )] Var [ϕ (rj ; µj , σj )] drj ,          (17)

where ϕ (rj ; µj , σj ) stands for the normal probability density function of rj conditional upon the mean
µj and the variance σj2 . It is important to note that our empirical tests use a measure of the degree of
ambiguity, defined by Equation (8), which is distinct from aversion to ambiguity. The former, which
is a matter of beliefs (or information), is estimated from the data, while the latter, which is a matter
of tastes, is endogenously determined by the empirical estimations.
   We employ the empirical method developed by Brenner and Izhakian (2016) to estimate the degree
of ambiguity using intraday stock trading data from the TAQ database. We compute the degree of
ambiguity, given in Equation (17), for each stock and for each month, by applying the following
procedure. We sample the price of the stock every five minutes starting from 9:30 until 16:00. The
decision to use five-minute time intervals is motivated in part by Andersen et al. (2001), who show this
time interval is suﬃcient to eliminate microstructure eﬀects. In cases for which there is no trade during
a specific time interval, we take the volume-weighted average of the closest trading price. Using these
prices we compute five-minute returns, 78 returns for each day at most. Note that this procedure
implies that we ignore returns between each closing price and opening price on the following day,
thereby eliminating the impact of overnight price changes and dividend distributions. For each stock,



                                                   17
we drop all trading days that do not have at least 15 quotes representing diﬀerent five minute time
intervals, and we drop all trading months that do not have at least 15 days that satisfy this condition.
Observations with extreme price changes (plus or minus 10 percent log returns) within five minutes
are also dropped, because many of them are due to mistaken orders that were cancelled by the stock
exchange.21
    For a given stock each day, we compute the normalized (by the number of intraday observations)
mean and variance of the return, denoted µj and σj2 respectively. As in French et al. (1987), the
variance of the returns is computed by applying the adjustment for non-synchronous trading proposed
by Scholes and Williams (1977).22 Based upon the assumption that the intraday returns are normally
distributed, for each stock j we construct the set of priors Pj , where each prior Pj within the set Pj
is defined by a pair of µj and σj . It is important to mention that in our approach, the sets of priors
that underlie ambiguity are endogenously derived.
    The set Pj of (normal) probability distributions of each stock j for a given month consists of 15 to
22 diﬀerent probability distributions. To compute the monthly degree of ambiguity of a given asset,
specified in Equation (17), we represent each daily return distribution by a histogram. To this end,
we divide the range of daily returns, from −40% to 40%, into 160 intervals (bins), each of width 0.5%.
For each day, we compute the probability of the return being in each bin. In addition, we compute the
probability of the return being lower than −40% and the probability of the return being higher than
+40%. Using these probabilities, we compute the mean and the variance of probabilities for each of
the 162 bins separately, where the histograms are assigned with equal weights, i.e., each probability
                                                                                                                            µj
distribution in the set Pj is equally likely. This is equivalent to assuming that the daily ratios                          σj   are
student’s-t distributed.23 Then, we estimate the degree of ambiguity of each stock j for each month
   21
      Testing our hypotheses while including observations with extreme price changes shows that the eﬀect of ambiguity
is even more significant than while excluding these observations.
   22
      Scholes and Williams’ (1977) adjustment for non-synchronous trading suggests that the volatility of returns takes
                  1 ∑                                  ∑
                     Nt                                 Nt
                                                  1
the form σt2 =          (rt,i − E [rt,i ])2 + 2            (rt,i − E [rt,i ]) (rt,i−1 − E [rt,i−1 ]). We also test our model without
                 Nt i=1                         Nt − 1 i=2
the Scholes-Williams correction for non-synchronous trading. The results are essentially the same.
   23
      When σµ is Student’s t-distributed, cumulative probabilities are uniformly distributed. See, for example, Kendall and
Alan (2010, page 21, Proposition 1.27). This is consistent with the idea that the representative investor does not have
any information indicating which of the possible probability distributions is more likely, and thus he acts as if he assigns
an equal weight to each possibility.




                                                                18
by the discrete form
                                                        [                  ]    [                  ]                
                                                       E Φ (rj,0 ; µj , σj ) Var Φ (rj,0 ; µj , σj ) +
                                                            [                                          ]            
                             (          )1+    1      ∑                                                             
                         1       0.01         π2      160
                                                           E Φ (rj,i ; µj , σj ) − Φ (rj,i−1 ; µj , σj ) ×           
            f2 [rj ] =                                         [                                         ]          ,           (18)
                         π        w                                                                                 
                                                      i=1 Var Φ (rj,i ; µj , σj ) − Φ (rj,i−1 ; µj , σj ) +         
                                                                                                                    
                                                         [                         ]  [                          ]
                                                       E 1 − Φ (rj,160 ; µj , σj ) Var 1 − Φ (rj,160 ; µj , σj )
where Φ (·) stands for the cumulative normal probability distribution, r0 = −0.40, w = ri − ri−1 =
             (     )1+ 12
0.005, and π1 0.01
               w
                      π   scales the weighted-average volatilities of probabilities to the bins’ size.24 This
scaling, which is analogous to Sheppard’s correction, has been tested to verify that it minimizes the
eﬀect of the selected bin size on the values of f2 ; see Brenner and Izhakian (2016).
       We don’t investigate whether f2 captures other well-known uncertainty factors because this veri-
fication has been done in Brenner and Izhakian (2016). Brenner and Izhakian conduct an exhaustive
set of tests to rule out the concern that the degree of ambiguity, measured by f2 , is related to other
“uncertainty” factors including skewness, kurtosis, variance of variance, variance of mean, downside
risk, mixed data sampling measure of forecasted volatility (MIDAS), investors’ sentiment and others.
They also conduct tests that rule out the concern that observed returns are generated by a single
(additive) probability distribution. In our empirical exploration, data in Table 2 indicate that the
correlation of ambiguity with risk is relatively low. Table 6 we examine the explanatory power of our
measure of ambiguity relative to others that have been proposed.

3.3       Estimating expected ambiguity
Next, we estimate the expected ambiguity of every stock in every sample month. We assume that
individuals form an expectation about future ambiguity by taking into account the evolution of a given
stock’s past ambiguity over time. The average monthly ambiguity f (over firms) is positively skewed.
To adjust for skewness and to avoid negative values of conditional ambiguity, we examine the natural
logarithm of fj,t .
       The estimated autocorrelations of fj,t suggest using the autoregressive moving average (ARMA)
model for estimating expected ambiguity. Using the formal link between realized and conditional
volatilities, as provided by Andersen et al. (2003), we estimate the expected ambiguity (conditional
volatility of probabilities) by substituting the realized ambiguity (realized volatility of probabilities),
f, for the latent monthly ambiguity.25 To do so, for each company in each month, ln\
                                                                                   fj,t+1 is computed
  24                                                                    1
       We find that this scale improves the pervious scale                1
                                                                     w ln w
                                                                               for the bin’s size, used in Izhakian and Yermack (2017),
in the sense that it reduces the sensitivity of the estimated f to the selection of the bin’s size.
                                                                           2
  25
     Andersen et al. (2003) provide the theoretical framework for integrating high-frequency intraday data into the
measurement of daily volatility, and they show that long-memory Gaussian vector autoregression for the logarithmic


                                                                       19
using the coeﬃcients estimated by the time-series ARMA(p, q) model
                                                       ∑
                                                       p                         ∑
                                                                                 q
                            ln fj,t = ψ0 + ϵj,t +             ψi · ln fj,t−i +         θi · ϵj,t−1                  (19)
                                                        i=1                      i=1
with the minimal Akaike information criterion (AIC). The expected volatility is then calculated as
                          ( 2 )E             (                          )
                           fj,t+1    = exp 2ln\  fj,t+1 + 2Var [uj,t+1 ] .                      (20)

where Var [uj,t+1 ] is the minimal predicted variance of the error term. For every month t, using the
data of only the 36 preceding months, i.e., from month t − 36 to month t − 1, the time-series regression
given by Equation (19) is estimated for each p = 1, . . . , 10 and q = 1, . . . , 10; in total p × q = 100
combinations. The coeﬃcients of the model that attains the minimal AIC (the highest-quality model)
                                                           (       )E
are then used for the estimation of the expected ambiguity, f2j,t+1 , by Equation (20). Note that
these estimates of expected ambiguity are out-of-sample estimates.

3.4    Estimating expected volatility
Along with ambiguity, volatility serves as the most important explanatory variable in our analysis.
We compute monthly volatility with standard methods, using daily log returns adjusted for dividends
obtained from the CRSP database. Since probabilities are uncertain, volatilities can be viewed as
computed using expected probabilities, as theoretically justified in Izhakian (2016). For each individ-
ual stock in a given month, we calculate the standard deviation, Stdj,t , of the stock’s daily returns over
that month, again applying the Scholes and Williams (1977) correction for non-synchronous trading
and a correction for heteroscedasticity.26 As with ambiguity, the average volatility measures Stdj,t
(over firms) are also positively skewed. To adjust for skewness and to avoid negative values of condi-
tional volatility, we examine the natural logarithm of Stdj,t . Again we assume that investors form an
expectation about future volatility based upon its evolution over time for a given stock. The average
autocorrelations (over firms) of ln (Stdj,t ) decay beyond lag 6, suggesting that ln (Stdj,t ) follows an au-
toregressive process. Similarly to the procedure applied to ambiguity, for every month t, the expected
volatility is also estimated with ARMA(p, q) for each equity j. Namely, using realized volatility, the
             \
parameter ln Stdj,t+1 is estimated using the coeﬃcients of the time-series model

                                                       ∑
                                                       p                           ∑
                                                                                   q
                          ln Stdj,t = ψ0 + ϵj,t +             ψi · ln Stdj,t−i +         θi · ϵj,t−1                (21)
                                                        i=1                        i=1

daily realized volatilities performs admirably. We apply the same approach to ambiguity, since it uses probabilities that
are estimated from intraday data.
  26
     See, for example, French et al. (1987).




                                                           20
that attains the minimal AIC out of the p × q = 100 combinations of coeﬃcients obtained from this
regression.27 The expected volatility is then calculated as
                                              (                              )
                          VarEj,t+1   =   exp   2 ln \
                                                     Stdj,t+1 + 2Var [uj,t+1 ,
                                                                            ]                                          (22)

where Var [uj,t+1 ] is the minimal predicted variance of the error term. As with expected ambiguity,
the obtained estimates of expected volatility are out-of-sample.

3.5    Leverage and firm specific characteristics
The annual leverage ratio of each firm is the main dependent variable in our empirical tests, and we
employ both the book value and the market value versions of this ratio. Book leverage is computed as
“debt in current liabilities” plus “long-term debt” divided by the total book value of assets. Market
leverage is computed as “debt in current liabilities” plus “long-term debt” divided by the total market
value of assets, where the latter is the market value of the equity at the end of the fiscal year plus
“debt in current liabilities” plus “long-term debt”.
    In addition to the leverage ratios, we obtain a set of annual firm characteristics using variables
that are standard in the empirical capital structure literature. Firm size is measured by the log of
sales normalized by gross domestic product (GDP).28 Firm profitability is measured by operating
income before depreciation divided by book assets. Asset tangibility is measured by property, plant
and equipment divided by book assets. The market to book ratio is measured by the market value of
equity plus total debt plus preferred stock liquidation value minus deferred taxes and investment tax
credits divided by book assets. Research and development is measured by R&D expenses relative to
sales normalized by 10, 000. In addition, to explore the firms’ leverage ratios relative to their industry,
we also include industry median annual leverage, where firms are classified by their four-digit SIC
codes. Expected marginal tax rates are obtained from John Graham’s website. When the expected
marginal tax rate is missing, we use the industry median annual marginal tax rate if available or the
market-wide median annual marginal tax rate if necessary. Firm age is measured relative to the first
year the stock price is reported in Compustat (Hadlock and Pierce, 2010).
    Table 1 presents summary statistics for the key variables used in the paper. Based on the statistics
presented in the table, our sample seems broadly consistent with those from other studies.

                                                        [ Table 1 ]
  27
     Hansen and Lunde (2005) also estimate the expected volatilities by substituting the realized volatilities for the latent
volatilities.
  28
     Alternatively, firm size can be measured by the log of book assets normalized to the annual GDP level. We have
also tested our hypotheses using this alternate measure of firm size and the results are virtually identical.



                                                             21
    Table 2 presents a correlation matrix for the variables. The two measures of uncertainty, risk
(volatility) and ambiguity, are only weakly negatively related to one another, with an average esti-
mated monthly correlation of -0.0857 (not reported). This suggests that the two variables capture
economically distinct aspects of financial uncertainty, a conclusion that coincides with the comprehen-
sive tests of Brenner and Izhakian (2016). The process of averaging monthly variables that are weakly
related to provide an annual measure will of course reduce randomness (noise) and so as expected,
annual measures of risk and ambiguity, have a stronger estimated correlation, -0.404 in Table 2.

                                               [ Table 2 ]


3.6   Regression tests
To test the statements of Propositions 3 and 4, we use two main empirical models. The first model
explores firm-level variation in the leverage ratio L. This model uses the time series/cross sectional
regression that is standard in the empirical capital structure literature.

                       Lj,t = α + β1 · f2j,t−1 + β2 · Varj,t−1 + γ · Zj,t−1 + εj,t ,               (23)

where j designates firm and t designates year. The vector Z consists of the standard controls in the
literature for firm characteristics as described in Section 3.5. The main goals of this regression test
are to examine the explanatory power (beyond the standard control variables) provided by ambiguity
for the leverage ratio and to provide a benchmark for comparison to the existing literature.
    The second model explores the eﬀect of firm-level change in ambiguity on the change in firm
leverage. To this end, we estimate

                   ∆Li,t = α + β1 · ∆f2j,t−1 + β2 · ∆Varj,t−1 + γ · ∆Zj,t−1 + εj,t ,               (24)

where ∆Li,t is the change in variable L between time t − 1 and t and ∆Zi,t−1 is the change in the
vector of variables Z between time t − 2 and time t − 1. This test is introduced in order to address
the omitted variables problem inherent in the standard levels regression (as identified by Lemmon,
Roberts and Zender (2008)).
    Both models are tested using both book leverage and market leverage. They are also tested using
both realized ambiguity and risk and for expected ambiguity and risk, estimated as detailed above.
All reported standard errors are clustered by year and by firm.


4     Empirical findings


                                                    22
4.1      Main findings
First, we test the basic model in Equation (23). That is, we test whether the level of the leverage
ratio is aﬀected by the level of ambiguity and risk in the previous year. Table 3 presents the findings
of these regression tests. Panel A shows estimates for the book leverage ratio, while Panel B shows
estimates for the market leverage ratio. In both panels, the actual values of ambiguity and risk are
used in the first four columns, while the expected values, as defined earlier, are used in the right four
columns. In each case we present estimates for leverage as a function of ambiguity alone, then as
a function of risk alone, then in a model with both the risk and ambiguity measures included, and
finally in a model that also includes a full range of additional control variables.
      Table 3 shows a relatively consistent pattern of results. When ambiguity, expected ambiguity,
risk, or expected risk are included in the model alone or in combination the estimated coeﬃcients
are consistent with the hypothesized relationships between these variables and leverage. That is, in
each of these models ambiguity or expected ambiguity has an estimated coeﬃcient that is positive
and significant while risk has an estimated coeﬃcient that is negative and (except for one case) signif-
icant. However, when the usual control variables are added to the regression explaining book leverage
(columns 4 and 8), the estimated coeﬃcients on the measures of risk become positive and significant.
In the regressions explaining market leverage, the coeﬃcient estimates for both the ambiguity mea-
sures and the risk measures see a reversal of the sign when full slate of controls are included. The
coeﬃcient estimates on the measures of ambiguity become negative and significant while the coeﬃcient
estimates on the measures of risk become positive and significant.

                                                        [ Table 3 ]

      Next, we present the results of an empirical model designed to control the endogeneity problem
inherent in the standard levels regression by testing whether leverage is adjusted in response to changes
to the extent of ambiguity and/or to risk. That is, we test the model in Equation (24), which suggests
that a change in the extent of ambiguity or a change in the level of risk will be followed by a change in
the use of leverage in the subsequent year. As with the level regressions, we test both book leverage
ratio (Panel A) and market leverage ratio (Panel B). Estimates are arranged identically to those
in Table 3. In these versions of the hypothesis tests we find that in every model, the ambiguity
(or expected ambiguity) variable has a positive and highly significant coeﬃcient estimate while the
coeﬃcient estimates for risk (or expected risk) are uniformly negative and significant.29
 29
      Note that firm age is not included as a control variable in the changes regression for the obvious reason.



                                                             23
       Control variables in Table 4 generally have estimates in line with prior research. Leverage is higher
in larger firms while more profitable firms use less leverage. Firms with higher asset tangibility borrow
more (perhaps due to the availability of collateral when assets in place are large) while leverage is lower
when the market-to-book ratio is high (which may be a reflection of investment opportunities versus
assets in place). One surprising result in our model is that the estimated relation between between
research & development spending and leverage is essentially zero. Most studies, such as Mackie-Mason
(1990) and Berger, Ofek and Yermack (1997), have found a negative relation, in line with the Myers
(1977) prediction that growth opportunities will be financed mostly by equity.

                                                         [ Table 4 ]
       We note that when we estimate the regression using changes, the estimates for the ambiguity
variable—the central focus of our study—are positive and significant regardless of the controls used
or the inclusion or exclusion of the risk variable. For all specifications of the regressions the estimates
for the eﬀect of ambiguity upon leverage appear to be more consistent and more reliably significant
than the estimates for the risk variable.30 These findings are remarkably robust and are consistent
for a variety of diﬀerent restrictions placed on the sample of firms included in the tests. If we trim
rather than windsorize the data, require consecutive data points to ensure a time series component to
the estimates, or measure firm size using the natural log of book assets, the ambiguity measures are
always positively and significantly related to leverage while the risk measures are negatively but not
always significantly related to leverage.31 The somewhat erractic significance of the risk variable can
been seen as consistent with Frank and Goyal (2009), who find that risk, measured as the variance
of stock returns, is not one of the core factors determining leverage, although their analysis is based
on the incremental contribution to R-squared rather than the magnitude or significance of coeﬃcient
estimates.
       To investigate the economic significance of ambiguity in explaining capital structure decisions,
Table 5 presents measures of the economic significance of the diﬀerent independent variables we employ.
The table is constructed by multiplying the coeﬃcient estimate of each explanatory variable from
Table 4 (Panels A and B), shown in the first column, by its standard deviation, shown in the second
column, with the product of these two quantities displayed in the third column under the heading
significance. The table reveals several patterns. First, ambiguity and expected ambiguity have greater
  30
     Similarly, using firm fixed eﬀects, rather than first diﬀerences to control for the firm specific unobserved heterogeneity
in leverage, provides similar results. Specifically, the (unreported) estimated coeﬃcients on ambiguity or expected
ambiguity are positive and significant while the estimated coeﬃcients on risk or expected risk are negative but not
always statistically significant.
  31
     These are all treatments of the data that have been used in prior studies of leverage.


                                                              24
levels of economic significance (though of opposite signs) than risk or expected risk in explaining
leverage choice. Second, consistent with theoretical results, the measure of the expected future value
ambiguity appears to have a much larger impact on leverage than does the simple lagged realized value
of ambiguity. Finally, a few of the standard control variables used in empirical capital structure studies
have roughly equivalent levels of economic significance than ambiguity or expected ambiguity. When
explaining book leverage, the tangibility of the firm’s assets and firm size (log(1+sales)) exhibit greater
economic significance than ambiguity and roughly the same level of significance as expected ambiguity.
However, both ambiguity and expected ambiguity display greater economic significance than the other
standard control variables (profitability, market to book ratio, R&D, industry median leverage and the
measure of the marginal tax rate). When explaining market leverage only firm size displays greater
economic significance than ambiguity, while expected ambiguity and firm size have equivalent levels of
economic significance. In the market leverage regressions, ambiguity and expected ambiguity display
greater levels of economic significance than all of the other control variables. Overall, relative to a
set of firm specific characteristics commonly used in the empirical capital structure literature, the
decision maker’s expectation for the future level of ambiguity faced by the firm appears to have a
highly significant impact on the leverage decision.

                                                [ Table 5 ]

   Table 6 reports robustness tests using alternative proxies for ambiguity that have appeared pre-
viously in the literature. We test each of the following four factors as a substitute for our ambiguity
measure as well as a complementary factor alongside our measure. The variance of the mean (Var
mean) is the variance of daily mean returns (computed from 5-minute returns) over the month. The
variance of the variance (Var var) is the variance of daily variance returns (computed from 5-minute
returns) over the month. Bid-ask spread is the eﬀective bid-ask spread. Analysts dispersion is the
variance among analyst forecasts of the stock price.
   We run our regression tests using changes in book and market leverage, as explained by year lagged
changes in the ambiguity proxies. All regressions include an intercept and changes in the standard
control variables that are included in Table 4. Panel A presents the results using book leverage and
panel B presents results using market leverage. The results display a fairly consistent pattern. When
the alternative proxies for ambiguity are included in the regressions explaining book leverage (instead
of our measure of ambiguity) none of the alternative proxies show a statistically significant relation
with leverage (columns 2 - 5 in panel A). When the alternative measures of ambiguity are included


                                                    25
in the regressions explaining market leverage (columns 2 - 5 in panel B) only the bid-ask spread is
a significant explanatory variable. The bid-ask spread, however, has a significantly negative relation
with market leverage rather than the positive relation predicted by the theory. This may simply be
due to the fact that the bid-ask spread is likely to proxy for a variety of other forces related to market
leverage; asymmetric information, liquidity, etc.
    The final four columns in panels A and B in Table 6 include both our measure of ambiguity and
the previously used proxies in regressions that also control for risk and the other control variables.
Importantly, our measure of ambiguity remains positive and statistically significant in all the regres-
sions for both book and market leverage. The variance of mean and the dispersion of analyst forecasts
are never significantly related to leverage. The variance of variance is insignificantly related to book
leverage but significantly negatively related to market leverage when our measure of ambiguity is
included in the regression. The bid-ask spread has a significantly negative relation to both book and
market leverage. We interpret these results as confirming that our measure of ambiguity is not simply
a proxy for previously used measures. We also conclude that the previously used proxies for ambiguity,
while plausibly reflecting some aspects of ambiguity, do not seem to capture the salient features of
this aspect of uncertainty in the context of the leverage decision.

                                               [ Table 6 ]



5    Conclusion
Uncertainty plays a role in capital structure choice and many other important financial decisions.
Until recently, most studies controlled for uncertainty simply by considering risk, typically measured
as the standard deviation or variance of returns to common stock. However, ambiguity, or Knight-
ian uncertainty, represents a separate and distinct type of uncertainty. We contribute to a growing
empirical literature by showing that ambiguity and risk both play roles in capital structure choice.
    We present a model generating hypotheses of a positive relation between ambiguity and leverage,
and we test these hypotheses using cross-sectional data and first diﬀerences in a dataset covering more
than 56,000 firm-year observations from more than 11,500 individual Compustat firms. Theoretically,
while risk should should have the well known negative relation to leverage, we show that ambiguity
should be positively related to leverage. As predicted, we find a positive association between ambiguity
and leverage along with a negative association between equity risk (as a proxy for the risk of the cash
flows) and leverage. The coeﬃcient estimates suggest that the expectation of the future ambiguity


                                                    26
facing the firm has an economically meaningful impact on the leverage decision. Robustness tests
demonstrate that other proxies for ambiguity that have been proposed are not meaningful explanators
of leverage.
   Our results are consistent with other recent papers analyzing variables aﬀected by financial uncer-
tainly, including the pricing of credit default swaps and the timing of stock option exercises. Together,
these studies suggest that the role of uncertainty in financial decisions is richer and more nuanced
than previously believed, and that further investigations of amibiguity have the promise of yielding
additional insights that may improve our understanding of basic financial decision-making.




                                                   27
References
Andersen, T. G., T. Bollerslev, F. X. Diebold, and H. Ebens (2001) “The distribution of realized stock return
  volatility,” Journal of Financial Economics, Vol. 61, No. 1, pp. 43–76.
Andersen, T. G., T. Bollerslev, F. X. Diebold, and P. Labys (2003) “Modeling and Forecasting Realized Volatil-
  ity,” Econometrica, Vol. 71, No. 2, pp. 579–625.
Anderson, E. W., E. Ghysels, and J. L. Juergens (2009) “The Impact of Risk and Uncertainty on Expected
  Returns,” Journal of Financial Economics, Vol. 94, No. 2, pp. 233–263.
Antoniou, C., R. D. Harris, and R. Zhang (2015) “Ambiguity aversion and stock market participation: An
  empirical analysis,” Journal of Banking & Finance, Vol. 58, pp. 57–70.
Avramov, D. (2002) “Stock return predictability and model uncertainty,” Journal of Financial Economics, Vol.
  64, No. 3, pp. 423–458.
Barry, C. B. and S. Brown (1984) “Diﬀerential information and the small firm eﬀect,” Journal of Financial
  Economics, Vol. 13, No. 2, pp. 283–294.
Bawa, V. S., S. Brown, and R. Klein (1979) Estimation Risk and Optimal Portfolio Choice in , Studies in
  Bayesian Econometrics, No. 3, Amsterdam: North-Holland.
Berger, P. G., E. Ofek, and D. L. Yermack (1997) “Managerial entrenchment and capital structure decisions,”
  The Journal of Finance, Vol. 52, No. 4, pp. 1411–1438.
Boyle, P. P., L. Garlappi, R. Uppal, and T. Wang (2011) “Keynes Meets Markowitz: The Tradeoﬀ Between
  Familiarity and Diversification,” Management Science, Vol. 58, pp. 1–20.
Brenner, M. and Y. Izhakian (2016) “Asset Prices and Ambiguity: Empirical Evidence,” SSRN eLibrary,
  1996802.
Cao, H. H., T. Wang, and H. H. Zhang (2005) “Model Uncertainty, Limited Market Participation, and Asset
  Prices,” The Review of Financial Studies, Vol. 18, No. 4, pp. 1219–1251.
Chapman, D. A. and V. Polkovnichenko (2009) “First-Order Risk Aversion, Heterogeneity, and Asset Market
  Outcomes,” The Journal of Finance, Vol. 64, No. 4, pp. 1863–1887.
Chen, Z. and L. Epstein (2002) “Ambiguity, Risk, and Asset Returns in Continuous Time,” Econometrica, Vol.
  70, No. 4, pp. 1403–1443.
Chew, S. H. and J. S. Sagi (2008) “Small Worlds: Modeling Attitudes Toward Sources of Uncertainty,” Journal
  of Economic Theory, Vol. 139, No. 1, pp. 1–24.
Coles, J. and U. Loewenstein (1988) “Equilibrium pricing and portfolio composition in the presence of uncertain
  parameters,” Journal of Financial Economics, Vol. 22, No. 2, pp. 279–303.
Coles, J., U. Loewenstein, and J. Suay (1995) “On Equilibrium Pricing under Parameter Uncertainty,” Journal
  of Financial and Quantitative Analysis, Vol. 30, No. 03, pp. 347–364.
Constantinides, G. M. (1982) “Intertemporal Asset Pricing with Heterogeneous Consumers and without Demand
  Aggregation,” The Journal of Business, Vol. 55, No. 2, pp. 253–267.
Cremers, K. M. (2002) “Stock return predictability: A Bayesian model selection perspective,” Review of Finan-
  cial Studies, Vol. 15, No. 4, pp. 1223–1249.
Drechsler, I. (2012) “Uncertainty, Time-Varying Fear, and Asset Prices,” The Journal of Finance, Forthcoming.
Ellsberg, D. (1961) “Risk, Ambiguity, and the Savage Axioms,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 75, No.
  4, pp. 643–669.
Epstein, L. G. and M. Schneider (2008) “Ambiguity, Information Quality, and Asset Pricing,” The Journal of
  Finance, Vol. 63, No. 1, pp. 197–228.
Frank, M. Z. and V. K. Goyal (2009) “Capital structure decisions: which factors are reliably important?”
  Financial management, Vol. 38, No. 1, pp. 1–37.
French, K. R., G. W. Schwert, and R. F. Stambaugh (1987) “Expected stock returns and volatility,” Journal
  of Financial Economics, Vol. 19, No. 1, pp. 3–29.


                                                      28
Gilboa, I. and D. Schmeidler (1989) “Maxmin Expected Utility with Non-Unique Prior,” Journal of Mathemat-
  ical Economics, Vol. 18, No. 2, pp. 141–153.
Hadlock, C. J. and J. R. Pierce (2010) “New evidence on measuring financial constraints: Moving beyond the
  KZ index,” Review of Financial studies, Vol. 23, No. 5, pp. 1909–1940.
Hansen, L. P. and T. J. Sargent (2001) “Robust Control and Model Uncertainty,” American Economic Review,
  Vol. 91, No. 2, pp. 60–66.
Hansen, L. P., T. J. Sargent, and T. D. Tallarini (1999) “Robust Permanent Income and Pricing,” The Review
  of Economic Studies, Vol. 66, No. 4, pp. 873–907.
Hansen, P. R. and A. Lunde (2005) “A forecast comparison of volatility models: does anything beat a
  GARCH(1,1)?” Journal of Applied Econometrics, Vol. 20, No. 7, pp. 873–889.
Izhakian, Y. (2012) “Capital Asset Pricing under Ambiguity,” SSRN eLibrary, 2007815.

        (2016) “A Theoretical Foundation of Ambiguity Measurement,” SSRN eLibrary, 1332973.
        (2017) “Expected Utility with Uncertain Probabilities Theory,” Journal of Mathematical Economics,
  Vol. 69, pp. 91–103.
Izhakian, Y. and S. Benninga (2011) “The Uncertainty Premium in an Ambiguous Economy,” The Quarterly
   Journal of Finance, Vol. 1, pp. 323–354.
Izhakian, Y. and D. Yermack (2017) “Risk, Ambiguity, and the Exercise of Employee Stock Options,” The
   Journal of Financial Economics, Vol. 124, pp. 65–85.
Jensen, M. C. and W. H. Meckling (1976) “Theory of the firm: Managerial behavior, agency costs and ownership
  structure,” Journal of financial economics, Vol. 3, No. 4, pp. 305–360.
Karni, E. and M.-L. Vierø (2013) ““Reverse Bayesianism”: A Choice-Based Theory of Growing Awareness,”
  American Economic Review, Vol. 103, No. 7, pp. 2790–2810.
Kendall, M. and A. Stuart (2010) “The Advanced Theory of Statistics. Vol. 1: Distribution Theory,” London:
  Griﬃn, 2010, 6th ed., Vol. 1.
Knight, F. M. (1921) Risk, Uncertainty and Profit, Boston: Houghton Miﬄin.

Kraus, A. and R. H. Litzenberger (1973) “A state-preference model of optimal financial leverage,” The journal
  of finance, Vol. 28, No. 4, pp. 911–922.
Lee, S. (2014) “Knightian uncertainty and capital structure: Theory and evidence,” SSRN eLibrary, 2374679.

Lemmon, M. L., M. R. Roberts, and J. F. Zender (2008) “Back to the beginning: persistence and the cross-
  section of corporate capital structure,” The Journal of Finance, Vol. 63, No. 4, pp. 1575–1608.
Mackie-Mason, J. K. (1990) “Do taxes aﬀect corporate financing decisions?” The journal of finance, Vol. 45,
 No. 5, pp. 1471–1493.
Merton, R. C. (1974) “On the pricing of corporate debt: The risk structure of interest rates,” Journal of
 Finance, Vol. 29, No. 2, pp. 449–470.
Modigliani, F. and M. H. Miller (1958) “The cost of capital, corporation finance and the theory of investment,”
 The American economic review, Vol. 48, No. 3, pp. 261–297.
Myers, S. C. (1977) “Determinants of corporate borrowing,” Journal of financial economics, Vol. 5, No. 2, pp.
 147–175.
Nau, R. F. (2006) “Uncertainty Aversion with Second-Order Utilities and Probabilities,” Management Science,
  Vol. 52, pp. 136–145.
Pástor, L. (2000) “Portfolio selection and asset pricing models,” The Journal of Finance, Vol. 55, No. 1, pp.
   179–223.
Pástor, L. and R. F. Stambaugh (2000) “Comparing asset pricing models: an investment perspective,” Journal
   of Financial Economics, Vol. 56, No. 3, pp. 335–381.



                                                      29
Pflug, G. and D. Wozabal (2007) “Ambiguity in Portfolio Selection,” Quantitative Finance, Vol. 7, No. 4, pp.
  435–442.
Rothschild, M. and J. E. Stiglitz (1970) “Increasing Risk: I. A Definition,” Journal of Economic Theory, Vol.
  2, No. 3, pp. 225–243.
Schmeidler, D. (1989) “Subjective Probability and Expected Utility without Additivity,” Econometrica, Vol.
  57, No. 3, pp. 571–587.
Scholes, M. and J. Williams (1977) “Estimating betas from nonsynchronous data,” Journal of Financial Eco-
  nomics, Vol. 5, No. 3, pp. 309–327.
Thimmea, J. and C. Völkertb (2015) “Ambiguity in the Cross-Section of Expected Returns: An Empirical
  Assessment,” Journal of Business & Economic Statistics, Vol. 33, pp. 418–429.
Titman, S. and R. Wessels (1988) “The determinants of capital structure choice,” The Journal of finance, Vol.
  43, No. 1, pp. 1–19.
Tversky, A. and D. Kahneman (1992) “Advances in Prospect Theory: Cumulative Representation of Uncer-
  tainty,” Journal of Risk and Uncertainty, Vol. 5, No. 4, pp. 297–323.
Ulrich, M. (2013) “Inflation ambiguity and the term structure of U.S. Government bonds,” Journal of Monetary
  Economics, Vol. 60, No. 2, pp. 295–309.
Williams, C. D. (2015) “Asymmetric Responses to Earnings News: A Case for Ambiguity,” Accounting Review,
 Vol. 90, pp. 785–817.




                                                     30
A     Appendix

A.1    Discrete state space

Let S be a finite state space and X : S → R be a consumption. The outcomes of X can then be
written X = (x1 , . . . , xn ), where xs stands for the outcome at state s and x1 , . . . , xn are listed in a
non-decreasing order. The investor, who doesn’t know the precise probabilities of these outcomes,
holds a set P of possible probability measures P on a σ-algebra of subsets of S. In addition, she holds
a second-order belief ξ (a probability measure on a σ-algebra of subsets of P).
    The expected utility of the investor can then by represented by
                                     (                           )
                           ∑           ∑                           [                 ]
             V (X) =            Υ−1        Υ (PX (xs )) ξ ({PX }) U (xs ) − U (xs+1 ) +                   (25)
                           0<s≤k         P∈P
                                         (                                )
                             ∑               ∑                                [                      ]
                                   Υ−1           Υ (PX (xs )) ξ ({PX })           U (xs ) − U (xs−1 ) ,
                           k<s≤n         P∈P

where U is a (von Neumann-Morgenstern) utility function; and Υ is an outlook function, capturing
attitude toward ambiguity. As usual, a concave U characterizes risk-averse behavior, and a convex
U characterizes risk-loving behavior. Similarly, a concave Υ characterizes ambiguity-averse behavior,
and a convex Υ characterizes ambiguity-loving behavior. The utility function is normalized such that
U (xk ) = 0, for some reference point 0 ≤ k. That is, any outcome indexed by s ≤ k is considered
unfavorable (a loss) and any outcome indexed k < s is considered favorable (a gain).
    By Izhakian ( Theorem 2, 2016), the dual representation of the expected utility in Equation (25),
can be approximated to obtain
                         ∑                        (                                 )
                                                      Υ′′ (E [PX (xs )])
              W (X) ≈         U (xs ) E [φX (xs )] 1 − ′                 VarφX (xs ) +                    (26)
                                                      Υ (E [PX (xs )])
                         s≤k
                         ∑                        (                                 )
                                                      Υ′′ (E [PX (xs )])
                              U (xs ) E [φX (xs )] 1 + ′                 VarφX (xs ) ,
                                                      Υ (E [PX (xs )])
                             s>k

where φX (x) is the probability mass function of X being greater than x; PX (x) is a cumulative
probability P ∈ P of X; and E [·] and Var [·] are respectively the expectation and the variance of
probabilities taken using the second order probability ξ. To simplify notations, the subscript X,
designating the random variable, is omitted. Using this functional form, the state prices of state s ∈ S
can be defined by
                                                                  ∂s U
                                         qs = E [φ (s)] Λ (s)          ,                                  (27)
                                                                  ∂0 U




                                                        31
where
                                       
                                        1 + η (E [P (s)]) Var [φ (s)] , s ≤ k
                               Λ (s) =                                         ,                    (28)
                                        1 − η (E [P (s)]) Var [φ (s)] , s > k

Accordingly, the risk neutral probability of state s is
                                          qs         E [φ (s)] Λ (s) ∂∂0s U
                                   πs∗ = ∑         =∑                     U
                                                                          ∂s U
                                                                               ,                    (29)
                                                q
                                               s s   s E [φ (s)] Λ (s)    ∂0 U
and the risk-free rate of return is
                                     1                            1
                               rf = ∑          −1= ∑                       ∂s U
                                                                                − 1.                (30)
                                       s qs              s E [φ (s)] Λ (s) ∂0 U
Let F be the face value of a zero-coupon debt and d is index. The objective function can then be
written

                   max         S0 (F ) + D0 (F )
                    F
                                   1 ∑ ∗
                   s.t.   S0   =            πs (1 − τ ) (xs − F )
                                 1 + rf
                                        d<s
                                                                                         
                                   1 ∑ ∗                      ∑                  ∑
                          D0   =             πs (1 − α) x +       πs∗ (1 − α) x +   πs∗ F  .
                                 1 + rf
                                               s≤k                   k<s≤d             d<s


A.2     Proofs

Proof of Theorem 1.
Assume that x ≤ k, i.e., an unfavorable outcome. Substituting the budget constraints into the
objective function in Equation (9) and solving the maximization problem, diﬀerentiation with respect
to θ conditional on a given x (state of nature), provides
                                              (                             )
                          q(x)∂0 U = E [φ (x)] 1 + η (E [P (x)]) Var [φ (x)] ∂x U.

Organizing terms completes the proof. The proof for k < x, i.e., a favorable outcome, is similar.
Proof of Theorem 2.
Obtained from the same arguments of the Modigliani-Miller’s (1958) Proposition 1.
Proof of Theorem 3.
The first order condition, obtained by diﬀerentiating the firm value in Equation (15) with respect to
its leverage, is
                                          ∫   ∞                            
                                       ∗
                        1           π − (x) (1 − τ ) dx
             ∂V (·)                                   ∫ ∞                   
                    =           F                                           = 0.
              ∂F      1 + rf     ∗
                               +π (F )F (1 − α) +          ∗         ∗
                                                          π (x)dx − π (F )F
                                                                 F




                                                           32
Rearranging terms provides
                                                                   ∫   ∞
                                                            τ
                                             F    =                        π ∗ (x)dx.
                                                       π ∗ (F )α   F



Proof of Proposition 2.              Since k < F , every F ≤ x is considered favorable. By Equation (7), for
favorable outcomes π ∗ (x) decreases in ambiguity. This holds for any F ≤ x. Thus, by Equation (14),
S0 decreases in ambiguity.
Proof of Proposition 1.              Consider a payoﬀ F ≤ x. Suppose that risk increases such that instead
of x the payoﬀ is x + ∆ or x − ∆, with equal probabilities, i.e., x ± ∆ is mean-preserving spread of x.
If ∆ ≤ x − F this will not aﬀect to value of the equity. If ∆ > x − F , then                    1
                                                                                                2   (x − F + ∆) > x − F .
This holds for any F ≤ x, Thus, by Equation (14), the value of the equity increases in the risk.
Proof of Proposition 3.
Substitute the explicit expression of π ∗ (·) into the optimal leverage in Equation (16) to obtain
                                                        ∫ ∞
                                                   τ
                                      F =                   q(x)dx.                                (31)
                                                 αq(F ) F
The first order condition (FOC) can be written by the implicit function32
                                                             ∫ ∞
                             (              )           τ
                            G F, η, f , γ, R = F −
                                     2
                                                                  q(x)dx.                                               (32)
                                                      αq(F ) F
Suppose that the ambiguity increases such that the variance Var [φ (x)] of the probability of some
x ∈ X increases. Diﬀerentiating the implicit function in Equation (32) with respect to Var [φ (x)],
provides
                                           ∂G                     τ      ∂q(x)
                                                         = −                        .
                                        ∂Var [φ (x)]            αq(F ) ∂Var [φ (x)]
By the second-order condition,
                                                         ∂G
                                                               < 0.
                                                         ∂F
By implicit function theorem,
                                       ∂G         ∂G
                                          dF +              dVar [φ (x)] = 0.
                                       ∂F      ∂Var [φ (x)]
Therefore,
                                                                            ∂G
                                                dF                       ∂Var[φ(x)]
                                                              =        −    ∂G
                                                                                    .
                                             dVar [φ (x)]                   ∂F
                 ∂q(x)
For F ≤ x,      ∂Varφ(x)    = −η (·) ∂∂x0 U
                                          U
                                            ≤ 0 (aversion to ambiguity). Therefore,            ∂G
                                                                                            ∂Var[φ(x)]   ≥ 0, which implies
that       dF
        dVar[φ(x)]   ≥ 0.
                       (               )
 32
      In the notation G F, η, f2 , γ, R , γ stands for the risk aversion coeﬃcient and η for the ambiguity aversion coeﬃcient.


                                                              33
Proof of Proposition 4.
As in Rothschild and Stiglitz (1970), add an additional element of risk by assuming a mean-preserving
spread in a given outcome x. Namely, there is an 0 ≤ ϵ ≤ x, which is mean-independent of x, such
that E [ϵ] = 0 and P (−ϵ) = P (ϵ) =   1
                                      2.   Diﬀerentiating the implicit function in Equation (32) with
respect to ϵ, provides
                                  (                              )(                             )
       ∂G         τ 1                                               ∂xx U (x − ϵ) ∂xx U (x + ϵ)
            =            E [φ (x)] 1 − η (E [P (x)]) Var [φ (x)]                 −
       ∂ϵ       αq(F ) 2                                                ∂0 U          ∂0 U
Since, by risk aversion, ∂xx U < 0 and ∂xxx U ≥ 0,   ∂G
                                                     ∂ϵ     ≤ 0. Because, by the second-order condition,
∂G
∂F   < 0,
                                                       ∂G
                                           dF
                                                = − ∂G
                                                    ∂ϵ
                                                       ≤ 0.
                                           dϵ          ∂F




                                                  34
A.3     Tables and Figures

         Low Risk               Risk                                No Ambiguity               Ambiguity
         High Risk                                                  Ambiguity




                     k F F                                                         k   F F

                       (a) Increasing Risk                                         (b) Increasing Ambiguity


                                             Figure 1: Optimal leverage
This figure depicts the eﬀect of an increase in risk (left panel) and an increase in ambiguity (right panel) upon optimal
leverage. Each panel represents a stylized perceived probability distribution in which the x-axis illustrates the range of
the firm’s possible future values. The point k on the x-axis is a reference point, below which any outcome is considered
unfavorable (a loss) and above which any outcome is considered favorable (a gain). The point F is the optimal choice for
the firm’s leverage, at which the expected marginal benefit of interest tax shields just equals the expected marginal cost
of bankruptcy. In the left panel, the blue series shows a lower-risk perceived probability distribution, which is assumed
to shift to the red series, representing a higher-risk perceived probability distribution. The optimal choice of leverage
then moves to the left on the x-axis. In the right panel, an increase in ambiguity is assumed to occur, resulting in higher
perceived probabilities of expected outcomes below k and lower perceived probabilities of outcomes above k, as shown
by the change from the blue to the red probability distribution. In this case the optimal choice of leverage moves to the
right.




                                                            35
                                     Table 1: Descriptive statistics
The full sample includes 56,325 annual observations associated with 11,527 individual firms between 1993 and
2016, using records from the Compustat database. Expected volatility, based on CRSP daily stock price records,
and expected ambiguity, based on TAQ intraday stock price records, are calculated according to procedures
described in the text. Book leverage ratio is “debt in current liabilities” plus “long-term debt” divided by the
total book assets. Market leverage ratio is “debt in current liabilities” plus “long-term debt” divided by the
total market value of assets, where the latter is the market value of the equity at the end of the fiscal year
plus “debt in current liabilities” plus “long-term debt”. Sale is the log of sales normalized to the annual gross
domestic product (GDP) level. Profitability is the operating income before depreciation divided by book assets.
Tangibility is the plant property divided by book assets. The market to book ratio is market equity plus total
debt plus preferred stock liquidation value minus deferred taxes and investment tax credits divided by book
assets. Research and development is the R&D expenses relative to sales. Median leverage is the median of the
annual leverage in the industry.


 Variable                  Mean          Std Dev       Minimum         Median       Maximum            N


Book Leverage               0.1943        0.1994         0.0000        0.1483         0.9980         56325
Market Leverage             0.1713        0.2048         0.0000        0.0949         0.9999         56325
Ambiguity                   0.0300        0.0189         0.0028        0.0251         0.1161         56325
Risk                        0.0335        0.0466         0.0000        0.0187         1.3803         56325
Expected Ambiguity          0.0328        0.0188        0.0035         0.0296         0.1073         40680
Expected Risk               0.0210        0.0263        0.0003         0.0126         0.7600         40680
Median Book Lev.            0.1622        0.1479        0.0000         0.1236         0.9906         56325
Median Market Lev.          0.1444        0.1589        0.0000         0.0880         1.0000         56325
Profitability               0.0474        0.2447        -2.5559        0.1093         0.5709         56325
Tangibility                0.2416         0.2190        0.0000         0.1685         0.9369         56325
Market to Book             1.9796         1.9431        0.0000         1.3759         36.4716        56325
R&D                        0.4464         3.8677        0.0000         0.0075        222.2798        56325
Sales                      5.7925         2.2146        0.0000         5.9293         11.9069        56325
Tax Rate                   0.1476         0.1522        0.0000         0.0452         0.3948         56325
Firm Age                   15.2657       12.7442        1.0000        11.0000        58.0000         56325




                                                       36
                                                                    Table 2: Correlation matrix
                The full sample includes 56,325 annual observations associated with 11,527 individual firms between 1993 and 2016, using records from the Compustat
                database. Expected volatility, based on CRSP daily stock price records, and expected ambiguity, based on TAQ intraday stock price records, are calculated
                according to procedures described in the text. Book leverage ratio is “debt in current liabilities” plus “long-term debt” divided by the total book assets.
                Market leverage ratio is “debt in current liabilities” plus “long-term debt” divided by the total market value of assets, where the latter is the market value
                of the equity at the end of the fiscal year plus “debt in current liabilities” plus “long-term debt”. Sale is the log of sales normalized to the annual gross
                domestic product (GDP) level. Profitability is the operating income before depreciation divided by book assets. Tangibility is the plant property divided
                by book assets. The market to book ratio is market equity plus total debt plus preferred stock liquidation value minus deferred taxes and investment tax
                credits divided by book assets. Research and development is the R&D expenses relative to sales. p-values appear in parentheses.


                              Book       Market     Ambiguity      Risk      Expected     Expected    Profitability   Tangibility   Market to    R&D         Sales      Tax      Firm
                             Leverage   Leverage                             Ambiguity      Risk                                     Book                               Rate     Age

     Book Leverage               1

     Market Leverage           0.8248       1
                             (<.0001)
     Ambiguity                 0.1498    0.0555          1
                             (<.0001)   (<.0001)
     Risk                     -0.0733    -0.0285      -0.4042        1




37
                             (<.0001)   (<.0001)     (<.0001)
     Expected Ambiguity       0.1509      0.0287       0.9836     -0.5400        1
                             (<.0001)   (<.0001)     (<.0001)    (<.0001)
     Expected Risk            -0.0785    -0.0227      -0.5119      0.8400      -0.5227        1
                             (<.0001)   (<.0001)     (<.0001)    (<.0001)     (<.0001)
     Profitability             0.1011    0.1055       0.2973      -0.3495      0.3577      -0.3677          1
                             (<.0001)   (<.0001)     (<.0001)    (<.0001)     (<.0001)    (<.0001)
     Tangibility               0.3340    0.3414       0.0859      -0.1135      0.0676      -0.0996       0.1982           1
                             (<.0001)   (<.0001)     (<.0001)    (<.0001)     (<.0001)    (<.0001)      (<.0001)
     Market to Book           -0.2112    -0.3759      -0.0980      0.1217      -0.0554      0.0940       -0.1720        -0.1793        1
                             (<.0001)   (<.0001)     (<.0001)    (<.0001)     (<.0001)    (<.0001)      (<.0001)       (<.0001)
     R&D                      -0.0486    -0.0667      -0.0648      0.0453      -0.0783      0.0581       -0.2639        -0.0720       0.0874       1
                             (<.0001)   (<.0001)     (<.0001)    (<.0001)     (<.0001)    (<.0001)      (<.0001)       (<.0001)     (<.0001)
     Sales                     0.2986    0.3325       0.6185      -0.4024      0.6289      -0.3976       0.5898         0.2344       -0.2854     -0.2264       1
                             (<.0001)   (<.0001)     (<.0001)    (<.0001)     (<.0001)    (<.0001)      (<.0001)       (<.0001)     (<.0001)    (<.0001)
     Tax Rate                 -0.0070    -0.0186      0.1247      -0.1979      0.1600      -0.2032       0.3825         0.1327       -0.0431     -0.0955    0.2957        1
                              (.0949)   (<.0001)     (<.0001)    (<.0001)     (<.0001)    (<.0001)      (<.0001)       (<.0001)     (<.0001)    (<.0001)   (<.0001)
     Firm Age                  0.0974    0.1121       0.4756      -0.2815      0.4565      -0.3356       0.2167         0.1181       -0.1695     -0.0556    0.4588     0.1375     1
                             (<.0001)   (<.0001)     (<.0001)    (<.0001)     (<.0001)    (<.0001)      (<.0001)       (<.0001)     (<.0001)    (<.0001)   (<.0001)   (<.0001)
                     Table 3: Level regression estimates of capital structure
 Linear model regression estimates of the level of annual leverage ratio explained by one-year lagged variables.
 The full sample includes 56,325 annual observations associated with 11,527 individual firms between 1993 and
 2016, using records from the Compustat database. Expected volatility, based on CRSP daily stock price records,
 and expected ambiguity, based on TAQ intraday stock price records, are calculated according to procedures
 described in the text. Book leverage ratio is “debt in current liabilities” plus “long-term debt” divided by the
 total book assets. Market leverage ratio is “debt in current liabilities” plus “long-term debt” divided by the
 total market value of assets, where the latter is the market value of the equity at the end of the fiscal year
 plus “debt in current liabilities” plus “long-term debt”. Sale is the log of sales normalized to the annual gross
 domestic product (GDP) level. Profitability is the operating income before depreciation divided by book assets.
 Tangibility is the plant property divided by book assets. The market to book ratio is market equity plus total
 debt plus preferred stock liquidation value minus deferred taxes and investment tax credits divided by book
 assets. Research and development is the R&D expenses relative to sales. t-statistics clustered by firm and year
 appear in parentheses below each coeﬃcient estimate. All errors are double clustered by firm and year.


                                            Panel A: Book leverage
Intercept                0.144      0.211       0.155   0.014      0.139           0.216      0.141      -0.004
                        (87.18)    (191.84)   (74.55)   (4.44)   (65.49)         (160.34)    (47.65)     (-1.01)
Ambiguity                1.717                  1.543   0.271
                        (39.70)               (32.49)   (4.92)
Risk                                -0.453     -0.177   0.071
                                   (-20.91)    (-8.45)  (3.43)
Expected Ambiguity                                                 1.873                       1.833      0.527
                                                                 (36.06)                     (29.92)     (7.60)
Expected Risk                                                                     -0.751      -0.051      0.182
                                                                                 (-16.26)    (-1.02)     (3.76)
Median Leverage                                             0.615                                         0.618
                                                          (92.39)                                       (79.68)
Profitability                                              -0.066                                        -0.080
                                                          (-13.97)                                      (-13.13)
Tangibility                                                 0.106                                         0.093
                                                          (25.32)                                       (19.40)
Market to Book                                             -0.005                                        -0.004
                                                          (-12.53)                                       (-6.50)
R&D                                                         0.001                                         0.001
                                                           (2.59)                                        (2.49)
Sales                                                       0.016                                         0.017
                                                          (28.59)                                       (24.45)
Tax Rate                                                   -0.100                                        -0.105
                                                          (-19.75)                                      (-18.07)
Firm Age                                                   -0.001                                        -0.001
                                                          (-16.80)                                      (-12.99)

N                       49082       49082      49082       49082      35439       35439       35439      35439
R-Square                0.0266      0.0102     0.0279      0.3349     0.0312      0.0096     0.03116     0.3368




                                                        38
                                         Panel B: Market leverage
Intercept             0.155       0.188       0.167    0.030      0.154       0.190     0.166     0.018
                     (89.31)    (164.37)    (74.37)   (9.28)    (69.70)     (136.90)   (52.67)    (4.40)
Ambiguity             0.786                   0.586   -0.859
                     (18.32)                (12.20)  (-15.43)
Risk                             -0.308      -0.203    0.145
                                (-13.63)    (-8.34)   (6.18)
Expected Ambiguity                                                0.784                 0.588      -0.697
                                                                (15.09)                (9.45)     (-10.00)
Expected Risk                                                                -0.490    -0.265       0.127
                                                                            (-10.37)   (-4.84)     (2.58)
Median Leverage                                         0.569                                       0.568
                                                      (81.88)                                     (70.64)
Profitability                                          -0.073                                      -0.087
                                                      (-18.60)                                    (-17.26)
Tangibility                                             0.111                                       0.105
                                                      (25.01)                                     (20.25)
Market to Book                                         -0.017                                      -0.018
                                                      (-37.57)                                    (-30.42)
R&D                                                     0.000                                       0.001
                                                       (1.72)                                      (2.97)
Sales                                                   0.022                                       0.023
                                                      (36.97)                                     (31.48)
Tax Rate                                               -0.102                                      -0.104
                                                      (-19.21)                                    (-17.25)
Firm Age                                               -0.001                                      -0.001
                                                      (-14.54)                                    (-11.08)

N                      49082      49082      49082    49082       35439      35439       35439    35439
R-Square             0.005011   0.004224   0.006523   0.3987     0.004965   0.003702   0.005701   0.3971




                                                 39
                   Table 4: Changes regression estimates of capital structure
Linear model regression estimates of the changes in annual leverage ratio explained by one-year lagged changes
in the variables. The full sample includes 56,325 annual observations associated with 11,527 individual firms
between 1993 and 2016, using records from the Compustat database. Expected volatility, based on CRSP daily
stock price records, and expected ambiguity, based on TAQ intraday stock price records, are calculated according
to procedures described in the text. Book leverage ratio is “debt in current liabilities” plus “long-term debt”
divided by the total book assets. Market leverage ratio is “debt in current liabilities” plus “long-term debt”
divided by the total market value of assets, where the latter is the market value of the equity at the end of the
fiscal year plus “debt in current liabilities” plus “long-term debt”. Sale is the log of sales normalized to the
annual gross domestic product (GDP) level. Profitability is the operating income before depreciation divided by
book assets. Tangibility is the plant property divided by book assets. The market to book ratio is market equity
plus total debt plus preferred stock liquidation value minus deferred taxes and investment tax credits divided by
book assets. Research and development is the R&D expenses relative to sales. t-statistics clustered by firm and
year appear in parentheses below each coeﬃcient estimate. All errors are double clustered by firm and year.


                                           Panel A: Book leverage
Intercept                0.007      0.007      0.007    0.006    0.005          0.006      0.005       0.005
                        (14.34)    (15.51)    (14.30) (11.13)   (10.23)        (12.04)    (10.17)      (9.06)
Ambiguity                0.348                  0.306   0.308
                         (6.42)                (5.44)  (5.43)
Risk                               -0.068      -0.052  -0.057
                                   (-4.03)    (-2.99)  (-3.29)
Expected Ambiguity                                               0.671                     0.638       0.648
                                                                (10.70)                   (9.78)      (9.86)
Expected Risk                                                                  -0.129     -0.046      -0.051
                                                                               (-3.72)    (-2.25)     (-2.41)
Median Leverage                                          -0.020                                       -0.014
                                                         (-2.60)                                      (-1.65)
Profitability                                            -0.008                                        0.000
                                                         (-1.30)                                      (-0.05)
Tangibility                                               0.066                                        0.063
                                                         (5.03)                                       (4.06)
Market to Book                                           -0.001                                       -0.001
                                                         (-2.31)                                      (-2.42)
R&D                                                       0.000                                        0.000
                                                         (-0.39)                                      (0.57)
Sales                                                     0.011                                        0.007
                                                         (5.70)                                       (2.83)
Tax Rate                                                  0.000                                        0.000
                                                         (-0.09)                                      (-0.08)

N                        39906      39906      39906      39906      25961      25961      25961      25961
R-Square                 0.0011     0.0007     0.0015     0.0059     0.0035     0.0007     0.0036     0.0065




                                                         40
                                    Panel B: Market leverage

Intercept             0.009     0.010       0.009     0.007   0.005      0.007    0.005     0.004
                     (15.46)   (18.11)    (15.37)   (11.09)   (7.75)    (11.69)   (7.62)    (6.28)
Ambiguity             0.945                 0.790    0.743
                     (14.48)              (12.01)   (11.28)
Risk                            -0.235     -0.193    -0.196
                               (-10.40)   (-8.80)   (-9.11)
Expected Ambiguity                                             1.788                1.658    1.588
                                                              (21.16)             (19.31)   (18.60)
Expected Risk                                                           -0.395     -0.182    -0.185
                                                                        (-8.63)   (-3.91)   (-4.03)
Median Leverage                                      -0.018                                  -0.015
                                                    (-2.18)                                 (-1.65)
Profitability                                        -0.018                                  -0.012
                                                    (-3.88)                                 (-2.14)
Tangibility                                           0.059                                   0.043
                                                     (4.21)                                  (2.47)
Market to Book                                        0.000                                   0.000
                                                     (1.30)                                  (0.60)
R&D                                                   0.000                                   0.000
                                                     (0.48)                                  (0.23)
Sales                                                 0.025                                   0.017
                                                    (11.68)                                  (6.75)
Tax Rate                                              0.000                                   0.001
                                                    (-0.09)                                  (0.12)

N                    39906     39906      39906      39906    25961     25961     25961     25961
R-Square             0.0063    0.0059     0.0101     0.0183   0.0177    0.0047    0.0186    0.0219




                                                    41
             Table 5: Economic significance of the estimates of capital structure
Linear model regression estimates of the changes in annual leverage ratio explained by one-year lagged changes
in the variables. The full sample includes 56,325 annual observations associated with 11,527 individual firms
between 1993 and 2016, using records from the Compustat database. Expected volatility, based on CRSP daily
stock price records, and expected ambiguity, based on TAQ intraday stock price records, are calculated according
to procedures described in the text. Book leverage ratio is “debt in current liabilities” plus “long-term debt”
divided by the total book assets. Market leverage ratio is “debt in current liabilities” plus “long-term debt”
divided by the total market value of assets, where the latter is the market value of the equity at the end of the
fiscal year plus “debt in current liabilities” plus “long-term debt”. Sale is the log of sales normalized to the
annual gross domestic product (GDP) level. Profitability is the operating income before depreciation divided by
book assets. Tangibility is the plant property divided by book assets. The market to book ratio is market equity
plus total debt plus preferred stock liquidation value minus deferred taxes and investment tax credits divided by
book assets. Research and development is the R&D expenses relative to sales.


                                      Panel A: Book leverage changes
                         Std Dev       Coeﬃcient     Significance  Ambiguity                Ex. Ambiguity
                                                                   Relative to               Relative to
Ambiguity                 0.0092         0.3084         0.0028        1.0000                     1.7992
Risk                      0.0364        -0.0567        -0.0021        1.3690                     2.4631
Expected Ambiguity        0.0079         0.6476         0.0051        0.5558                     1.0000
Expected Risk             0.0183        -0.0514        -0.0009        3.0123                     5.4199
Median leverage           0.0711        -0.0205        -0.0015        1.9431                     3.4962
Profitability             0.1466        -0.0077        -0.0011        2.5119                     4.5195
Tangibility               0.0652         0.0657         0.0043        0.6601                     1.1876
Market to Book            1.5905        -0.0011        -0.0018        1.5719                     2.8282
R&D                       2.7515        -0.0001        -0.0003       10.2751                    18.4873
Sales                     0.4308         0.0113         0.0049        0.5826                     1.0482
Tax Rate                  0.1203        -0.0004         0.0000       67.0586                   120.6542

                                    Panel B: Market leverage changes
                         Std Dev      Coeﬃcient    Significance   Ambiguity                 Ex. Ambiguity
                                                                  Relative to                Relative to
Ambiguity                 0.0092        0.7429        0.0068         1.0000                      1.8315
Risk                      0.0364       -0.1955        -0.0071        0.9566                      1.7521
Expected Ambiguity        0.0079        1.5880         0.0125        0.5460                      1.0000
Expected Risk             0.0183       -0.1848        -0.0034        2.0162                      3.6927
Median leverage           0.0961       -0.0181        -0.0017        3.9045                      7.1511
Profitability             0.1466       -0.0178        -0.0026        2.6137                      4.7870
Tangibility               0.0652        0.0589         0.0038        1.7711                      3.2438
Market to Book            1.5905        0.0004         0.0006       11.1771                     20.4711
R&D                       2.7515        0.0001         0.0003       24.4828                     44.8406
Sales                     0.4308        0.0248         0.0107        0.6376                      1.1678
Tax Rate                  0.1203       -0.0005        -0.0001      120.7594                    221.1726




                                                         42
                                            Table 6: Robustness tests
  Linear model regression estimates of the changes in annual leverage ratio explained by one-year lagged changes
  in the variables. The full sample includes 56,325 annual observations associated with 11,527 individual firms
  between 1993 and 2016, using records from the Compustat database. Book leverage ratio is “debt in current
  liabilities” plus “long-term debt” divided by the total book assets. Market leverage ratio is “debt in current
  liabilities” plus “long-term debt” divided by the total market value of assets, where the latter is the market value
  of the equity at the end of the fiscal year plus “debt in current liabilities” plus “long-term debt”. The variance
  of the mean (Var mean) is the variance of daily mean returns (computed from 5-minute return) over the month.
  The variance of the variance (Var var) is the variance of daily variance returns (computed from 5-minute return)
  over the month. Bid-ask spread is the eﬀective bid-ask spread. Analysts dispersion is the variance among analyst
  forecasts of the stock price. All regressions include an intercept and the following control variables (whose
  coeﬃcient estimates are unreported). Sale is the log of sales normalized to the annual gross domestic product
  (GDP) level. Profitability is the operating income before depreciation divided by book assets. Tangibility is the
  plant property divided by book assets. The market to book ratio is market equity plus total debt plus preferred
  stock liquidation value minus deferred taxes and investment tax credits divided by book assets. Research and
  development is the R&D expenses relative to sales. t-statistics clustered by firm and year appear in parentheses
  below each coeﬃcient estimate. All errors are double clustered by firm and year.


                                               Panel A: Book leverage

Ambiguity               0.248                                                   0.247      0.248      0.216      0.248
                       (3.77)                                                  (3.76)     (3.77)     (3.26)     (3.77)
Risk                   -0.113     -0.139      -0.139     -0.107     -0.138     -0.112     -0.113     -0.085     -0.112
                       (-3.73)    (-4.87)     (-4.89)    (-3.79)    (-4.87)    (-3.72)    (-3.73)    (-2.84)    (-3.71)
Var Mean                           0.000                                        0.000
                                  (0.87)                                       (0.82)
Var Var                                        0.000                                      0.000
                                               (1.06)                                     (0.42)
Bid-Ask Spread                                           -0.003                                      -0.870
                                                         (-0.31)                                     (-5.54)
Analysts Dispersion                                                 -0.002                                      -0.002
                                                                    (-0.54)                                     (-0.54)

N                      21205      21205       21205      21205      21205      21205      21205      21205      21205
R-Square               0.0071     0.0066      0.0066     0.0089     0.0068     0.0068     0.0071     0.0093     0.0072


                                       Panel B: Market leverage

Ambiguity               0.644                                                   0.644      0.644      0.560      0.644
                       (7.79)                                                  (7.80)     (7.79)     (6.77)     (7.79)
Risk                   -0.309     -0.374       -0.374    -0.284      -0.373    -0.309     -0.309     -0.229     -0.308
                       (-8.13)   (-10.10)     (-10.10)   (-7.80)    (-10.07)   (-8.14)    (-8.13)    (-6.14)    (-8.10)
Var Mean                           0.000                                        0.000
                                  (-0.70)                                      (-0.89)
Var Var                                        0.000                                       0.000
                                              (-0.34)                                     (-3.04)
Bid-Ask Spread                                            -2.550                                     -2.493
                                                         (-12.48)                                   (-12.25)
Analysts Dispersion                                                 -0.003                                      -0.003
                                                                    (-1.10)                                     (-1.11)

N                      21205      21205       21205      21205      21205      21205      21205      21205      21205
R-Square               0.0087     0.0186      0.0186     0.0333     0.0187     0.0214     0.0214     0.0354     0.0215




                                                          43
