                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                SUSTAINING IMPACTS WHEN TRANSFERS END:
         WOMEN LEADERS, ASPIRATIONS, AND INVESTMENT IN CHILDREN

                                          Karen Macours
                                           Renos Vakis

                                       Working Paper 22871
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w22871


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    November 2016




We are grateful to the program team at the Ministerio de la Familia and in particular Carold
Herrera and Teresa Suazo for their collaboration during the design of the impact evaluation, as
well as the Centro de Investigación de Estudios Rurales y Urbanos de Nicaragua (in particular
Veronica Aguilera, and Enoe Moncada) for excellent data collection. We are indebted to Ximena
Del Carpio, Fernando Galeana, and Patrick Premand for countless contributions to the wider
research project. We also would like to thank Caridad Araujo, Mariano Bosch, Karla Hoff,
Norbert Schady, and participants of the NBER conference on The Economics of Asset
Accumulation and Poverty Traps for their suggestions. Financial support for this research has
been received from BASIS-AMA (under the USAID Agreement No. EDH-A- 00-06-0003-00
awarded to the Assets and Market Access Collaborative Research Support Program) and the
World Bank (ESSD trust funds, the RRB grant, as well as the Government of the Netherlands
through the BNPP program). The views expressed in this paper are those of the authors and do
not necessarily reflect those of the World Bank, any of its affiliated organizations, or the National
Bureau of Economic Research. All errors and omissions are our own.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2016 by Karen Macours and Renos Vakis. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Sustaining Impacts When Transfers End: Women Leaders, Aspirations, and Investment in
Children
Karen Macours and Renos Vakis
NBER Working Paper No. 22871
November 2016
JEL No. I15,I25,O12,O15

                                          ABSTRACT

Numerous evaluations show that conditional cash transfer programs change households’
investments in their young children, but there are many open questions about how such changes
can be sustained after transfers end. This paper analyzes the role of social interactions with local
female leaders for sustaining program impacts. The social interactions are identified through the
randomized assignment of leaders and other beneficiaries to different cash transfer packages.
Random exposure to leaders that received the largest package was found to augment short-term
program impacts on households’ investments in education and nutrition, and to affect households’
attitudes towards the future during the intervention. This paper shows that the strong social
multiplier effects from leaders’ treatment persisted two years after the end of the program.
Households randomly exposed to female leaders with the largest package sustained higher
investments in their children and reported higher expectations and aspirations for the future of
their children. These results suggest that program design features that enhance ownership of a
program’s objectives by local leaders may shift other beneficiaries’ norms and sustain higher
levels of human capital investments.


Karen Macours
Paris School of Economics
karen.macours@psemail.eu

Renos Vakis
The World Bank
1818 H Street NW
Washington, DC 20043
rvakis@worldbank.org
1. Introduction


The intergenerational transmission of poverty often occurs through low levels of investment in education and

nutrition. Conditional cash transfer programs (CCTs) and many other development interventions therefore

specifically aim to increase human capital investment by the poor. A large body of evidence shows that CCT

programs have been successful in augmenting investment in education and nutrition in many settings

(Fiszbein and Schady, 2009; Ganimian and Murnane, 2014). A key question is whether CCTs can have

lasting impacts on investment behavior after households stop receiving transfers. Only a few papers study

whether the impacts on households’ human capital investments persist after such programs end, and the

evidence is mixed (Macours, Schady and Vakis, 2012; Baird, McIntosh and Ozler, 2016). Even less is known

about the possible mechanisms underlying persistence. A better understanding is needed to derive lessons

regarding optimal design of new programs and adjustments to existing ones. More generally, knowing

whether and how short-term programs can result in long-term increases in human capital investment is

important for policy design.



For programs to have a persistent effect on households’ human capital investments, they need either to

permanently lift existing liquidity constraints, or to change the value households attribute to investments in

education and nutrition.1 The latter may occur if the interventions increase the perceived returns to such

investments by reducing information asymmetries or changing preferences. Nguyen (2008) and Jensen (2010)

show that changes in the perceived returns to schooling through information can lead to educational gains.

Recent evidence also suggests the potential of external interventions to shift preferences by changing parents’

aspirations for their children (Beaman et al., 2012; Bernard et al., 2014).2



Understanding how to design interventions to maximize such shifts hence becomes an important policy

1
    If some decisions are driven by habits, a program that changes habits can also have a persistent effect.
2
 External interventions can also change the aspirations of children themselves (Wydick, Glewwe and Rutledge, 2013) or
aspirations of adults for themselves (Lybbert and Wydick, 2016).



                                                               2
question. Several design features of CCT programs could be contributing to shifts in investment behavior.

CCTs typically include heavy social marketing and conditionalities enforcing attendance at regular meetings

in which the nutritional, health and educational objectives are discussed. To the extent that such messages get

internalized, one could expect increased human capital investments to persist. Targeting the transfers to

women in the household could shift gender norms regarding decision making within the household, and this

too could persist after the transfers stop. Often programs also assign specific roles to key women in the

community to re-enforce the messages, but causal evidence on their specific role is rare.3



This paper shows that interactions with local female leaders can contribute to the persistence of a program’s

impacts, by providing evidence for a CCT pilot program in Nicaragua. It builds on Macours and Vakis

(2014), where we showed that exposure to successful and motivated female leaders substantially increased

impacts on nutritional and educational investments, as well as future-oriented attitudes, while the program

was operating. This paper analyzes whether these shifts were sustained after the program ended. A priori the

answer is not obvious. Increasing aspirations in the presence of many other remaining constraints may lead to

only short-term gains, and households could revert back to pre-program behavior when the transfers stop. On

the other hand, if social interactions during the program changed norms and beliefs regarding human capital

investments, the increased investment levels could persist even after the end of the program. Macours, Schady

and Vakis (2012) show that the Nicaraguan CCT indeed had persistent effects on parental investments in

early childhood. This paper helps explain why.



Using data collected two years after the program ended, we show that social interactions with successful and

motivated leaders were crucial for the persistence of the educational and nutritional investment. Two years

after the transfers stopped, former beneficiaries who live in the proximity of such leaders still show



3
 The importance of these local female leaders has been recognized in several qualitative evaluations of CCT programs
(Adato, 2000; Adato et al, 2004). In Colombia, an independent ECD intervention specifically targeted the “madre
voluntarias” of the CCT program in recognition of their local leadership role (Attanasio et al, 2015).



                                                         3
significantly higher investments in both education and nutrition of their children. Random exposure to

successful leaders also led to significant shifts in parental aspirations and expectations for their children’s.4



We use a two-stage randomized design to identify the social interaction effects. The program combined a

regular CCT with interventions aimed at increasing households’ productive potential. Because it targeted the

vast majority of households in each community and explicitly encouraged group formation, it is a good

setting to analyze the role of social interactions. The experiment varied the nature and the size of the benefit

packages leaders and other households received, and as such creates random variation in whether

beneficiaries live close to leaders that received the largest package. In general all leaders have higher human

capital investments and aspirations than other beneficiaries, and hence provide potential examples to follow.

The leaders that received the largest package, in addition, outperform other leaders in terms of economic

outcomes and also have higher expectations for their children’s future. Earlier findings also showed that

leaders with the largest package communicated more with other beneficiaries during the intervention.5 We

analyze whether proximity to these successful and motivated leaders affected human capital investments of

other beneficiaries.



We follow Manski (2000) and define social interactions as interactions with agents – in this case leaders with

the largest package – that affect actions of other agents through changing constraints, expectations or

preferences. We provide empirical evidence in support of those different channels, by exploiting the random

variation in the type of package each of the non-leaders received and the variation in per capita expenditure

levels that resulted two years after the intervention. Beneficiaries of the largest package - on average - still


4
  We draw on a rich set of questions measuring parental expectations and aspirations. As in Beaman et al (2012) and
Bernard et al (2014) we measure aspirations by asking parents about what they like their children to achieve on a number
of dimensions, such as the desired education level or occupation. As in the later paper, we also separately measure
expectations by asking parents what they think their children realistically will achieve on those same dimensions. Both
set of indicators more broadly capture future oriented attitudes.
5
  More specifically, distance between houses generally reduces communication between leaders and beneficiaries (as
expected), but this was not the case for leaders with the largest package. The differences between leaders with different
packages were significant (Macours and Vakis, 2014).



                                                           4
had higher per capita expenditures two years after the end of the transfers, and more so when they were

exposed to leaders with the same package. Such effects do not exist for beneficiaries of the other packages.

Hence while changes for the first group can be driven in part by relaxing spending constraints, changes for the

other groups are more likely driven by shifts in expectations or aspirations (and hence preferences).



The paper contributes to the developing literature in economics and the wider social sciences on the role and

the formation of aspirations (Genicot and Ray, 2014; Besley, 2016). Appadurai (2004) and Ray (2006) argue

that upward mobility might be difficult for the poor when they lack the capacity to aspire, i.e. when their own

experiences and the experiences of those that are close to them suggest that escaping poverty is not a feasible

option. Yet learning about the positive experiences of others that are sufficiently “close” may help open their

“aspiration window”. Hence social interactions may be instrumental in changing aspirations and shaping

positive attitudes towards the future, and in turn lead to investments in children’s future.6 Empirical evidence

of such mechanisms is rare due to the “reflection problem.” This paper addresses the problem through the

randomized assignment of leaders and other beneficiaries to different benefit packages.



More broadly, this paper relates to recent work on the potential of social interactions to shift norms and

behavior (Paluck and Shepherd, 2012; Feigenberg, Field, and Pande, 2013) and to the emerging literature

about mental models and attitudinal changes (Jensen and Oster 2009; La Ferrara, Chong, and Duryea 2012;

World Bank, 2015; Hoff and Stiglitz, 2016). By focusing on local female leaders, the paper also relates to the

literature on female reservations for local leadership position in India (Chattopadhyay and Duflo, 2004;

Beaman et al, 2009) and in particular to Beaman et al (2012), who show that a law reserving leadership

positions for women affected girls’ educational aspirations.



Finally, this study relates to the growing literature on longer-term impacts of CCT programs (see Molina-

6
  Appadurai (2004) describes how mobilization by social movements can expand the capacity to aspire, in part through
regular social gatherings and sharing ideas and experiences about future-oriented activities among the poor.



                                                         5
Millan et al, 2016, for a review). We contribute by studying the impacts of a one-year randomized pilot

program after it ended, and for which the experimental control group was never phased in. This allows

providing clean evidence of the sustainability of impacts on human capital investments after only a few years,

avoiding selection (attrition) concerns that often hamper long-term studies.              That said, because the

intervention only lasted one year, it differs from many of the large CCT programs in Latin America, where

beneficiaries often receive transfers for many years.7 We return to this point in the conclusion. By focusing on

the impact on human capital investment, we complement other studies that analyze whether the impacts on

human capital outcomes (as opposed to investments) or other welfare outcomes persist on the longer run.

While some studies analyze long-term impacts of ongoing programs (Parker, Behrman and Todd, 2009,

2011; Gertler, Martinez, and Rubino-Codina, 2012; Araujo, Bosch and Schady, 2016), others, like us, provide

evidence on programs with short duration (Barham, Macours, and Maluccio, 2013a,b; Macours, Premand and

Vakis, 2013; Barrera-Osorio, Linden and Saavedra 2015; Filmer and Schady, 2015).



The paper is organized as follows: in the next section we discuss the program and the relevance of social

interactions. Section 3 discusses the data and the empirical strategy. Section 4 shows that social interactions

with successful leaders had persistent impacts on other beneficiaries’ human capital investments. Section 5

shows results for per capita expenditures, parental expectations and aspirations; section 6 concludes.



2. Program information and design



2.1.    Program description and treatment packages8

The Atención a Crisis program was a one-year pilot program implemented in 2006 by the Ministry of the

Family in Nicaragua. In the treatment communities, three different treatments were randomly allocated among

7
  In the large national CCT programs in Colombia or Mexico, for instance, beneficiaries only exit when their children
reach a certain age or after households reach a higher income level.
8
 More details about the program are provided in the online appendices of Macours, Schady and Vakis (2012) and
Macours and Vakis (2014), as well as the following website: http://go.worldbank.org/VUYJAQ3UN0



                                                         6
3000 eligible households. All selected households were eligible for the basic CCT, which included cash

transfers conditional on children’s primary school attendance and health center visits. The transfers came with

a strong social marketing message reinforcing the importance of investing in children’s education and in a

diversified diet. Take-up of the CCT was 95%. In addition to the CCT, one-third of the eligible households

received a scholarship for a vocational training for one adult (with take-up of 89%). Another third of eligible

households received, in addition to the basic CCT, a 200 US$ lump-sum grant to invest in a small non-

agricultural business (with take-up of 99%). This last treatment was perceived by the beneficiaries as the most

attractive, and involved the largest cash amount. We call it the “largest package”. Given the high take-up

rates, we henceforth refer to eligible households in treatment communities as beneficiaries.



The program design aimed to change households’ investment behavior through several mechanisms. The

level of cash transfers was substantial, ranging from 18 per cent of average annual household income for

those receiving the basic CCT package to 34 per cent for those receiving the productive investment package.

The conditionalities and social marketing on education, health and nutrition aimed at changing households’

perspectives about investment in long-term human capital. The program design also created many

opportunities for enhanced communication between beneficiaries. More than 90 per cent of the households in

treatment communities were eligible for the program, increasing the opportunities for information sharing,

possibly resulting in higher motivation and program ownership. Beneficiaries were also required to participate

in local events ranging from discussions on nutrition and health practices to workshops on the importance of

education, business development and labor market skills. The program put in place a system of volunteer

local promotoras to enhance information flows and compliance with program requirements. The promotoras

met frequently with small groups of beneficiary women to talk about these requirements and the program’s

objectives. As such, the program created a lot of new leadership positions for women.9 Women self-selected

into these positions and then subsequently were randomly allocated to one of the three program packages (see

9
  Before the program, leadership positions for women were limited mostly to positions as teachers and health
coordinators.



                                                       7
below). Interviews during and after the intervention showed that most of the promotoras had taken strong

ownership of the messages and objectives of the program, and were committed to reminding other

beneficiaries that the purpose of the cash transfers was to invest in the nutrition and education of their

children. During payment days, for instance, promotoras would often organize with the beneficiaries in their

group to collectively buy food products and material for their children. Among other things, this allowed

beneficiaries to directly observe investments by their promotoras. Qualitative evidence further confirms that

beneficiaries were very aware of investments by others, with plenty of stories about children in the village

going to school well fed, with new cloths and material.



2.2.       Program randomization



The program targeted 6 municipalities in the Northwest of Nicaragua, and a first lottery randomly selected 56

intervention and 50 control communities. Baseline data were used to define household program eligibility

using proxy means methods for both treatment and control.10 In the treatment communities, the main female

caregiver from each eligible household was invited to a registration assembly. If there were more than 30

eligible households in a community, several assemblies were organized at the same time, and households

were assigned to one of the assemblies based on the geographic location of their house. In total, there were

134 assemblies (hence on average 2.4 per community).



During the assemblies, the program objectives and its various components were explained and women were

asked to volunteer for the promotora positions. Volunteers were approved by the assembly and each

promotora became responsible for a group of approximately 10 beneficiaries living close to her, with

promotoras and beneficiaries mutually agreeing on the compositions of the group. After the groups were

formed, and at the very end of each assembly, all the beneficiaries - including the promotoras - participated in



10
     As more than 90% of all households were eligible, the analysis in this paper is limited to the eligible households.



                                                               8
a second lottery process through which the three packages described above were randomly allocated among

the beneficiaries, with each of the three packages assigned to one-third of households in the treatment

communities. As a result of the two lotteries, households were randomly assigned to the control group (in the

control communities), or to one of three packages: the CCT, the CCT plus training, or the CCT plus

productive investment grant (the largest package). Since promotoras and existing female leaders in the

treatment communities were randomly allocated to one of the three treatment groups, beneficiary households

were randomly exposed to leaders with a treatment package that could be different from theirs. In particular,

as there are on average four leaders in each assembly, some beneficiaries will randomly live close to several

leaders that got the largest package, while others may not have any leaders with that package in their

registration assembly.11 This is the main exogenous variation that we exploit.



3. Data and empirical strategy



3.1. Data



In treatment communities, data were collected from all households. In control communities, a random sample

of households was selected at baseline so that the control group was of equal size as each of the three

intervention groups (1000 households). The data analyzed in this paper was collected between August 2008

and May 2009, approximately two years after the last transfer. Individuals who had migrated out of the area

were tracked to different locations in Nicaragua resulting in a very low attrition rate (3 per cent at the

household level), which is uncorrelated with treatment.



The survey instrument was modeled after the Nicaraguan Living Standard Measurement Survey (LSMS),

11
  While the meetings of the promotoras with their groups were, by design, more frequent than meetings with the larger
group of beneficiaries of an assembly, we use the larger assemblies as the reference group in part because the
administrative information on the composition of the small groups is less precise than the information on who
participated in which assemblies. In addition, it is possible that beneficiaries reorganized the groups after the assemblies,
so that the effective groups may not correspond to the administrative data on groups.



                                                             9
with modules on education, health, and detailed household expenditures, among others. For the main set of

results, we use the same education and nutrition investment indicators as those used in Macours and Vakis

(2014). Specifically, for child level education outcomes, we consider all children between 7 and 18 years old,

and use an indicator of whether the child was attending school, the number of days the child has been absent

from school in the last month, and the amount spent on school expenditures since the start of the academic

year. Nutrition investment is measured at the household level and is measured by the shares of food

expenditures for animal products and for vegetables and fruits, reflecting the emphasis of the program’s

messaging on the importance of such nutrients for children. To account for multiple hypotheses testing, we

also combine the education and nutrition variables in two aggregate indices, by first calculating z-scores for

each variable using the mean and standard deviation of the control group, and then averaging over these z-

scores, following Kling, Liebman and Katz (2007).



We complement this analysis with indicators of investments in children 0-7 years old, using the same

indicators of investment in early childhood as Macours, Schady and Vakis (2012). We analyze impacts on

three families of outcomes by calculating average z-scores of a set of indicators for nutrition, education and

health.12 These are the three early childhood risk factors for which investments on average were still higher in

the treatment than in the control, two years after the end of the transfers. As this is an age group that is not yet

in primary school, the stimulation index can be seen as the equivalent of the education index for the older

children. We use these indices to specifically analyze social multiplier effects on investment in children born

after the end of the transfer (and hence approximately 0-2 years old). This allows testing whether the change

in investment behavior is also observed for children not directly affected by the intervention, which provides

a strong test of a more permanent shift in investment behavior.

12
   The nutrition index is the average of the z-scores for the share of food in total expenditures, the shares of animal
proteins and of fruit and vegetables in total food expenditures, and the reverse of the share of staples in total food
expenditures; the stimulation index is the average of the z-scores for variables indicating whether the household has pen
and paper, has a toy, somebody tells stories or sings to the child, and the number of hours reading to the child per week;
and the health index is the average of the z-scores for variables indicating whether the child was weighed, got vitamins
or iron, got deworming drugs, and the number of days sick in bed. See Macours, Schady and Vakis (2012) for detailed
definitions.



                                                           10
A specific module was added in 2008 to ask mothers’ about expectations and aspirations for all their children

between 7 and 15 years old.13 Mothers were asked both what they desired (to measure aspirations), and what

they realistically expected for their children in terms of final educational attainment, occupation, future

monthly earnings, and living standards. To proxy for future living standards, we also ask mothers for the

number of rooms they desired and expected for the house their children would live in in 30 years time. For

occupation, we consider two possible definitions. The first is a dummy indicating whether the mother

expected or desired a professional job for her child, i.e. a job for which university education is required. The

second is a dummy indicating whether she expected or desired a professional or skilled salary job, i.e. a job

for which at least secondary education would be required. For monthly earnings, and taking into account the

highly skewed nature of the distribution of this variable, we follow Athey and Imbens (2016) and use an

indicator of the rank in the earnings distribution.14 Finally, to account for multiple hypotheses testing, we use

an aggregate indicator for both aspirations and expectations, which is the average of the standardized

measures for educational attainment, occupation, monthly earnings and living standard (number of rooms in

the house), following Kling, Liebman and Katz (2007).15 All standardized measures were obtained by

subtracting the mean and dividing by the standard deviation of the control group.



3.2. Outcomes for leaders

Identification relies on the random allocation of beneficiaries to one of the three program packages or the

control, and the random allocation of these same packages among leaders. We consider both the leadership

positions created in the treatment communities by the program (the promotoras) and other women with

leadership positions, since they are not mutually exclusive (many health coordinators and teachers

13
  The module was not asked for children younger than 7, as mothers demonstrated difficulties answering such questions
for their young children during piloting.
14
     Results are qualitative similar when using the absolute value of earnings, winsorized at 95th percentile.
15
  As an important share of parents desire professional jobs for their children, but few expect their children to get such
jobs, we use the variable for professional job in the aggregate index for aspirations, and the variable for professional or
skilled wage job in the aggregate index for expectations.



                                                               11
volunteered to be promotoras). Female leaders tend to be younger and more educated than the average female

beneficiary. While beneficiaries on average have completed 3 years of education, leaders have completed on

average 5 years. Other indicators of socio-economic status at baseline are similar between leaders and non-

leaders.



In Macours and Vakis (2014) we show that the randomization worked well and that the short-term returns to

the largest package for the leaders were higher than for the other beneficiaries. During the intervention,

leaders with the largest package also had higher non-agricultural and total income than leaders with other

packages, reflecting the additional cash they had received to start new activities. As the income level and the

income sources of these leaders at baseline were similar to those of the other beneficiaries, it seems plausible

that beneficiaries could identify with their success during the program and that this might have motivated and

inspired them.



The largest package is also the only intervention that led to gains in average income and consumption levels

two years after the end of the program (Macours, Schady and Vakis, 2012; Macours, Premand and Vakis,

2013). Table 1 shows that leaders who received this package continue to stand out. Two years after the end of

the intervention, leaders who had the largest package still have higher incomes from non-agricultural self-

employment than other leaders. And their nonagricultural income and total income is significantly higher than

for other beneficiaries who received the same package, even if their income from agricultural wages is lower.

This suggests they may have been better in maintaining their new commercial activities and likely continue to

be seen as successful leaders in the community.



We observe the same patterns with respect to parents’ expectations for their children’s future. For leaders who

received the largest package, expectations are significantly higher than for other leaders. They expect their

children to achieve higher schooling levels and earn higher wages, and are 11 percentage points more likely to

expect their children to become a professional or skilled salary earner (Table 1). There are also large


                                                      12
differences in the expectations of these leaders and those of other beneficiaries who received the same

package, with leaders expecting their children to obtain 1.5 years more education, and 21 percentage points

more likely to become a professional or skilled salary earner. These latter differences are consistent with the

program identifying natural leaders through self-selection. The differences mean that these leaders may be

seen as local success stories – in both current achievement and their attitudes towards the future - that others

could aspire to emulate.



A similar pattern is found for differences between leaders and others in their reported aspirations for their

children, although differences in aspirations are smaller than differences in expectations. Comparing mean

values of aspirations and expectations shows large gaps between the two sets of outcomes, with expectations

for educational attainment, for instance, 5 years less than aspirations and similarly large differences for

earnings, occupation and living standards. Interestingly, these gaps are smaller for leaders than non-leaders.

The pattern suggests that both leaders and other households internalize their constraints when reporting their

expectations, but they also suggest a capacity to aspire to a much better lives for their children.16



In line with the other results, leaders’ investments in the education and nutrition of their children are higher

than those of others beneficiaries. The significant differences in human capital investment between leaders

and non-leaders in Table 1 mirror similar findings from the baseline and the midline survey (Macours and

Vakis, 2014). Leaders with the largest package hence provided positive examples for others, in line with the

program objectives, both during the program and two years after the transfers ended.



3.3. Empirical specification

To analyze whether higher exposure to leaders with the largest package changed education and nutrition

investments of other beneficiaries, we calculate the share of leaders randomly allocated to the largest package



16
     The questions for expectations specifically asked: “Taking into account your current situation, what do you expect… “



                                                             13
in each registration assembly, including – as before – both promotoras and other women with leadership

positions in the community. The average number of leaders in an assembly is four, so that there is substantial

variation in the share of leaders that got the largest package in an assembly. There is much less variation in

the share of other beneficiaries who got the largest package since the number of households in each assembly

was relatively large and thus the share of non-leaders with the largest package in each assembly is close to

one-third in all assemblies.17



Our general specification is:



                                   Yia = δ0+δ1Tia + δ2(Tia* Sa) + δ3 Sa +εia                         (1)



where Yia is an outcome indicator for eligible household i (or a child of household i ) who was invited to

assembly a, Tia is assignment of i to any of the three treatment groups, and Sa is the share of leaders in the

assembly that randomly received the largest package in i’s registration assembly. Given that households were

invited to particular assemblies based on geographic proximity, Sa will capture the share of leaders with the

largest package that live in the proximity of i.18 Since Sa is always 0 in the control communities, and since all

eligible households in the treatment communities receive one of the three intervention packages, the term δ3

Sa cancels out of the estimation. The coefficients of interest are δ1 and δ2. A finding, for example, that δ1 and

δ2 are both positive would imply that while assignment to the treatment group increases the outcome of

interest (δ1), there is an additional impact of the program that comes from the social interactions (δ2). We also

explore how the share of leaders with the largest package affects impacts for beneficiaries of each of the three




17
   The share of peers at the 10th and 90% percentile of the distribution is 21 and 39% respectively. In contrast for the
leaders, the shares at the 10% and 90% of the distribution are 0 and 67%.
18
  Location of one’s house might be endogenous, and people living in the proximity of leaders might also be more likely
to be their family members, or otherwise have similar characteristics. The identification in this paper does not depend,
however, on the proximity to the leader per se, but instead it depends on the random allocation of certain packages to
those leaders.



                                                          14
packages separately. All regressions are estimated on the sample of eligible households (or their children) that

are not leaders themselves.



4. Social interaction effects on human capital investments



4.1 Main results



We first pool households across treatment packages and investigate whether there is a general relationship

between program impacts and proximity to leaders who received the largest package. Table 2 presents in the

top panel the results for 2008, the main focus of this paper, and in the bottom panel, the findings for 2006

from our earlier work for comparison. The interaction terms in the top panel suggest that social interactions

are crucial to sustain program impacts on education and nutrition investments after the end of the

intervention. Indeed, the findings indicate no significant sustained impacts on human capital investments

when no leader was assigned the largest package, in contrast to the findings during program implementation.



The interaction terms suggest that the higher the share of leaders with the largest package, the less likely

children are absent in school and the more households invest in education, in animal proteins and in fruit and

vegetables. The social multiplier effects are not only statistically significant but also large. For example,

school expenditures increase 49% when all the leaders in one’s assembly got the largest package, while

school absences decline by 21%. Strikingly, the magnitude of the social multiplier effects two years after the

end of the program are similar, if not larger, than those while the intervention was in place. The coefficients

of the z-scores in Table 2 also imply that, two years after the transfers, the impact on nutrition, respectively

educational, investment was only significantly different from zero if at least 33%, respectively 75%, of

leaders in one’s registration assembly received the largest package.




                                                      15
Table 3 shows the social interaction impacts on human capital investments by treatment group. The effects are

strongest for beneficiaries of the largest package. For instance, school expenditures more than double for

beneficiaries of the largest package in the extreme case that the share of female leaders with the same package

changes from 0 to 1. The impacts are about half the size for the beneficiaries of the training packages (and

even smaller for those with the basic package) for most outcomes and the interaction effects for education

investments are not significant. Nevertheless, as for the 2006 findings, the p-values indicate that we cannot

reject that the social effects are the same for the three groups for most variables. And when pooling the basic

and the training packages, the interaction effects for school expenditures, the nutrition-index, expenditures for

animal proteins, and fruit and vegetables are all significant (not shown).



Note that while the coefficients of the interaction effects are large, there are on average about 4 leaders in a

registration assembly. The estimates hence indicate that having one additional leader with the largest package

in one’s assembly reduces school absences by 0.4 days per month and increases school expenditures by about

16 percent. For households that have the largest package, one additional leader with the same package

increases school attendance by 2.5 percentage points and increases school expenditures by 25 percent. These

are not only large effects, but are similar or even larger than the effects found in 2006. Hence, interactions

with leaders had a remarkably persistent impact on other households’ investment behavior, and the impact is

particularly important for households that themselves received the largest package.



In contrast to the impacts during the intervention, however, none of the packages had positive impacts on

investments for beneficiaries that were not exposed to any leader with the largest package, and indeed the

point estimates are negative for a number of indicators. Hence positive significant effects are only found for

the subset of the beneficiaries with high exposure to successful leaders.



4.2. Robustness




                                                       16
The results are robust to several alternative specifications.19 A first concern could be that the results are driven

by extreme values in the independent variable. While the average share of leaders with the largest package is

0.33, for 95% of the observations, the range is between 0 and 0.67. The first robustness check in Table 4

excludes observations with values above 0.67. This does not substantially alter any of the results, even if, as

expected, the standard errors increase. The results are also robust to clustering the standard errors at the level

of the registration assembly, as opposed to at the community-level, and to not excluding outliers. The next

two specifications show that the results are further robust to controls for the total number of people in an

assembly, or the total number of peers (defined as beneficiaries that are not leaders) in an assembly. Finally,

the results remain generally robust when including a community fixed effect, with the exception of the food

expenditures for animal products, even if the variation in the independent variable is reduced.



Table 4 also shows alternative specifications using the number of leaders with the largest package instead of

the share. These specifications separately control for the total number of leaders in the registration assembly.

The coefficient on the number of leaders with the largest package is consistent with the main results in terms

of sign, size, and magnitude. We can then also compare the coefficient of the number of leaders with the

largest package, with the coefficient of the number of peers with the largest package (last specification in

Table 4). The results suggest that social interaction effects from peers might be more limited: the coefficients

are generally not significant and smaller than the coefficients for the number of leaders, with the exception of

the expenditures for animal products. The coefficients for leaders and peers are significantly different for

school attendance, absences and spending on fruit and vegetables. Note however that these results should be

interpreted with caution, given that they could be driven by the fact that there is less variation to identify the

social effects of peers.



4.3. Results for investments in early childhood

19
  Table 4 presents robustness checks for the beneficiaries with the productive investment package. Results pooling all
beneficiaries are similarly robust.



                                                         17
Table 5 shows estimates of the social multiplier effects for investments during early childhood, showing

estimates for all children 0-7 years old, and separately for the cohort of children born after the end of the

transfers (i.e. children approximately 0-2 years old). The results show relatively large social multiplier effects

for both age groups for both nutrition and stimulation. In contrast, we do not observe a similar pattern for

health investments. This result is interesting, as the health conditionalities in Atencion a Crisis were never

monitored due to coordination problems between the ministry of health and the ministry of the family. It

seems plausible that the health component was seen as less salient by leaders and less emphasized during

discussions about the program. For nutrition and stimulation, the coefficients are positive and significantly

different from zero for almost all beneficiaries, except those that were not exposed to any leader with the

largest package. Impacts are larger for beneficiaries with higher exposure to such leaders.



Importantly, we find similar strong and significant social multiplier effects for investments in nutrition and

stimulation for children born after the end of the transfers. This is true even if the statistical power is reduced

as the cohort is much smaller. There are no significant differences in the coefficient of the multiplier effects

for beneficiaries with different packages. Overall, these results point to a permanent shift in investment

behavior among families exposed to successful leaders that goes beyond the impacts on the children that

directly benefitted from the intervention.



5. Social interaction effects on per capita expenditures, expectations and aspirations



While the identification strategy allows to clearly demonstrate the importance of the social interaction effects,

it does not necessarily help to understand how exactly leaders might be influencing other households’

investments. Indeed one can wonder whether interaction with leaders with the largest package may have lifted

economic constraints of other households, whether the interaction effects are driven by other households

mimicking the behavior of these leaders, or whether they capture actual shifts in aspirations and expectations

of non-leader households for the future of their children.


                                                        18
We investigate this question by analyzing the data regarding mothers’ expectations and aspirations for

children’s final educational levels, future occupation, earnings and living standards. Table 6 shows results of

the main specification for these outcomes, and also shows the spillovers on the educational level attained by

2008 and on per capita expenditures levels. These questions were only asked for children less than 15 years

old as older children are more likely to already have reached their final education levels.20 The top panel

shows the impacts on the expectations mothers reported for their children, while the lower panel shows

impacts on their aspirations.



Table 6 shows that parents’ expectations about their children obtaining professional jobs or skilled salary jobs

are strongly affected by exposure to leaders with the largest package. Having one more such leader in one’s

registration assembly increases expectations of parents for their children to become (white-collar)

professionals by almost 50% (starting from a very low level in the control group). Strong social multiplier

effects are also found for expectations regarding children’s future earnings and living standards. The social

interaction effects for mothers’ aspirations follow a similar pattern.



Averaging over the different indicators, we find that the difference between no exposure and full exposure to

leaders with the largest package increases expectations regarding children’s future with 0.27 standard

deviations, while it increases aspirations with 0.21 standard deviations.21 The coefficients of the z-scores in

Table 6 also imply that, two years after the transfers, the impact on expectations and aspirations was only

significantly different from zero if at least 60% of leaders in one’s registration assembly received the largest

package. Overall, these findings show that interactions with successful female leaders changed beneficiaries’


20
  In an alternative specification, we excluded children below 9 years old from the analysis, as the younger children did
not directly benefit from the educational component of the CCT during the intervention. Results are broadly similar, but
social multipliers on expected years of education, attained years of education, and expected earnings are slightly larger
for the beneficiaries of the largest package.
21
     Increases in aspirations (expectations) reflect a change towards more ambitious aspirations (expectations).



                                                              19
expectations and aspirations for their children’s educational and occupational future, consistent with the

sustained higher levels of human capital investments.



The table further shows that the large spillover effects in investments are reflected in spillovers in educational

attainment by 2008. Indeed 2 years after the end of the intervention, being exposed to one additional leader

with the largest package increases children’s school attainment with 0.18 years of schooling. A comparison of

this coefficient with the estimate on expectations suggests that parents expect the educational gains to persist

and possibly slightly increase in the future. The estimates also imply, however, that the one-year CCT

program did not significantly increase educational attainment for more than half of the children in the sample.

Finally the table shows that there is no significant social multiplier for per capita expenditures.



To further understand the potential role of relaxing economic constraints, Table 7 shows social multiplier

effects separately for each of the three types of beneficiaries. The last column in Table 7A shows a significant

social multiplier effect on per capita expenditures for households who got the largest package, but no such

effects exist for the two other packages. Hence beneficiaries who got the largest package are still better off

two years after the intervention when a sufficiently large share of leaders in their proximity received the same

package. This result is in line with findings on similar spillovers for productive investments during the

intervention (Macours and Vakis, 2014). In contrast, the coefficients of the interaction effects of per capita

expenditures for beneficiaries with the basic and training package are very small, not significantly different

from zero, and significantly different from the interaction effect for the largest package. Hence for the two

other groups, economic spillovers cannot explain the change in education and nutrition investment. 22



Considering then the impacts on expectations (Table 7A), we see that social multiplier effects are significant

for all three interventions, and are not significantly different from each other. Hence beneficiaries of the three

22
  One could have thought such economic spillovers could arrive from leaders employing other beneficiaries in their new
business, or otherwise transferring economic benefits from their increased income to other beneficiaries.



                                                         20
packages expect a better future for their children, as long as they have sufficiently high exposure to leaders

with the largest package. This is so even if only beneficiaries with the largest package are economically better

off two years after the interventions. This mirrors the findings for investments, where we also found no

significant differences between groups, even if the point estimates are higher for beneficiaries of the largest

package. Hence the social multiplier effects do not just come from changes in economic constraints, as

expectations and investments change also for the groups for whom economic constraints were not relaxed.



The results on aspirations (Table 7B) complete the picture, as the social multiplier effects for aspirations are

concentrated on beneficiaries who received the training package (and to a lesser extent those with the basic

package). Possibly, for beneficiaries of the productive package, their own experience of trying to develop a

non-agricultural activity may have dampened the impact of leader’s experiences on aspirations, in particular

given that average aspiration levels were already high. One could also hypothesize that the focus of this

package on non-agricultural self-employment led these beneficiaries to put less weight on professional

occupations or high levels of education for their children. In contrast, the results for beneficiaries of the

training package are driven in particular by the aspirations for education and professional occupation, which

may suggest training led to a higher orientation towards education.23 Yet the results show these increased

aspirations only materialized if they were exposed to a large share of leaders with the largest package. Indeed

there even is a significant negative impact on aspirations if none of the leaders in their proximity got the

largest package, suggesting that some training beneficiaries in fact got demotivated.24



While the differences in findings for expectations and aspirations are intriguing, they could in part be driven

by measurement errors. Parents may find hypothetical questions regarding the desired future for their children


23
  The vocational training may have made beneficiaries more aware of the potential gains to formal education through a
number of channels: exposure to the professional staff conducting the training, increased awareness of the benefits of
skilled wage employment, or awareness of the importance of education to increase returns to other training (as illiterate
beneficiaries in particular were very limited in their choice of courses).
24
     As training did not lead to significant increases in income, this does not seem implausible.



                                                               21
hard to answer and the difference between expectations and aspirations, while theoretically important for

economists, are not necessarily accurately captured by the answers mothers gave to the respective questions.

A more cautious interpretation of the results in Table 6 and 7 therefore is that there was a significant social

multiplier effect on parent’s attitudes regarding their children’s future for the three types of beneficiaries. This

attitudinal change in turn is consistent with the social multiplier effect on investment behavior, and helps

explain the increased investment by beneficiaries for whom per capita expenditure levels did not increase.



Finally, one can wonder whether the results after the end of the program result because leader with the largest

package are still communicating more with other beneficiaries than leaders with other packages. This does not

appear to be the case as we find no significant social multiplier effects on the probability of talking to a

leader, a teacher or health coordinators, two years after the intervention (not reported). This is in line with

qualitative interviews after the end of the program, which suggested that some promotoras may have

continued to meet with beneficiaries, but that this was rather limited. Nevertheless, increased communication

during the program may have played a role in shifting the local social norms towards more investment in

children on the short-term, which in turn may have led to persistent changes in investment behavior.



6. Conclusions


Many development interventions aim, through a variety of mechanisms, to shift the investment behavior of

beneficiary households. Conditional cash transfer programs have an implicit or explicit objective to change

households’ attitudes and the social norms toward investment in the education, health and nutrition of their

children. When programs are designed to last for only a limited period, the sustainability of the impacts might

crucially depend on whether changes in investment behavior persist after the end of the program. Yet, the

mechanisms through which such change can be reached and reinforced are not always clear.




                                                        22
This paper shows that social interactions with successful and motivated local leaders can change the way

parents think about their children’s future and result in sustainable changes in educational and nutritional

investment. The evidence in this paper hence draws attention to the positive role local leaders can play, which

contrasts with the focus in many policy discussions of the negative role of leaders through elite capture. The

results suggest that natural leaders living in people’s close proximity can be important vehicles for change by

motivating and encouraging others and by providing examples that people aspire to follow. We find these

effects when both leaders and other beneficiaries received sizable transfers and social effects are particularly

large when leaders and beneficiaries received the same package. Hence the results do not suggest that

interventions should be primarily targeted to leaders. Instead, it points to the importance of assuring that

development program designs take into account the presence of local natural leaders, and enhance their

ownership of a program’s objectives to help shift beneficiaries’ attitudes.



The results also have implications for the debate on the sustainability of using cash or asset transfer programs

in low- and middle-income countries. The evidence in this paper suggests that designing such programs in

ways that facilitate and encourage social interactions may be important to create sustainable change. An

important caveat for the interpretation of the findings is that we provide evidence of program persistence for a

pilot program that only lasted one year. As such it differs from many other CCT programs in Latin America,

where beneficiaries often receive transfers for many years. This could have implications for the external

validity of the findings, as households do not necessarily react similarly to a one-year transitory shock than to

a longer-term transfer program. The paper hence should primarily be seen as a proof-of-concept for the role

local leaders can play in sustainably shifting poor households’ educational and nutritional investments. More

generally, the findings highlight the potential importance for careful attention to social dynamics in the design

and implementation of programs targeting human capital investments.




                                                       23
References

Adato, Michele, 2000. Final report: The impact of Progresa on community social relationships International
       Food Policy Research Institute, Washington, DC.

Adato, Michelle and Terry Roopnaraine, 2004. Final report: A Social Analysis of the Red de Proteccion
       Social (RPS) in Nicaragua, International Food Policy Research Institute, Washington, DC.

Appadurai, Arjun, 2004. “The Capacity to Aspire”. In Rao, V., and M. Walton (eds.) Culture and Public
        Action. Palo Alto, CA: Stanford University Press.

Araujo, Caridad, Mariano Bosch, and Norbert Schady, 2016. “Can Cash Transfers Help Households Escape
       an Inter-Generational Poverty Trap?” Paper presented at NBER conference on the “The Economics of
       Asset Dynamics and Poverty Traps”, Washington DC.

Athey, Susan, and Guido W. Imbens, 2016. “The Econometrics of Randomized Experiments”, Banerjee, A.
        and E. Duflo, (eds.), Handbook of Economic Field Experiments. Volume 1. Elsevier.

Attanasio, Orazio, Camila Fernandez, Emla Fitzsimons, , Sally Grantham-McGregor, Costas Meghir, and
       Marta Rubio-Codina. “Using the infrastucture of a conditional cash transfer program to deliver a
       scalable integrated early child development program in Colombia: cluster randomised controlled
       trial.” British Medical Journal 249 (2014): 5785.

Baird, Sarah, Craig McIntosh, and Berk Ozler, 2016. “When the Money Runs Out: Do Cash Transfers have
        Sustained Effects?” mimeo.

Barham, Tania, Karen Macours, and John A. Maluccio, 2013a. “Boys' Cognitive Skill Formation and Physical
       Growth: Long-term Experimental Evidence on Critical Ages for Early Childhood Interventions.” The
       American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings 103(3): 467-471.

Barham, Tania, Karen Macours, and John A. Maluccio, 2013b. “More Schooling and More Learning?: Effects
       of a Three-year Conditional Cash Transfer Program in Nicaragua after 10 years.” IADB Working
       Paper Series IDB-WP-432.

Barrera-Osorio, Felipe, Linden, Leigh L., and Saavedra, Juan E., 2015. “Long Term Educational
       Consequences of Alternative Conditional Cash Transfer Designs: Experimental Evidence from
       Colombia.” Unpublished manuscript.

Beaman, Lori, Esther Duflo, Rohini Pande and Petia Topalova, 2012. “Female Leadership Raises Aspirations
       and Educational Attainment for Girls: A Policy Experiment in India,” Science, 355: 582-586.




                                                    24
Beaman, Lori, Raghabendra, Chattopadhyay, Esther Duflo, Rohini Pande, and Petia Topalova, 2009.
       “Powerful women: does exposure reduce prejudice”, Quarterly Journal of Economics, vol. 124(4):
       1497–540.

Behrman, Jere R., Susan W. Parker, and Petra E. Todd, 2009. “Schooling Impacts of Conditional Cash
       Transfers on Young Children: Evidence from Mexico.” Economic Development and Cultural Change
       57(3): 439–477.

Behrman, Jere R., Susan W. Parker, and Petra E. Todd, 2011. “Do Conditional Cash Transfers for Schooling
       Generate Lasting Benefits? Five-year Follow-up of Progresa/Oportunidades.” Journal of Human
       Resources 46(1), 93-122.

Bernard, Tanguy, Stefan Dercon, Kate Orkin, and Alemayehu Seyoum Taffesse, 2014. “The Future in Mind:
       Aspirations and Forward-Looking Behaviour in Rural Ethiopia“, CSAE Working Paper WPS/2014-
       16.

Besley, Timothy, 2016. “Aspirations and the Political Economy of Inequality”, Oxford Economic Papers,
       forthcoming.

Chattopadhyay, Raghabendra, and Esther Duflo, 2004. “Women as policy makers: evidence from a
       randomized policy experiment in India”, Econometrica, vol. 72(5): 1409–43.

Feigenberg, Benjamin, Erica Field, and Rohini Pande, 2013. “The Economic Returns to Social Interaction:
       Experimental Evidence from Microfinance.” Review of Economic Studies 80 (4): 1459–83.

Filmer, Deon, and Norbert R. Schady, 2014. “The Medium-Term Effects of Scholarships in a Low-Income
       Country.” Journal of Human Resources, 49(3), 663–694.

Fiszbein, Ariel, and Norbert R. Schady, 2009. “Conditional Cash Transfers: Reducing Present and Future
       Poverty.” World Bank Policy Research Report. Washington, DC, United States: 24, World Bank.

Ganimian, Alejandro J., and Richard J. Murnane, 2014. “Improving Educational Outcomes in Developing
       Countries: Lessons from Rigorous Evaluations”, NBER Working Paper 20284.

Genicot, Garance, and Debraj Ray, 2015. “Aspirations and Inequality”, NBER Working Paper No. 19976

Gertler, Paul, Sebastian Martinez, and Marta Rubio-Codina, 2012. "Investing Cash Transfers to Raise Long
       Term Living Standards." American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 4(1): 164–92.

Hoff, Karla & , Joseph E. Stiglitz, 2016. "Striving for Balance in Economics: Towards a theory of the social
        determination of behavior," Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization, vol. 126(PB): 25-57.

Jensen, Robert, and Emily Oster, 2009. “The Power of TV: Cable Television and Women’s Status in India.”


                                                    25
       Quarterly Journal of Economics 124 (3): 1057–94.

Jensen, Robert. 2010. "Impact of Information on the Returns to Education on the Demand for Schooling in the
       Dominican Republic." Quarterly Journal of Economics 125 (2010): 515-548.

Kling, Jeffrey, R., Jeffrey B. Liebman, and Lawrence F. Katz. 2007. “Experimental Analysis of
       Neighborhood Effects.” Econometrica 75(1): 83-119.

La Ferrara, Eliana, Alberto Chong, and Suzanne Duryea. 2012. “Soap Operas and Fertility: Evidence from
       Brazil.” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 4 (4): 1–31.

Lybert, Travis and Bruce Wydick, 2016. “Poverty, Aspirations, and the Economics of Hope: A Framework
       for Study with Preliminary Results from the Oaxaca Hope Project”, Paper presented at NBER
       conference on the “The Economics of Asset Dynamics and Poverty Traps.”


Macours, Karen and Renos Vakis, 2014. “Changing Households’ Investment Behaviour through Social
       Interactions with Local Leaders: Evidence from a randomized transfer program”, Economic Journal
       124: 607–633.


Macours, Karen, Norbert R. Schady and Renos Vakis, 2012. “Cash Transfers, Behavioral Changes, and
       Cognitive Development in Early Childhood: Evidence from a Randomized Experiment” American
       Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 4(2): 247–273.

Macours, Karen, Patrick Premand, and Renos Vakis, 2012. “Transfers, Diversification and Household Risk
       Strategies: Experimental Evidence with Lessons for Climate Change Adaptation.” CEPR Discussion
       Paper 8940. London, United Kingdom: Center for Economic Policy Research.

Manski, Charles F., 2000. “Economic Analysis of Social Interactions”, Journal of Economic Perspectives,
       14(3): 115–136.

Molina-Millan, Teresa, Tania Barham, Karen Macours, John A Maluccio, and Marco Stampini. 2016. “Long-
       Term Impacts of Conditional Cash Transfers in Latin America: Review of the Evidence” Inter-
       American Development Bank Technical Note No. IDB-N-923.

Nguyen, Trang. 2008. “Information, Role Models and Perceived Returns to Education: Experimental
       Evidence from Madagascar”. mimeo, MIT.


Paluck, Elizabeth Levy, and Hana Shepherd, 2012. “The Salience of Social Referents: A Field Experiment on
       Collective Norms and Harassment Behavior in a School Social Network.” Journal of Personality and
       Social Psychology 103 (6): 899.



                                                    26
Ray, Debraj, 2006. “Aspirations, Poverty and Economic Change”, in Banerjee, Abhijit V., Roland Benabou,
       and Dilip Mookherjee (eds.), Understanding Poverty, Oxford University Press, Oxford.


World Bank, 2015. World Development Report 2015: Mind, Society and Behavior, Washington DC.

Wydick, Bruce, Paul Glewwe, and Laine Rutledge. 2013. "Does International Child Sponsorship Work? A
       Six-Country Study of Impacts on Adult Life Outcomes." Journal of Political Economy, 121(2): 393-
       436.




                                                  27
Table 1: Comparison of follow-up outcomes of leaders with largest package with other leaders and non-leaders
                                                                               Non-     P-value   P-value P-value
                                                   Leader Leader Leader leader Leaders Leaders Leaders T3-
                                                   T1       T2        T3       T3       T3-T1     T3-T2 NonleaderT3
Economic activities (in cordoba per capita)
  Income from non-agricultural self-employment     489.1    546       810      557      0.04**    0.09*    0.04**
  Income from commercial activities                190.9    156       404      222      0.05**    0.02** 0.05**
  Income from agricultural wages                   602.8    749       679      973      0.51      0.55     0.01**
  Value animal stock                               1630     2104      2191     1631     0.14      0.84     0.13
  Total income                                     11707 12049        12272    10925 0.51         0.78     0.05*

Expectations for children's future
  average index                                        0.15     0.17       0.37      0.00    0.01***    0.02**     0.00***
  expected years of education attained                 9.72     9.82       10.39     8.64    0.06*      0.07*      0.00***
  expected occupation: professional                    0.03     0.04       0.04      0.05    0.43       0.77       0.90
  expected occupation: professional or skilled empl.   0.35     0.36       0.47      0.26    0.04**     0.06*      0.00***
  expected number of rooms in house                    2.64     2.76       2.87      2.74    0.05*      0.40       0.28
  expected monthly earnings                            2132     2047       2332      1976    0.12       0.02**     0.00***
  expected monthly earnings (winsorized 95%)           1703     1637       1898      1593    0.13       0.04**     0.00***


Aspirations for children's future
  average index                                        0.06     0.19       0.17      0.02    0.15       0.83       0.06*
  desired years of education attained                  14.05    14.39      14.49     13.56   0.12       0.78       0.00***
  desired occupation: professional                     0.53     0.63       0.60      0.53    0.13       0.62       0.16
  desired occupation: professional or skilled empl.    0.90     0.94       0.92      0.88    0.49       0.56       0.09*
  desired number of rooms in house                     5.18     5.35       5.221     5.25    0.83       0.49       0.88
  desired monthly earnings : rank                      2140     2239       2273      2037    0.30       0.79       0.06*
  desired monthly earnings (winsorized 95%)            4532     4655       4831      4274    0.38       0.64       0.10*

Human capital investment
  Attending school                                     0.863    0.84       0.82      0.77    0.49       0.96       0.00***
  Number of days absent from school                    4.329    5.16       5.71      6.35    0.44       0.70       0.02**
  School expenditures                                  767      683        636       518     0.51       0.67       0.00***
  Share of food expenditures for animal products       0.17     0.17       0.18      0.16    0.37       0.97       0.07*
  Share of food expenditures for vegetables&fruit      0.07     0.07       0.08      0.07    0.47       0.51       0.16

Note: Sample includes intent-to-treat households in treatment communities. Economic outcomes and food expenditures are
household level data. Data on education, expectations and aspirations are child-level data. Highest and lowest .5% outliers of
income and expenditures data trimmed. Expectation and aspirations questions refer to children 9-15 years old. Education
questions refer to children 7-18 years old. Average expectation index is average of standardized outcomes for expected years of
education, professional or skilled employment, number of rooms in the house and monthly earnings rank. Average aspiration
index is average of standardized outcomes for expected years of education, professional employment, number of rooms in the
house and monthly earnings rank. Earnings ranks are calculated by converting the absolute monthly earnings to the rank in the
earnings distribution, combining answers of leaders and non-leaders. All monetary values are in Cordoba (1 US$ =~ 20
Cordobas). P-values account for clustering at the community level. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                               28
Table 2: Social interaction effects on human capital investments

                                   Education                                             Nutrition

                                   Z-score        Attendin    Number of     School       Z-score       Share of      Share of
                                   education      g school    days absent   expendi-     nutrition     food          food
                                   investment     (7-18       from          tures (7-    investment    expendi-      expendi-
                                                  year        school        18 year                    tures for     tures for
                                                  olds)       (7-18 year    olds)                      animal        fruit and
                                                              olds)                                    products      vegetables
                                     2008 (2 years after program ended)
Intent-to-treat*                     0.116**       0.045       -1.506*       310.9*** 0.353***         0.039**        0.022***
  % leaders with largest package (0.050)           (0.040)     (0.88)        (118)       (0.12)        (0.017)        (0.008)
Intent-to-treat                      -0.031        -0.008      0.197         -68.80      -0.013        -0.005         0.001
                                     (0.027)       (0.026)     (0.58)        (62.5)      (0.066)       (0.010)        (0.004)
Mean dep. variable in control        0.001         0.777       6.341         493.4       -0.002        0.154          0.0581
Observations                         5231          5228        5228          5205        3230          3214           3214
                                     2006 (during implementation)
Intent-to-treat*                     0.127**       0.062*      -1.760***     191.7*** 0.201**          0.022          0.014**
  % leaders with largest package (0.054)           (0.032)     (0.669)       (70.9)      (0.093)       (0.017)        (0.006)
Intent-to-treat                      0.134***      0.050*** -1.352***        188.6*** 0.381***         0.055***       0.019***
                                     (0.028)       (0.019)     (0.405)       (34.8)      (0.058)       (0.010)        (0.004)
Mean dep. variable in control        0.001         0.761       6.209         300.9       -0.003        0.152          0.066
Observations                         5181          5176        5169          5153        3294          3278           3279
Note: Coefficients for index of family of outcomes calculated following Kling, et al. (2007). The share of leaders measures the
share of female leaders with the productive investment package over all female leaders in a beneficiary's registration assembly.
Individual level data for education, household level data for food expenditures. Excluding households with female leaders.
Intent-to-treat estimators. Highest and lowest .5% of outliers in expenditures trimmed. Robust standard errors in parentheses,
corrected for clustering at the community level. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                         29
Table 3: Social interaction effects on human capital investments by intervention group

                                           Education                                             Nutrition

                                           Z-score       Attending     Number of School           Z-score        Share of    Share of
                                           education     school        days          expendi- nutrition          food        food
                                           investment    (7-18 year    absent        tures (7- investment expendi-           expendi-
                                                         olds)         from          18 year                     tures for   tures for
                                                                       school        olds)                       animal      fruit and
                                                                       (7-18 year                                products    vegetables
                                                                       olds)
                                           2008 (2 years after program ended)
Productive investment package*             0.188**       0.093*        -2.676**      485.4**      0.498***       0.050**     0.034***
  % leaders with largest package           (0.091)       (0.050)       (1.09)        (200)        (0.13)         (0.019)     (0.011)
Training package*                          0.096         0.029         -1.017        246.2        0.364**        0.038*      0.023**
  % leaders with largest package           (0.071)       (0.061)       (1.38)        (165)        (0.15)         (0.021)     (0.011)
Basic package*                             0.062         -0.001        -0.538        192.8        0.222          0.032       0.011
  % leaders with largest package           (0.060)       (0.053)       (1.15)        (154)        (0.15)         (0.020)     (0.012)
Productive investment package              -0.050        -0.034        0.764         -114.0       -0.022         -0.004      -0.001
                                           (0.032)       (0.032)       (0.69)        (72.0)       (0.062)        (0.001)     -0.005
Training package                           -0.014        0.007         -0.041        -36.92       -0.072         -0.012      -0.002
                                           (0.034)       (0.030)       (0.69)        (77.2)       (0.082)        (0.013)     -0.006
Basic package                              -0.024        0.011         -0.299        -46.06       0.051          0.001       0.005
                                           (0.029)       (0.031)       (0.69)        (69.4)       (0.079)        (0.011)     -0.005
P-value test social effect on T3 vs T2     0.413         0.360         0.291         0.348        0.350          0.575       0.373
P-value test social effect on T3 vs T1     0.196         0.109         0.116         0.193        0.035**        0.252       0.069*
P-value test social effect on T1 vs T2     0.668         0.671         0.744         0.779        0.350          0.743       0.350
Mean dependent variable in control         0.001         0.777         6.341         493.4        -0.002         0.154       0.0581
Observations                               5231          5228          5228          5205         3230           3214        3214
                                           2006 (during implementation)
Productive investment package*             0.192**       0.097**       -2.579*** 291.6*** 0.328**                0.044**     0.019*
  % leaders with largest package           (0.076)       (0.047)       (0.975)       (102.5)      (0.13)         (0.019)     (0.011)
Training package*                          0.097         0.047         -1.356        145.6*       0.139          0.017       0.008
  % leaders with largest package           (0.066)       (0.041)       (0.844)       (81.9)       (0.11)         (0.021)     (0.007)
Basic package*                             0.102         0.045         -1.293        149.3*       0.158          0.006       0.016
  % leaders with largest package           (0.062)       (0.052)       (1.128)       (82.8)       (0.13)         (0.021)     (0.010)
Productive investment package              0.129***      0.045**       -1.107**      174.3*** 0.368***           0.049*** 0.020***
                                           (0.031)       (0.022)       (0.458)       (39.5)       (0.067)        (0.011)     (0.005)
Training package                           0.125***      0.049**       -1.438*** 181.4*** 0.379***               0.057*** 0.018***
                                           (0.032)       (0.023)       (0.479)       (39.4)       (0.059)        (0.011)     (0.004)
Basic package                              0.149***      0.057**       -1.574*** 211.8*** 0.393***               0.058*** 0.020***
                                           (0.033)       (0.026)       (0.584)       (42.2)       (0.070)        (0.011)     (0.005)
P-value test social effect on T3 vs T2     0.226         0.434         0.360         0.151        0.170          0.174       0.327
P-value test social effect on T3 vs T1     0.192         0.306         0.238         0.124        0.208          0.0325** 0.810
P-value test social effect on T1 vs T2     0.934         0.964         0.959         0.964        0.889          0.603       0.518
Mean dependent variable in control         0.001         0.761         6.209         300.9        -0.003         0.152       0.066
Observations                               5181          5176          5169          5153         3294           3278        3279
Note: Coefficients for index of family of outcomes calculated following Kling, et al. (2007). The share of leaders measures the share of
female leaders with the productive investment package over all female leaders in a beneficiary's registration assembly. Individual level
data for education, household level data for food expenditures. Excluding households with female leaders. Intent-to-treat estimators.
Highest and lowest .5% of outliers in expenditures trimmed. Robust standard errors in parentheses, corrected for clustering at the
community level. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                                30
Table 4. Robustness checks and alternative specifications: beneficiaries of largest package two years after program

                                                          Attending      Number of     School         Share of food Share of food
                                                          school         days absent   expenditures   expenditures expenditures
                                                          (7-18 year     from school   (7-18 year     for animal    for fruit and
                                                          olds)          (7-18 year    olds)          products      vegetables
                                                                         olds)



Base specification                                        0.093*         -2.676**      485.4**        0.050**        0.034***
                                                          (0.050)        (1.09)        (200)          (0.019)        (0.011)
Robustness checks
Excluding extreme values independent variable             0.064          -2.087*       319.5*         0.061***       0.037***
                                                          (0.057)        (1.25)        (186)          (0.022)        (0.012)

S.e. clustered at level of assembly                       0.093          -2.676**      485.4***       0.050**        0.034***
                                                          (0.061)        (1.29)        (177)          (0.022)        (0.010)

Not excluding outliers                                                                 726.0**        0.051**        0.040***
                                                                                       (325)          (0.020)        (0.012)

Controlling for number of people in assembly              0.093*         -2.681**      485.8**        0.051***       0.034***
                                                          (0.049)        (1.06)        (201)          (0.019)        (0.011)

Controlling for number of peers in assembly               0.095*         -2.745**      495.4**        0.051***       0.034***
                                                          (0.048)        (1.05)        (203)          (0.019)        (0.011)

With community fixed effects                              0.096*         -2.668**      350.2          0.009          0.022**
                                                          (0.051)        (1.16)        (226)          (0.019)        (0.010)

Alternative specifications with # number of leaders
# leaders with largest package                            0.019          -0.599*       94.64**        0.013**        0.009***
  controlling for total nr leaders                        (0.015)        (0.33)        (47.2)         (0.005)        (0.003)

# leaders with largest package                            0.033**        -0.855**      72.98          0.001          0.006**
  controlling for total nr leaders and community f.e.     (0.016)        (0.36)        (53.8)         (0.005)        (0.003)

# leaders with largest package                            0.031          -0.833*       100.3*         0.009          0.007**
   controlling for total nr leaders                       (0.019)        (0.42)        (55.2)         (0.007)        (0.003)
# peers with largest package                              -0.003         0.028         32.76          0.012**        0.001
  controlling for total nr peers and community f.e.       (0.020)        (0.45)        (36.9)         (0.005)        (0.003)
P-value test social effect leader = social effect peer    0.064*         0.046**       0.265          0.567          0.100*

Note: See notes table 3. Every line corresponds to a separate specification, with the exception of the last specification where the
number of leaders and peers are included in the same specification. Peers are defined as all beneficiaries with the same package
that are not leaders. Specification with extreme values of independent variable excluded: excludes observations for which the
value of the share is in the upper 5% of the distribution.




                                                               31
Table 5: Social interaction effects on human capital investments in early childhood two years after program

                                    Children 0-7 years old                          Children born after end of transfers
                                                                                   (0-2 years old)
z-scores                             Nutrition       Stimulation Health           Nutrition     Stimulation Health
                                                                             2008
Intent-to-treat*                     0.323***        0.143*         0.004         0.383**       0.243**      0.087
  % leaders with largest package (0.11)              (0.078)        (0.076)       (0.18)        (0.11)       (0.089)
Intent-to-treat                      -0.001          0.048          0.083**       0.067         0.033        -0.010
                                     (0.047)         (0.051)        (0.035)       (0.072)       (0.059)      (0.045)
Observations                         3410            3405           3410          660           641          660
Note: Coefficients for index of family of outcomes calculated following Kling, et al. (2007). Nutrition index includes
share of food in total expenditures, and shares of staples, animal proteins and fruit and vegetables in total food
expenditures; stimulation index includes whether household has pen and paper, has toy, somebody tells stories/sings to
child, and number of hours reading to child per week; and health index includes whether child was weighed, got
vitamins or iron, got deworming drugs and number of days sick in bed. See Macours, Schady and Vakis (2012) for
detailed definitions. The share of leaders measures the share of female leaders with the productive investment package
over all female leaders in a beneficiary's registration assembly. Excluding households with female leaders. Intent-to-
treat estimators. Robust standard errors in parentheses, corrected for clustering at the community level. *** p<0.01, **
p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                          32
Table 6: Social interaction effects on parental expectations and aspirations, educational attainment and per capita expenditures two years after program
                                                                                           Expected
                                                               Expected                    occupation: Expected       Expected
                                                 Average       years of      Expected      professional number of     monthly      Years of       Log (per
                                                 expectation education       occupation: or skilled     rooms in      earnings:    education      capita
                                                 index         attained      professional empl.         house         rank         attained       expenditures)
Intent-to-treat*                                 0.267***      0.805         0.035**       0.137***     0.304**       315.1**      0.700***       0.126
  % leaders with largest package                 (0.095)       (0.50)        (0.017)       (0.048)      (0.12)        (147)        (0.22)         (0.096)
Intent-to-treat                                  -0.052        -0.132        0.002         -0.033       -0.032        -79.30       -0.171         0.008
                                                 (0.056)       (0.27)        -0.008        (0.030)      (0.076)       (93.4)       (0.15)         (0.049)
Mean dependent variable in the control           0.00          8.41          0.023         0.25         2.62          2543         3.12           9.11
Observations                                     4304          4300          4291          4291         4299          4242         4086           3230

                                                                                                                       Desired
                                                                                  Desired                              occupation:        Desired           Desired
                                                               Average            years of          Desired            professional       number of         monthly
                                                               aspiration         education         occupation:        or skilled         rooms in          earnings:
                                                               index              attained          professional       empl.              house             rank
Intent-to-treat*                                               0.205*             0.946**           0.115*             0.028              0.146             342.2*
  % leaders with largest package                               (0.10)             (0.42)            (0.065)            (0.026)            (0.37)            (185)
Intent-to-treat                                                -0.018             -0.090            -0.015             0.015              -0.063            26.48
                                                               (0.067)            (0.26)            (0.048)            (0.019)            (0.15)            (124)
Mean dependent variable in the control                         -0.001             13.29             0.50               0.872              5.19              2485
Observations                                                   4302               4300              4299               4299               4300              4289
Note: The share of leaders measures the share of female leaders with the productive investment package over all female leaders in a beneficiary's registration assembly. Individual level data for children 7-15
years old in 2008. Per capita expenditure measured at the household level. Excluding households with female leaders. Intent-to-treat estimators. Robust standard errors in parentheses, corrected for clustering at
the community level. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. Average expectation index is average of standardized outcomes for expected years of education, professional or skilled employment, number of rooms in
the house and monthly earnings rank. Average aspiration index is average of standardized outcomes for expected years of education, professional employment, number of rooms in the house and monthly
earnings rank. Earnings ranks are calculated by converting the absolute monthly earnings to the rank in the earnings distribution, combining answers of leaders and non-leaders.
Table 7a: Social interaction effects on parental expectations, educational attainment and per capita expenditures two years after program
                                                                                        Expected
                                                          Expected                      occupation:     Expected      Expected
                                          Average         years of       Expected       professional    number of     monthly        Years of                                                       Log (per
                                          expectation     education      occupation:    or skilled      rooms in      earnings:      education                                                      capita
                                          index           attained       professional   employment      house         rank           attained                                                       expenditures)
Productive investment package*            0.270**         0.658          0.105***       0.158***        0.315*        343.3          0.521                                                          0.277***
  % leaders with largest package          (0.12)          (0.74)         (0.036)        (0.058)         (0.17)        (207)          (0.44)                                                         (0.083)
Training package*                         0.306**         0.991          -0.010         0.157**         0.385**       267.7          0.931***                                                       0.070
  % leaders with largest package          (0.14)          (0.73)         (0.028)        (0.076)         (0.16)        (223)          (0.32)                                                         (0.10)
Basic package*                            0.220*          0.761          0.016          0.092           0.217         310.4          0.596*                                                         0.051
  % leaders with largest package          (0.12)          (0.53)         (0.027)        (0.070)         (0.19)        (237)          (0.35)                                                         (0.15)
Productive investment package             -0.055          -0.087         -0.010         -0.041          -0.020        -112.5         -0.169                                                         -0.010
                                          (0.057)         (0.28)         (0.011)        (0.033)         (0.079)       (102)          (0.18)                                                         (0.045)
Training package                          -0.068          -0.225         0.010          -0.036          -0.065        -87.8          -0.265                                                         0.011
                                          (0.072)         (0.38)         (0.014)        (0.037)         (0.10)        (108)          (0.19)                                                         (0.057)
Basic package                             -0.029          -0.086         0.006          -0.021          -0.013        -22.2          -0.061                                                         0.022
                                          (0.066)         (0.30)         (0.010)        (0.035)         (0.10)        (119)          (0.17)                                                         (0.064)
P-value test social effect on T3 vs T2    0.830           0.737          0.004***       0.996           0.757         0.743          0.490                                                          0.026**
P-value test social effect on T3 vs T1    0.693           0.863          0.088*         0.428           0.629         0.911          0.885                                                          0.061*
P-value test social effect on T1 vs T2    0.550           0.725          0.527          0.476           0.452         0.899          0.430                                                          0.860
Mean dependent variable in the control    0.00            8.41           0.023          0.25            2.62          2543           3.12                                                           9.11
Observations                              4304            4300           4291           4291            4299          4242           4086                                                           3230
Note: The share of leaders measures the share of female leaders with the productive investment package over all female leaders in a beneficiary's registration assembly. Individual level data for children 7-15 years
old in 2008. Per capita expenditure measured at the household level. Excluding households with female leaders. Intent-to-treat estimators. Robust standard errors in parentheses, corrected for clustering at the
community level. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. Average expectation index is average of standardized outcomes for expected years of education, professional or skilled employment, number of rooms in the
house and monthly earnings rank. Earnings ranks are calculated by converting the absolute monthly earnings to the rank in the earnings distribution, combining answers of leaders and non-leaders.




                                                                                                 34
Table 7b: Social interaction effects on parental aspirations by intervention group two years after program ended
                                                                                         Desired
                                                                                         occupation:     Desired                                               Desired
                                           Average         Desired years Desired         professional    number of                                             monthly
                                           aspiration      of education    occupation:   or skilled      rooms in                                              earnings:
                                           index           attained        professional  empl.           house                                                 rank
Productive investment package*             -0.008          0.338           -0.032        -0.038          -0.481                                                331.0
  % leaders with largest package           (0.12)          (0.57)          (0.091)       (0.042)         (0.34)                                                (304)
Training package*                          0.406***        2.114***        0.297***      0.084**         0.378                                                 266.3
  % leaders with largest package           (0.13)          (0.70)          (0.097)       (0.042)         (0.24)                                                (236)
Basic package*                             0.233           0.379           0.081         0.039           0.603                                                 470.6*
  % leaders with largest package           (0.18)          (0.52)          (0.078)       (0.046)         (0.89)                                                (276)
Productive investment package              0.068           0.169           0.039         0.034           0.163                                                 68.1
                                           (0.072)         (0.29)          (0.051)       (0.023)         (0.17)                                                (154)
Training package                           -0.147**        -0.661*         -0.119**      -0.016          -0.300**                                              26.5
                                           (0.074)         (0.36)          (0.059)       (0.027)         (0.15)                                                (125)
Basic package                              0.015           0.212           0.033         0.025           -0.087                                                -32.3
                                           (0.079)         (0.29)          (0.051)       (0.026)         (0.22)                                                (151)
P-value test social effect on T3 vs T2     0.006***        0.027**         0.007***      0.290           0.033**                                               0.853
P-value test social effect on T3 vs T1     0.206           0.958           0.309         0.832           0.211                                                 0.701
P-value test social effect on T1 vs T2     0.319           0.016**         0.017**       0.375           0.784                                                 0.548
Mean dependent variable in the control     -0.001          13.29           0.50          0.872           5.19                                                  2485
Observations                               4302            4300            4299          4299            4300                                                  4289
Note: The share of leaders measures the share of female leaders with the productive investment package over all female leaders in a beneficiary's registration assembly.
Individual level data for children 7-15 years old in 2008. Excluding households with female leaders. Intent-to-treat estimators. Robust standard errors in parentheses, corrected
for clustering at the community level. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. Average aspiration index is average of standardized outcomes for expected years of education,
professional employment, number of rooms in the house and monthly earnings rank. Earnings ranks are calculated by converting the absolute monthly earnings to the rank in
the earnings distribution, combining answers of leaders and non-leaders.




                                                                                                  35
