                            NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




        ECONOMIC TRANSFORMATION IN AFRICA FROM THE BOTTOM UP:
                      EVIDENCE FROM TANZANIA

                                      Xinshen Diao
                                     Josaphat Kweka
                                    Margaret McMillan

                                    Working Paper 22889
                            http://www.nber.org/papers/w22889


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                  December 2016




The authors would like to thank Goodluck Charles and the Financial Sector Deepening Trust
(FSDT) for making the firm level data available. We thank Zara Qureshi and Eduardo Magalhaes
for excellent research assistance. We thank participants at the STAARS Conference in Addis
Ababa, the Annual Bank Conference on Development Economics at World Bank, Washington
DC and the 2016 CAER-IFPRI Annual International Conference in Fuzhou, China for many
useful comments. We thank the International Growth Centre and CGIAR’s Policies, Institutions
and Markets (PIM) program for financial support. The views expressed herein are those of the
author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2016 by Xinshen Diao, Josaphat Kweka, and Margaret McMillan. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Economic Transformation in Africa from the Bottom Up: Evidence from Tanzania
Xinshen Diao, Josaphat Kweka, and Margaret McMillan
NBER Working Paper No. 22889
December 2016
JEL No. O4,O55

                                         ABSTRACT

At roughly 4% per annum, labor productivity in Tanzania has grown more rapidly over the past
12 years than at any other time in recent history. Employment growth has also been strong
keeping up with population growth at roughly 2.5 percent per annum; the bulk of employment
growth (90%) has been in the non-agricultural sector. However, the vast majority of this non-
agricultural employment growth has occurred in the informal sector. Using Tanzania’s first
nationally representative survey of micro, small and medium sized enterprises - we show that
firms in the informal sector contributed roughly half a percentage point to economy-wide labor
productivity growth in Tanzania between 2002 and 2012. However, virtually all of the labor
productivity growth contributed by informal firms came from a small subset of firms we call the
in-between firms. We consider attributes of the in-between firms that could be used for targeting
financial and business services to firms with the potential to grow. We find two salient
characteristics of firms in the in-between sector that might lend themselves to targeting – their
owners are more likely to keep written accounts and they are more likely to keep their savings in
formal bank accounts.

Xinshen Diao                                        Margaret McMillan
Senior Research Fellow, IFPRI                       Tufts University
Deputy Division Director, DSG                       Department of Economics
International Food Policy Research Institute        114a Braker Hall
2033 K Street NW, Washington DC                     Medford, MA 02155
x.diao@cgiar.org                                    and International Food Policy Research Institute
                                                    and also NBER
Josaphat Kweka                                      margaret.mcmillan@tufts.edu
Economic and Social Research Foundation
(ESRF)
josaphat.kweka@gmail.com
1. Introduction

         Africa’s impressive performance over the past two decades has been accompanied by a
proliferation of small firms, many of which operate in the informal sector. Researchers at the African
Development Bank (2013) estimate that the informal sector accounts for around 55% of Sub-Saharan
Africa’s GDP and 80% of its’ employment1. This is potentially alarming since firms in the informal
sector are widely viewed as unproductive employers of last resort2.
         Yet, there is also a large body of literature which documents significant heterogeneity among
small typically informal firms in developing countries3. Schoar (2009) argues that unless we understand
this heterogeneity, development policies aimed at fostering entrepreneurship are likely to be
unsuccessful. Both Schoar (2010) and La Porta and Shleifer (2011 and 2014) argue that the number
of entrepreneurs that transition from the informal sector to the formal sector is likely to be small.
However, as Li and Rama (2015) point out – we actually don’t know a whole lot about these firms
because of a lack of comprehensive nationally representative firm level data. It follows that we do not
understand very well the role that small largely informal firms play in the growth and development of
poor economies.
         Our goal in this paper is to contribute to our understanding of the role that small firms play
in a rapidly growing but still poor African economy. We choose Tanzania for a couple of reasons.
First, the government of Tanzania’s national statistics office makes available on its website most of
the data required to estimate the contribution of the informal sector to labor productivity and
employment growth. Second, Tanzania has one of the only nationally representative firm level surveys
of micro, small and medium sized enterprises in Africa. While household surveys are often nationally
representative and sometimes capture self-employment they cannot be used to obtain an accurate
picture of firm level activity. The same is true of labor force surveys.
         We begin our analysis using national accounts data and census data to show that between 2002
and 2012 Tanzania’s economy grew more rapidly than at any other time in recent history; average
annual GDP growth was 6.5% and average annual labor productivity growth was 4.1%. More than
three quarters of this labor productivity growth was accounted for by structural change; the remainder
of the growth is largely attributable to within sector productivity growth in agriculture. The labor


1 These numbers also include agriculture. In this paper, we focus on the non-agricultural private sector. There is clearly
room for modernizing agriculture but that is not the focus of this paper.
2See for example La Porta and Shleifer (2011 and 2014).
3See for examples Grimm et al (2011), McKenzie and Woodruff (2008) Fafchamps et al (2014) among others.


                                                             3
productivity growth attributable to structural change is almost entirely explained by a rapid decline in
the agricultural employment share and an increase in the non-agricultural private sector employment
share. Combining the information from the census data with information from the Formal
Employment and Earnings Survey (FEES) we estimate that only 11.5% of employment growth in the
private nonagricultural economy is due to the expansion of the formal private sector; the remaining
88.5% of employment growth occurred outside the formal sector. The two sectors that contributed
most significantly to labor productivity growth were manufacturing and trades services. Job creation
in these two sectors was dominated by the informal sector leaving open the possibility that informal
firms contributed to economywide labor productivity growth.
        Since we do not have a nationally representative firm level panel that captures firms of all sizes
in both the formal and informal sectors, we cannot directly compute the contribution of formal and
informal firms to economywide labor productivity growth. Instead, we use Tanzania’s first nationally
representative survey of micro, small and medium sized enterprises (MSMEs) to estimate first the size
of the informal sector that has average labor productivity levels above the economywide average in
trade services and second in manufacturing. Our reasoning for this approach is that only the firms
with above average labor productivity at the end of the period could have contributed to economywide
labor productivity growth between 2002 and 2012. Using the manufacturing cutoff, we find that that
5.7% of MSMEs account for 30.7% of the value-added per worker produced by MSMEs; using the
trade services cutoff, we find that 10.38% of MSMEs account for 37.4% of the value-added per worker
created by MSMEs.
        Having identified MSME firms with above average productivity, we then explore the extent
to which observable characteristics of these firms and their owners predict firm performance relative
to the rest of the firms in the MSME sample. This exercise serves two purposes. First, by using firm
characteristics that others have found to be good predictors of firm performance, we are able to check
the reliability of our productivity estimates. For example, it is widely accepted that electricity use
enhances firm level labor productivity. If we do not find that electricity use is positively correlated
with firm level labor productivity we would have less confidence in our measures of labor productivity.
Second, identification of salient traits of productive businesses may help us to think about the role of
targeting designed to enhance business performance in Tanzania and other developing countries. We
find that keeping written accounts and keeping savings in a formal bank account are positively
correlated with labor productivity. By contrast, measures associated with formality such as having a



                                                    4
tax identification number or being registered with Tanzania’s Business Registration and Licensing
Agency (BRELA) are not significant predictors of labor productivity.
          The evidence presented in this paper contributes to the small but growing literature on
structural change in Africa by demonstrating the role played by the large and growing number of
informal businesses in one African country that has experienced rapid labor productivity growth. Our
work reinforces the work of Schoar (2010) and others who argue that programs designed to stimulate
entrepreneurship in developing countries must take into account the heterogeneous nature of small
firms and their owners4. This argument is supported by research which shows that the impact of access
to credit on business outcomes depends on borrower attributes 5 (de Mel et al 2008, Banerjee et al
(2015). Our analysis of MSME’s also contributes to a growing body of literature that attempts to
identify high potential firms or what are commonly referred to as gazelles6. However unlike previous
researchers who have tended to use very small samples, we have access to a large nationally
representative sample of micro, small and medium sized firms. Finally, our work contributes to an
ongoing effort by senior researchers and policymakers in Tanzania to better understand the nature of
the informal economy in Tanzania in order to guide national policy (Mmari and Wangwe, 2016).
          The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we briefly describe the
datasets used for this analysis. In Section 3, we place Tanzania’s MSMEs in the context of the macro
economy and estimate their contribution to economywide labor productivity growth. In Section 4, we
explore the correlates of the most productive firms and describe analyze their constraints to doing
business relative to the rest of the MSMEs. In Section 5, we explore the extent to which MSMEs
might contribute to future labor productivity and employment growth. In Section 6, we discuss what
it would mean to include these firms in a growth strategy. Section 7 concludes.


2. The Macro Setting: Structural Change, Productivity Growth and Employment

   Before diving into our analysis, a few words are in order about the data and our definition of
informality. Our value added data is drawn from two reports published by the National Bureau of
Statistics (NBS, 2014a and 2014b). The statistics in the second NBS report (2014b) reflect the national
accounts rebasing using 2007 as the base year and thus our results incorporate that rebasing. Our total
employment figures are also based on two reports published by the NBS based on the 2002 and 2012

   4   See for example Banerjee et al (2015) and McKenzie (2015).
   5 See for example de Mel et al (2008) and Banerjee et al (2015)
   6 See for example Grimm et al (2012) and Fafchamps and Woodruff (



                                                           5
censuses in which employment is reported at the industry level (NBS 2006 and NBS 2014d). Formal
sector employment is based on NBS’ Formal Employment and Earnings Survey (FEES) (NBS 2007
and 2014c). Our measure of employment in the informal sector is computed as the difference between
total employment as reported in the census and formal sector employment as reported in FEES.
Finally, our measure of formal sector value added in six sub-sectors of manufacturing are based on
two reports published by the Ministry of Industry and Trade (2010, 2012).


2.1    Economic Growth in Tanzania 1988-2014

       Between 2000 and 2014 Tanzania’s economy grew more rapidly than at any other time in
recent history, with the annual GDP growth rate averaging 6.7% (Figure 1). An important feature of
this recent performance is that it has been inclusive in nature; growth in total employment has been
at par with population growth. A second important feature of this recent growth is that it has been
accompanied by strong labor productivity growth: labor productivity grew by 4.1% per year annually
between 2002 and 2012. Additionally, rapid growth in the country’s manufacturing sector implies that
there are no signs of deindustrialization: the sector’s GDP grew at 8% per year between 2000 and
2014 - more than three times the growth experienced in 1988-1999 (Figure 1).

2.2     Structural Change Accounts for Most of the Productivity Growth

       To better understand the nature of Tanzania’s recent growth, we employ the growth
decomposition methodology developed by McMillan and Rodrik (2011). To this end, we aggregate
the economy into 10 main subsectors and decompose economy-wide labor productivity into that
which can be attributed to within sector productivity growth and that which can be attributed to
structural change. For the purposes of this paper, we define within sector productivity growth as
growth in labor productivity in any of the ten sub-sectors and we define productivity growth
attributable to structural change as the productivity growth that occurs when employment is
reallocated across these ten sub-sectors as a result of different levels of average labor productivity.
Details of the growth decomposition are presented in Appendix 1.

       Table 1 highlights the main results of this exercise. Our analysis confirms that close to 80% of
Tanzania’s recent growth in labor productivity is attributable to structural change. Employment shares
have declined in agriculture – the sector with the lowest average labor productivity – and increased in
various nonagricultural sectors, most of which are significantly more productive than agriculture.

                                                  6
         The growth decomposition presented in Table 1 tells us nothing about whether structural
change in Tanzania was the result of job creation or simply labor reallocation across sectors. Like
many African countries, Tanzania has had a relatively high population growth rate over the past decade
leading millions of young people to enter the job market. To this end, Table 2 links the growth in
employment with the change in the economic structure by displaying ‘new’ employment opportunities
across all nonagricultural sectors.

         We define new employment by sector as the net increase in the number of employees in each
sector between 2002 and 2012 computed using the population censuses. While the agricultural sector
still accounts for the largest share of employment, its’ role in the net increase in the number of
employees between 2002 and 2012 is quite small at only 11%; in other words agriculture has not played
a very important role in job creation. Instead, almost 90% of the new jobs created over this ten year
period were created in the non-agricultural sector. Considering that agricultural employment made up
more than 80% of total employment in 2002 (Table 1, first panel, column 6), it is remarkable that the
majority of the new jobs were created outside of the agricultural sector in this relatively short period
of time.7

2.3       Employment in Small Private Firms Dominates Employment Growth

         Two key facts need to be highlighted in the ‘new employment’ decomposition presented in
Table 2. First, a majority of new jobs were created in the private sector, not the public sector; 83.2%
of increased total employment between 2002 and 2012 is accounted for by the private sector; the
public sector accounts for only 5.6% of the increase in total employment (Table 2, second column).
Second, 73% of the increase in total employment - equivalent to 83% of the net increase in private
sector jobs - were created in the informal economy by micro and small firms (Table 2, last column).
         This trend in private sector job creation by micro and small firms is often seen as a distressing
phenomenon, as firms in the informal economy, or small firms in general, are often associated with
low productivity and a lack of dynamism. However, once we link the trend in private sector job
creation with the results of the growth decomposition analysis shown in Table 1, the following facts
become evident. First, structural change accounted for almost 80% of economy-wide labor
productivity growth (Table 1, last row) in Tanzania between 2002 and 2012. Second, structural change
was primarily achieved by the growth in employment in small firms in the informal economy. These

    7 The employment shares of agricultural and non-agricultural sectors in 2002 and 2012 and the annualized growth rate in

employment 2002-2012 are reported in Appendix Table 3a.

                                                              7
two facts together raise the possibility that some of Tanzania’s growth in labor productivity may be
linked to the growth in employment in small firms.
        There are two sectors that stand out as having contributed significantly to job creation in
Tanzania over the period 2002 to 2012. These are manufacturing and trade services. Average labor
productivity in Tanzania’s manufacturing sector is more than seven times that of the agricultural sector.
Although the sector is still relatively small, because of its extremely high productivity compared with
the rest of the economy, increased employment in this sector contributed 12.4% of economy-wide
labor productivity growth (Table 1, second panel, column 2). Notably, more than two thirds of this
increase in employment is accounted for by small mostly informal firms.
        Like manufacturing, trade services productivity is also relatively high in Tanzania. While labor
productivity in this sector is only half of that of manufacturing, it is still 3.5 times that of agriculture
(Table 1, first panel, columns 1 and 2). More importantly, more new jobs were created in this sector
than in any other sector between 2002 and 2012. As Table 2 highlights, amongst the nearly one million
new jobs created in trade services, more than 99% were created in by the informal economy. Further,
although these jobs were created by small firms in the informal sector, productivity in trade services
did not fall. As the growth decomposition analysis of Table 1 shows, within-sector productivity
actually increased modestly in the trade services sector between 2002-2012 (Table 1, comparing row
1 to row 2). As a result, job creation in Tanzania’s trade services sector accounted for more than 18%
of economy-wide productivity growth between 2002 and 2012.
        Nonetheless, without more information it is difficult to know what to make of these results.
Although employment in the formal sector is growing, it is not growing quickly enough to keep pace
with the growth in the labor force. This is problematic since average labor productivity in the formal
sector is significantly greater than average labor productivity in the informal sector. Instead, the bulk
of the employment growth has come from the entry of small informal firms. To better understand the
implications of this pattern of growth, we turn to an in-depth analysis of firms in the informal sector.


3.      The Micro Setting: Where Are the Small Firms and What Do They Do?

        Based on our analysis in Section 2, we know that the majority of ‘new’ jobs in Tanzania have
been created in the informal sector. In this section, we will use Tanzania’s first nationally representative
survey of small businesses - The Micro, Small and Medium Sized Enterprise Survey (MSME) 2010 -
to assess the extent to which these small businesses contribute to national employment and output.


                                                     8
         A significant advantage of this survey is that it is nationally representative; it consists of 6,134
firm level observations representing a little under 3 million businesses and around 5 million employees.
However, the survey is not without limitations. First, the sampling frame for this survey is households
and the selection of households is based on the 2002 census. This poses at least two problems. First,
because the survey is household based, it is representative of households and not businesses. Thus,
since Tanzania is still a very poor country, we are likely to be missing some of the more productive
businesses. Indeed, an analysis of the data reveals that mid-sized firms are under-represented in this
dataset (Financial Sector Deepening Trust, 2012). Second, because the sampling framework is 2002,
it oversamples rural households. This is because there was a significant reduction in rural activity
between 2002 and 2012 as documented in Section 2 of this paper. Therefore, the reader should keep
in mind that our analysis is likely to understate the contribution of small businesses to economy-wide
productivity and employment and also to understate the importance of small businesses in urban areas.

3.1      Data and Summary Statistics

         A set of summary statistics based on the MSME survey is presented in Table 3. Among the
6,134 sampled firms, a total of 5,653 firms have all of the information reported in Table 3. A t-test of
means of observables across samples do not reveal any systematic differences between the two
samples8. As shown in the first panel of Table 3, most MSMEs are extremely small: mean employment
is 1.48. Only 3% of these firms are registered with Tanzania's Business Registration and Licensing
Agency (BRELA) that opened in 19999. Similarly, only 5.3% of these firms have a tax identification
number. Officially, firms in Tanzania are classified as formal when they are either registered with
BRELA or when they have a tax id; thus, our MSME samples consists primarily of small informal
firms. While the MSME survey is a household based survey, only 50% of firms report that their
businesses are actually operating out of their homes.

         As previously noted, because the sampling framework is based on the 2002 census, the sample
is heavily skewed towards rural firms; indeed the second panel of Table 3 indicates that 74.1% of firms
are located in rural areas. We also report in the second panel of Table 3 average monthly value-added
and average monthly sales per firm. The mean value-added of an MSME firm is very close to the


8Not reported in the interest of space constraints but available upon request.
9 BRELA is Tanzania’s Business Registrations and Licensing Agency. It is a Government Executive Agency and was
established on the 28th of October, 1999. The aim of the agency is to ensure that businesses operate in accordance with
regulations and to ensure that businesses follow ‘sound principles.’


                                                          9
average monthly gross income of a formal employee in Tanzania, which is 336,835 Tanzanian Shillings
according to Tanzania’s Formal Employment and Earnings Survey 2010. There is enormous variation
in monthly value-added among surveyed firms, indicated by the very high value of the standard
deviation (s.d.) in Table 3. This productive heterogeneity among small informal firms is a point to
which we will return in great detail later on in the paper.

        The majority of MSME firms are young as indicated by the mean age of 6.33 years in panel 2
of Table 3. This is consistent with our macro findings that the majority of non-farm private sector
jobs created in Tanzania between 2002 and 2012 were created by small informal firms. Panel 2 of
Table 3 also indicates that 80% of these businesses operate full time. Panel 3 of Table 3 indicates that
roughly one third of these business owners report that the business is the owners’ only source of
income with a slightly higher share of business owners (40%) reporting that the business is the owners’
main source of income. 19.3% of business owners report that farming is their main source of income.

        Like their businesses, the owners of these small businesses are also relatively young. The mean
age of business owners is 36.9 years; the youngest business owner is 16 and the oldest is 91. Roughly
half of these business owners are women.

        Finally, we report in panel 4 of Table 3 the category of income of the household in which the
business owner resides. There are three categories derived from Tanzania’s Household and Budgetary
survey: not poor, moderately poor and very poor. 44.9% of the MSME owners households are not
poor, 35.2% are moderately poor and 19.9% are very poor.

3.2     Industrial and Geographic Distribution

        Although the MSMEs operate in a wide range of activities, the bulk of these activities can be
classified into trade services (79.9%) and manufacturing (16.7%). As reported in Table 4,
manufacturing enterprises operate in the following 6 sub-sectors: grain milling (1.7%), beverages
(8.3%), textiles (3.4%), wood (0.5%), building materials (1.1%) and furniture (1.6%). Firms in the trade
services sector operate primarily in retail (47.1%), food services (22.3%) and beverage services (7.9%).
Many of these activities appear to have strong links to agriculture but without further information, it
is not possible to identify which ones and exactly how these linkages work. This is an important area
for future research. The distribution of firms across regions is roughly proportional to regional
population shares. However, unlike the distribution of firms, the distribution of employment is almost


                                                   10
evenly split between rural and urban areas indicating that firms in urban areas have on average more
employees.


3.3      MSME Coverage of National Employment

      In Section 2, we combined census data with Tanzania’s Formal Employment and Earnings Survey
(FEES) to show that the majority of new jobs created in Tanzania over the past decade are in the
informal sector. Here, we combine the MSME data for 2010 with data from the 2012 Census and the
Formal Employment and Earnings Survey (FEES) 2012 to get a sense for what the MSME firms
represent in terms of national output and employment. Since we are only interested in rough estimates,
we chose not to interpolate 2012 census data back to match the 2010 MSME data and instead report
actual numbers. Thus, this analysis is likely to understate the importance of MSMEs since this sector
is growing more rapidly than the formal sector.
      Table 5 summarizes the results of the comparison of MSME employment to census and FEES
employment. We report total private non-agricultural employment by data source in the last row of
Table 5. As we reported previously, formal private sector employment is about 15% of the total non-
agricultural employment reported in the 2012 Census; the implication is that 85% of all private
nonagricultural jobs are in the informal sector. The MSME survey covers 83% of the jobs in the
informal sector.
      At the sector level, the number of employees in the MSME is much higher than in the Census for
manufacturing and trade services. In manufacturing, the total number of employees covered by the
MSME survey doubles the informal manufacturing employment numbers obtained by taking the
difference between the census and FEES. In the trade services sector, the total number of employees
covered by the MSME survey is more than 50% greater than what is reported in the census. In
addition, in other small informal business activities, such as construction and transport, there are very
few firms covered by the MSME survey, indicating that such economic activities are under-represented
in the MSME survey. Furthermore, personal services, which account for 25% of total informal non-
agricultural employment in the Census, are not considered small businesses and hence are not covered
by the MSME survey.
      Most of the employment related discrepancies in the sectoral breakdowns between the MSME
data and the census data can be explained by digging deeper into the data. First, the MSME survey
covers businesses that do not run full time, and employees of such part time businesses may have


                                                   11
been counted in the Census as farm workers. In fact, more than 25% of the rural MSME firms
identified agriculture as their main source of income and 32% of rural households operating in MSME
manufacturing identified agriculture as their main source of income. Second, though the Census
reports fewer informal workers in the “Hotel, Restaurants and Food Services” industry than the
MSME, a possible explanation for this could be that the Census counts only the employees of hotels
and restaurants in this sector, designating small business owners of food and beverage services to
other service activities.


3.4      MSME Coverage of National Output

      In addition to the MSME contribution to employment, we would like to know how much the
MSMEs contribute to total output of the economy. According to the “National Baseline Survey
Report for Micro, Small, and Medium Enterprises in Tanzania”, MSMEs contributed around 27% to
Tanzania’s GDP in 2010 (Ministry of Trade and Industry, 2012, p15). In our view this estimate is too
high because it fails to take into account seasonality associated with MSMEs. Since the MSME
questionnaire asks business owners about their monthly sales, we are able to compute a seasonally
adjusted value of output per work by firm (see online Appendix 2 for details of this calculation). Using
this methodology, we arrive at a lower but we think more realistic estimate for the MSME sector’s
value added of about 13.5% of national GDP (see online Appendix for the details of this calculation).
The results of this estimation are reported in Table 6.

      As reported in Table 6, the value added of the MSME sector accounted for 25% of national private
non-agricultural GDP in 2010. The contribution of the MSME sector to manufacturing value-added
is roughly 18%. In manufacturing, the MSMEs are concentrated in six sub-sectors: beverages, food
processing, textiles, wood processing, furniture, and building materials.10 We also present the value-
added of these six manufacturing sub-sectors contributed by firms in the formal sector using
Tanzania’s Annual Survey of Industrial Production (ASIP) for the years 2008 and 2009 (the two most
recent rounds of ASIP). We find that in some cases, small informal firms seem to play the dominant




     10 Though the value added numbers for these six sub-sectors of manufacturing is not available in the National

Account data, according to the Annual Survey of Industrial Production (ASIP), these six manufacturing sectors account
for less than 50% of total formal manufacturing. Therefore, we can say with confidence that the contribution of MSMEs
in these six manufacturing sectors would be much higher than their contribution to the overall manufacturing sector.

                                                         12
role as their total value-added contribution is actually higher than that of their counterpart formal
firms.

      In summary, although MSMEs do contribute to national output, their contribution to employment
is far greater. This is an indication that MSMEs have lower average productivity than formal firms in
the same private non-agricultural sectors. This leads to the next section of this paper in which we
explore the productive heterogeneity of MSMEs.

4.       Quantitative and Qualitative Characteristics of MSMEs and Their Owners

         Before proceeding further, it is worth stressing what we are and are not attempting to do in
this section of the paper. Our goal here is to try to understand which – if any – of the MSMEs might
be able to contribute to economywide labor productivity growth while at the same time providing
employment. We view this exercise in the spirit of Schoar’s (2010) work who argues that policy that
fails to take into account the heterogeneity of small businesses in the informal sector is likely to yield
disappointing results. Indeed, the work of Banerjee et al (2015) indicates that at least one very large
scale microfinance program that was at least in part designed to foster entrepreneurship had little to
no average impact on business outcomes. Subsequent work by these same authors suggests that one
of the reasons for the disappointing average effects is that not all businesses are destined for success.
We structure our investigation into the heterogeneity of these businesses around the self-reported
motivations of business owners, the productivity of MSMEs and the correlates of highly productive
MSMEs.

4.1      Self-reported Motivations of Small Business Owners

         The MSME survey includes three questions designed to elicit the reasons for opening a
business. The responses to these questions are tabulated using sample weights in Table 7. The first
question is: what was your main occupation before you started this business? Notably, only 7.56% of
respondents reported that they were previously unemployed prior to starting a business. The second
question is: for what reason did you choose your line of business? A little under half of all business
owners say that the reason they chose their line of business is because they saw a market opportunity.
The second most common reason for operating in a particular line of business is that the owners’
capital could only finance that line of business. The third and most common reason for picking a line
of business was having experience in that line of business and the fourth reason was having friends
and family who operated a similar business.

                                                   13
        The third question is: if you were offered a full-time salary paying job, would you take it?
Responses to this question are reported in the bottom panel of Table 7 and indicate that only 46.57%
of small business owners would leave their current business for a full time salaried position. 63.92%
of the respondents who would prefer a full time salaried job say they would like to work for the
government. This is consistent with results reported in Banerjee and Duflo (2007) and Banerjee et al
(2011) about the analysis of the economic lives of the poor. Another 23.99% of the respondents say
they would prefer to work for a large private company. The reported reason for preferring a full time
salaried position is better security of income.


4.2     Job Creation: the Employment Growth of Small Firms

        Our analysis of the dynamics of small firms is severely limited by the cross sectional nature of
the data (a second survey is planned for 2017). There is however, a retrospective question that asks
business owners how many employees worked in the business when the business started. By
combining this information with the number of employees that currently work in the business we are
able to come up with an estimate of annualized employment growth. We report on this number but
refrain from any detailed analysis of firm size and employment growth since the MSME sample is
truncated at both ends of the distribution. In other words, we do not observe firms that exited from
the sample and we do not observe firms that graduate out of the sample. Nevertheless, by examining
our measure of employment growth among the MSMEs, we can begin to get a sense for whether any
of the MSMEs have the potential to grow into larger firms generating employment for the scores of
individuals who would rather have salaried jobs than work in a small business and at the same time
take advantage of economies of scale.
        We find that mean employment growth among MSMEs is 2.2 percent. To put this in
perspective, we consider what this implies for an average MSME firm over a ten year period. The
average firm has 1.29 full time employees. If employment in the average firm grew at 2.2 percent per
year for ten years, the average number of full time employees would increase to only 1.57. The average
though significant underlying heterogeneity. Our data reveal that 87.76 percent of MSMEs never grow
and that the average growth rate among the firms that do grow is 13 percent. The average firm size
for firms that do grow is 2.89 employees. At this rate of employment growth, these firms would have
an average of 8.68 employees after 10 years.




                                                  14
4.3    The Productive Heterogeneity of Small Firms

       To examine the productive heterogeneity of MSMEs, we compute labor productivity defined
as value added per worker. Value added is computed as the firm’s average monthly sales minus the
firms’ average monthly costs of production. Because firms report average sales for each month of the
year, we are able to take into account the seasonality of businesses. In the appendix, we show that this
is quite important in that there is significant seasonal variation in revenues. Of course, an important
issue with this type of data is measurement error. In recent work - de Mel, Mckenzie and Woodruff
(2008) examine the extent to which we can trust sales and expense data reported by small enterprises
in developing countries. They find that sales are typically under-reported by up to 30% and that
keeping written accounts significantly increases the accuracy of these measures. Since we know which
firms in our dataset keep written accounts, we are able to check whether this holds in our data. We
find that keeping written accounts is significantly positively correlated with firm level productivity.
However, it could be that this difference is also a reflection of management capability and not just
measurement error. Thus, we keep the full sample for our analysis and note that our estimates of labor
productivity are likely to be understated. We also perform robustness tests by dropping firms that do
not keep accounts - 67% of the firms in our sample - from our analysis.
       We use kernel densities of the log of value added to examine the productive heterogeneity of
MSMEs. Our analysis of the productive heterogeneity of firms in the MSME sector reveals two
important features of these firms. First, there is significant overlap in productivity between ‘formal’
and ‘informal’ firms. This is shown in Figures 2a and 2b which plot the distribution of productivity
for formal MSMEs (blue line) and the distribution of productivity for informal MSMEs (red line). We
use two definitions of formality. In Figure 2a firms are consider formal if they are registered with
BRELA Tanzania’s business registration and licensing agency. In Figure 2b firms are considered
formal if they have a tax identification number (Tax ID). The overlap in the distribution of
productivity between formal and informal MSMEs is significant. Thus, it would be a mistake to classify
all informal MSMEs as unproductive and all formal MSMEs as productive.
       Second, Figure 3 reveals that a little over half of the firms in the MSME sector have labor
productivity levels higher than the economy-wide average in agriculture. This is not surprising and is
consistent with evidence presented in Section 2 of this paper where we show that average productivity
in the sectors dominated by small firms is consistently higher than average productivity in agriculture.
What is more surprising is the fact that 6.2% of the MSMEs – or 143,483 firms - have labor


                                                  15
productivity higher than economy-wide manufacturing labor productivity. These firms account for
30.7% of the total value-added generated by the MSME sector. This is important because it means
that a good number of firms contribute to raising labor productivity in Tanzania’s economy and it
underscores the productive heterogeneity of the informal sector.


5.      Using the MSME Survey to Identify Highly Productive MSMEs

        Following Lewis (1979), we call MSMEs that are highly productive in-between firms. This
terminology is meant to capture the idea that the characteristics of these firms place them somewhere
in-between Tanzania’s modern (most productive) and informal (least productive) firms. Because we
want to get a sense for the number of firms and employees that fall into the in-between sector we
classify firms according to whether or not they meet our definition of in-between. As a first cut, we
include in the in-between group only firms with average annual labor productivity greater than
economywide labor productivity in manufacturing. We then expand the sample of in-between firms
by including all firms with annual average labor productivity greater than economywide labor
productivity in trade services. Based on these definitions we begin by estimating the size of the in-
between sector and then turn to examining observable correlates of in-between firms. It is worth
emphasizing that we are thinking about this problem from the standpoint of a government with scarce
resources with the goal of stimulating productive private sector investment in the face of many market
imperfections including but not limited to firms’ lack of access to collateral.


5.1     Estimating the Magnitude and Potential of the In-between Sector

        In Table 8 we report the number of firms, the number of employees and average labor
productivity for each of the two groups of in-between firms; firms with average labor productivity
greater than economywide labor productivity in manufacturing and then trade services. Since
economywide labor productivity in manufacturing is greater than in services, Group 2 includes the
firms from Group 1. The manufacturing cutoff leaves us with 143,483 firms and 245,056 employees.
Average labor productivity in these firms in USD 9,746 nearly 5 times the MSME average. Group 1
accounts for 5.7% of MSME firms, 6.18% of MSME employment and 30.7% of MSME value added.
The trade services cutoff leaves us with 261,375 firms and 449,783 employees. Average labor
productivity in these firms in USD 6,463 more than three times the MSME average. Group 2 accounts
for 10.38% of MSME firms, 11.34% of MSME employment and 37.4% of MSME value added.

                                                   16
5.2     Observable Characteristics of In-between Firms

        There is a large body of literature examining the determinants of firm level productivity in
both developed and developing countries. Broadly speaking, these variables can be classified under
the two sub-headings characteristics of business owners and characteristics of businesses. Business
owner characteristics thought to influence firm success include socio-economic attributes, labor
history, and owner’s knowledge of business and management practices. Characteristics of businesses
thought to influence firm level productivity include firm attributes such as size and age as well as
access to infrastructure, technology and business services including finance. We have identified at least
70 such variables in the MSME dataset. A list of these variables along with a t-test of differences in
the means of these variables between the in-between firms (defined using the manufacturing cutoff)
and the rest of the firms is presented in Appendix Table 1a.

        The results of the t-tests are mostly consistent with what we already know about the
determinants of firm level productivity. For example, more educated business owners and business
owners who are more knowledgeable about business and management practices run more productive
firms. Female headed businesses are less productive and this turns out to be a function of the fact that
female headed businesses tend to be run out of the household on a part-time basis. Firms that operate
full time and firms that keep written accounts in a ledger are more productive. Access to infrastructure,
technology and financial services are also correlated with firm level productivity. Apart from what we
learn about firms in Tanzania, these results lend credence to our firm level measure of labor
productivity.

        Firm and owner characteristics that are readily observable and that can be verified will be most
useful to policymakers designing programs targeted at small business growth. To this end and based
on the t-tests presented in Appendix 1a, we identify 11 variables that differentiate in-between firms
from the rest of small businesses and that could be used to guide policy. We use these variables as
regressors in a probit specification where the dependent variable takes a value of one if the firm is in
the in-between sector and zero otherwise. The estimated coefficients tell us something about the
strength of these variables as predictors of firm performance. Of course this approach suffers from
omitted variable bias and we have no intention of claiming causality. In fact, we are searching for
variables that may indeed be correlated with the omitted variables that are costly to quantify and verify.
One way to think about this exercise is as a search for sufficient statistics that can be used to capture
several firm and owner attributes that would be costly or impossible to quantify and verify. The idea

                                                   17
is to use this information as a starting point for thinking about how to design an intervention targeted
at the most promising firms.


          Our estimating equation takes the follow form:


    𝑦 = 𝛼 + ∑ 𝛽𝑖 𝑥 + 𝜀                                                                            (1)

where y takes the value of 1 if the firm is in the in-between sector and zero otherwise. In equation (1)
α is a constant, x is a matrix of covariates, β is a vector of coefficients to be estimated, and ε is an
identically identified and distributed error term. Following the basic framework outlined in equation
(1), we estimate three sets of results: (1) national level results which include both urban and rural
businesses; (2) urban only results, and (3) rural only results. Sampling weights were applied in the
estimation of all results and appropriate subpopulations were created for the estimation of urban and
rural results. Marginal effects are reported together to facilitate interpretation. All standard errors are
robust.

          The results of estimating equation (1) are presented in table 9. The first three columns have
as the dependent variable a binary variable that is equal to 1 if labor productivity of the business is
greater than economywide average labor productivity in manufacturing and zero otherwise. The
dependent variable for the last three columns was defined as 1 if labor productivity of the business is
greater than economy trade-services labor productivity and zero otherwise. In the text below we use
the terms manufacturing and trade as a way to indicate how the left-hand side variable was constructed.

          We begin with the only variable that describes the owner of the business: gender. Negative
and significant signs are observed across all specifications. Decreases in the probability of being in-
between (under the manufacturing definition) range from 6.2 to almost 7 percent. Much larger
decreases are observed for trade, from 9 percent in rural areas to 13 percent in urban settings.
Obviously national policies would not be designed to discriminate against women. This result is
important though because it does imply – as do the t-statistics reported in the appendix – that women
are less likely to own successful businesses. As previously noted, this is partly because female headed
businesses are more likely to be part-time and run out of the household both of which are negatively
correlated with business productivity.




                                                    18
        Operating on a full-time basis is positively correlated with being in the in-between sector in
most cases. For manufacturing operating full-time increases the probability of being in-between by
4.3 and 6.3 percent respectively. Slightly larger increases were observed for trade (6.1 and 7.8 for
national and rural areas respectively). Keeping accounts in a ledger increases the likelihood of being
in the in-between sector by between 6.2 and 13.2 percent. Having paid workers has very little impact
on the likelihood of being classified in the in-between sector.

        One of the most significant predictors of firm performance is the number of daily customers
it has; the question asks whether firms have at least 20 customers a day. This may be viewed as an
imperfect proxy for sales revenue and firm size. Thus it is reassuring that this variable is strongly
positively correlated with our measure of firm performance. Having 20 or more customers a day
increases in the probability of being in the in-between sector by between 5.7-7.3 percent using the
manufacturing cutoff and between 7.8-8.8 percent using the trade cutoff. Running the business from
the household, on the other hand, has largely negative and significant effects particularly for national
and rural areas.

        Finally, infrastructure and interactions with the formal banking sector are also positively
correlated with being in the in-between sector. Using electricity for the business increases the
probability of being in the in-between sector by 7-11 when the manufacturing cutoff is used; greater
increases are observed for businesses under the trade cut. The last variable captures whether or not
business owners save money in a formal bank account. This too is positively correlated with being in
the in-between sector.

        In summary, firm performance is positively correlated with operating full-time, having an
account ledger, using electricity to power the business and having a savings account in a formal bank.
These results are robust to whether the manufacturing cutoff or the trade cutoff is used. To further
check the robustness of these results, we re-run the regressions using only firms that keep accounts in
a ledger on the grounds that the information provided by these firms is likely to be more accurate and
less prone to measurement error. The results of this analysis are presented in Appendix Table 2a and
indicate that although the magnitudes of the coefficients change slightly, the signs and significance of
the coefficients remain largely intact.




                                                   19
5.3          Can Observable Characteristics Be Used for Targeting?

             The most important obstacle to doing business reported by firms in the MSME sample is
access to finance including working capital. This is not surprising and is consistent with the widespread
popularity of microfinance and government programs designed for lending to small businesses at
concessionary rates. Yet we have very little evidence to suggest that these programs actually enhance
business performance. Instead, we do have evidence that well intended programs aimed at promoting
small business growth have had un-intended negative consequences. 11 It is likely that these
disappointing results are at least partially attributable to an inability or an unwillingness to target
products designed to enhance business success at capable firms. Of course targeting can be
operationally and politically difficult. But we agree with Schoar (2010) who writes that unless policies
designed to enhance small firm performance take into account small firm heterogeneity, they are likely
to fail.
             There is of course no blueprint for successful targeting but in closing we consider some
options based on the results of the analysis presented in this section. The results that seem potentially
useful to us are the findings on keeping written accounts and formal savings accounts. In lieu of
collateral, lenders in Tanzania could require written accounts on a quarterly or bi-annual basis as a pre-
condition for lending. Presumably if the accounts were audited by an independent third party, they
would inform lenders not just about the quality of the borrower but also about the size and terms of
the loan that any given business could carry with minimal risk of default. An advantage to this type of
targeting is that it could in principle be open to all MSMEs but would likely prove too costly for
MSMEs with poor business performance. The information associated with formal savings accounts
might also be used for targeting. For example, monitoring deposits and withdrawals in a formal savings
accounts would allow lenders to learn about the financial habits of potential borrowers. A disadvantage
of this approach is that it would likely tie borrowers to the banks in which they save limiting
competition.




      11   See for example Martin et al (2015) and De Paula et al (2011).

                                                               20
5.4     How Much Could Small Firms Contribute to Labor Productivity Growth?

        To think about how much the informal sector could contribute to labor productivity growth,
we rely on the framework laid out in Rodrik (2014) that separates labor productivity growth into the
components due to improvements in fundamentals, convergence in formal manufacturing and
structural change. Since we have no way of predicting how improvements in fundamentals might
impact the productivity of firms in the informal sector, we focus exclusively on the structural change
channel. In this framework, the contribution of the informal sector to labor productivity growth is the
difference in relative productivities between the informal sector (I) and the traditional sector (T)
multiplied by the change in the employment share in the informal sector 𝑑𝛼𝐼 . Formally this may be
written as in equation (2) where 𝑦̂ stands for growth in output per worker, 𝜋𝐼 is relative labor
productivity in the informal sector and 𝜋𝑇 is relative labor productivity in the traditional sector.

           𝑦̂ = (𝜋𝐼 − 𝜋 𝑇 )𝑑𝛼𝐼                                                            (2)

        This equation makes it clear that informal firms will contribute to economywide labor
productivity growth when the relative productivity of informal firms is greater than relative
productivity in the traditional sector and when employment in the informal sector expands. Using
equation (2) we estimate that the overall contribution of MSMEs to labor productivity growth in
Tanzania between 2002 and 2012 was roughly .57 percentage points or (.81-.41)*1.39. Firms in the in-
between sector defined by the manufacturing cutoff accounted for 98% of this increase in labor
productivity growth or (4.7-.41)*.13. There are two obvious ways in which firms in the in-between
sector could contribute more to economywide labor productivity growth. First, they could hire more
workers and second they could raise their relative productivity.

        Increasing the share of workers in the in-between sector from .13 percent to .26 percent of
total employment while holding relative productivities constant would increase the in-between sectors’
contribution to labor productivity by 1.12 percentage points. This would be equivalent to getting each
firm in the in-between sector to hire one additional full time worker. This does not seem out of the
realm of possibility but there is no guarantee that productivity would remain constant if more workers
were hired. Doubling labor productivity in the in-between sector while maintaining the past growth
rate of the employment in the in-between sector of .13 percent per annum would raise the in-between
sectors contribution to annual labor productivity growth in the economy to 1.17 percentage points.



                                                   21
This is pretty much equivalent to graduating all of the in-between firms to formal status which at least
on the face of it seems like a much more difficult task.

        These numbers are not meant to be accurate predictions of what is to come. Rather they are
intended to give us a sense for the potential of the in-between firms to contribute to economywide
labor productivity growth. The percentage points reported here are not trivial in following sense.
Tanzania’s formal economy contributed around 1.5 percentage points to labor productivity growth
between 2002 and 2012. Our calculations suggest that in-between firms could contribute meaningfully
to economywide labor productivity growth. But it is unlikely that this will happen without a targeted
effort by the private and/or public sector. Given the size of Tanzania’s informal economy, it seems
to us that prioritizing labor productivity growth in the informal sector would be worthwhile.


6.      Conclusion

        We have shown in this paper that at 4.1% per annum, labor productivity in Tanzania has
grown more rapidly over the past 12 years than at any other time in recent history. We have also shown
that employment growth has kept up with population growth at roughly 2.5 percent per annum.
However, the bulk of this employment growth–almost 90%– has occurred in the non-agricultural
sector. In addition, 73% of employment growth in the non-agricultural has occurred in the informal
sector. We argue that because employment growth in the informal sector has been more rapid than
employment growth in the formal sector – and there is no indication that this is likely to change any
time soon - more attention needs to be paid to firms in the informal sector.
        We use Tanzania’s first nationally representative survey of micro, small and medium sized
enterprises (MSMEs) to explore the nature of these businesses and their contribution to econonywide
labor productivity growth. We find that these firms operate primarily in the manufacturing and trade
services sectors and that they are distributed across regions roughly in proportion to population
density. We find little difference in labor productivity between firms in rural and urban areas. And we
find that roughly half of MSME business owners would not quit their businesses for a full time salaried
position.
        We show that the informal sector contributed roughly half a percentage point to economywide
labor productivity growth in Tanzania between 2002 and 2012. Virtually all of the labor productivity
growth contributed by informal firms came from a small subset of firms we call the in-between firms.
We consider attributes of the in-between firms that could be used for targeting financial and business

                                                  22
services to firms with the potential to grow. We find two salient characteristics of firms in the in-
between sector that might lend themselves to targeting. Firms in the in-between sector are more likely
to keep written accounts in a ledger and the owners of firms in the inbteween sector are more likely
to save money in a formal bank account. Both of these attributes could be used to target MSMEs with
growth potential.




                                                 23
References
African Development Bank. 2013. "Recognizing Africa's Informal Sector." Retrieved November 30,
      2015, from http://www.afdb.org/en/blogs/afdb-championing-inclusive-growth-across-
      africa/post/recognizing-africas-informal-sector-11645/
Banerjee, Abhijit, Abhijit Vinayak Banerjee, and Esther Duflo. 2011. Poor economics: A radical rethinking
      of the way to fight global poverty. PublicAffairs.
Banerjee, Abhijit V., and Esther Duflo. 2007. “The economic lives of the poor.” The journal of economic
      perspectives: a journal of the American Economic Association 21(1): 141.
Banerjee, Abhijit V., Emily Breza, Esther Duflo and Cynthia Kinnan. 2015. “Do credit constraints
      limit entrepreneurship? Heterogeneity in the returns to microfinance.” Working Paper. July
      2015. Retrieved August 15, 2015 from
      http://conference.nber.org/confer/2015/SI2015/PRPD/Kinnan.pdf
De Mel, Suresh, David McKenzie, and Christopher Woodruff. 2008. “Returns to Capital in
    Microenterprises: Evidence from a Field Experiment.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics 123(4):
    1329-1372.
De Mel, S., McKenzie, D.J. and Woodruff, C., 2009. “Measuring microenterprise profits: Must we ask
     how the sausage is made?” Journal of development Economics, 88(1), pp.19-31.
De Paula, Aureo and Jose Scheinkman. 2011. “The Informal Sector: An Equilibrium Model and
       Some Empirical Evidence from Brazil.” Review of Income and Wealth 57(s1), s8-s26.
Fafchamps, Marcel, David McKenzie, Simon Quinn, and Christopher Woodruff. 2014. “When is
      Capital Enough to Get Female Enterprises Growing? Evidence from a Randomized
      Experiment in Ghana.” Journal of Development Economics (xx).
Fafchamps, M. and Woodruff, C., 2016. “Identifying gazelles: expert panels vs. surveys as a means to
      identify firms with rapid growth potential” The World Bank Economic Review, p.lhw026.
Financial Sector Deepening Trust. 2012. "National Baseline Survey Report for Micro, Small and
      Medium Enterprises in Tanzania." Retrieved from http://www.fsdt.or.tz/data/msme-
      baseline-survey/
Grimm, Michael, Jens Krüger, and Jann Lay. 2011. “Barriers to Entry and Returns to Capital in
      Informal Activities: Evidence from Sub-Saharan Africa.” Review of Income and Wealth. 57(1): 27-
      53.
Grimm, M., Knorringa, P. and Lay, J., 2012. “Constrained gazelles: High potentials in West Africa’s
      informal economy” World Development, 40(7), pp.1352-1368.
Lewis, W. Arthur. 1979. “The Dual Economy Revisited.” The Manchester School 47(3): 211-29.

Li, Yue and Martin Rama. 2015. “Firm Dynamics, Productivity Growth and Job Creation in
      Developing Countries: The Role of Micro- and Small Enterprises.” The World Bank Research
      Observer, Oxford University Press.

                                                   24
Martin, Leslie A., Shanti Nataraj and Ann Harrison. 2015. “In with the big, out with the small:
      Removing small-scale reservations in India.” NBER Working Paper, 19942. Retrieved July 24,
      2015, from http://www.nber.org/papers/w19942
McKenzie, David J. 2015. "Identifying and spurring high-growth entrepreneurship: experimental
    evidence from a business plan competition." World Bank Policy Research Working Paper 7391
    (2015).
McKenzie, David, and Christopher Woodruff. 2008. “Experimental Evidence on Returns to Capital
    and Access to Finance in Mexico.” World Bank Economic Review. 22(3): 457-482.
McMillan, M., & Rodrik, D. 2011. “Globalization, Structural Change and Productivity Growth.”
     NBER      Working     Paper,  17143.     Retrieved     November    30,    2015,   from
     http://www.nber.org/papers/w17143
Ministry of Industry and Trade, Tanzania. 2012. “Annual Survey of Industrial Production 2009:
       Statistical Report.” Dar es Salaam, Tanzania, May 2012
Ministry of Industry and Trade, Tanzania. 2010. “Annual Survey of Industrial Production and
       Performance 2008: Analytical Report.” Dar es Salaam, Tanzania, September 2010
National Bureau of Statistics, Ministry of Finance, Tanzania. 2014a. “National Accounts of Tanzania
      Mainland 2001-2013,” Dar es Salaam, Tanzania, December 2014.
National Bureau of Statistics, Ministry of Finance, Tanzania. 2014b. “Revised National Accounts
      Estimates for Tanzania Mainland, Base Year, 2007” Dar es Salaam, Tanzania, November 2014.
National Bureau of Statistics, Ministry of Finance, Tanzania. 2014c. “Formal Sector Employment and
      Earnings Survey: Analytical Report 2013,” Dar es Salaam, Tanzania, August 2014.
National Bureau of Statistics, Ministry of Finance, and Office of Chief Government Statistician,
      Ministry of State, President’s Office, State House and Good Governance, Tanzania. 2014d.
      “Tanzania 2012 Census: Basic Demographic and Socio-Economic Profile,” Dar es Salaam and
      Zanzibar, Tanzania, April 2014.
National Bureau of Statistics, Ministry of Planning, Economy and Empowerment, Tanzania. 2007.
      “Analytic Report for Employment and Earnings Survey 2002.” Dar es Salaam, Tanzania, July
      2007.
National Bureau of Statistics, Ministry of Planning, Economy and Empowerment, Tanzania. 2006.
      “Tanzania 2002 Census: Analytic Report, Volume X,” Dar es Salaam, Tanzania, August 2006.
La Porta, R., and Shleifer, A. 2011. "The Unofficial Economy in Africa." NBER Working Paper, 16821.
      Retrieved November 30, 2015, from http://www.nber.org/papers/w16821
La Porta, R., and Shleifer, A. 2014. "Informality and Development." NBER Working Paper, 20205.
      Retrieved November 30, 2015, from http://www.nber.org/papers/w20205
Rodrik, Dani. 2014. “The past, present, and future of economic growth.” Challenge 57(3): 5-39.



                                                25
Wangwe, Samuel and Mmari, Donald. 2016. “Managing the Transition from Informal to Formal
     Enterprises,” REPOA, Tanzania. February.
World Bank. 2016. World Development Indicators. An online database.
Schoar, Antoinette. 2010. "The divide between subsistence and transformational entrepreneurship."
      Innovation Policy and the Economy, Volume 10. University of Chicago Press, 57-81.




                                               26
Tables and Figures

Table 1: Tanzania’s economy-wide labor productivity growth decomposition (2002-2012)
                                                                     Sector labor                                                 Economywide labor productivity
                            Value-added per worker (constant                                  Sector GDP      Sector labor
                                                                  productivity growth                                             growth decomposition (2002-12
                                  2005 TZS in billion)                                           share           share
                                                                         rate                                                               annual, %)
                                   2002                2012       (2002-12 annual %)     2002       2012     2002       2012     Within      Between       Total
 Agriculture                           351                 509            3.8            34.2        27.0   81.7      65.8         1.28            -0.81           0.48
 Mining                               4,057              1,581           -9.0                2.4     3.3     0.5       2.6          -0.12          0.33            0.20
 Manufacturing                        3,575              3,706            0.4                8.2     9.6     1.8       3.2          0.02           0.51            0.53
 Utilities                            6,467              1,792           -12.0               2.3     1.9     0.3       1.3          -0.14          0.18            0.04
 Construction                         5,560              5,119           -0.8                7.3     9.9     1.0       2.4          -0.04          0.70            0.66
 Trade services                       1,607              1,760            0.9            14.9        16.0    7.5      11.3          0.11           0.66            0.77
 Transport services                   5,968              5,442           -0.9                6.5     7.5     0.8       1.7          -0.04          0.48            0.44
 Business services                   35,298             20,860           -5.1            12.1        13.5    0.2       0.8          -0.29          1.23            0.94
 Gov’t services                       3,178              3,762            1.7            11.2        10.7    4.1       3.5          0.24           -0.22           0.02
 Personal services                     213                 114           -6.0                0.8     0.7     2.1       7.4          -0.02          0.06            0.04
 Total private economy                 761               1,148            4.2            88.8        89.3   95.9      96.5          0.76           3.33            4.09
             Total                     832               1,240            4.1                100     100     100       100           1.0            3.1             4.1
 Contribution to economywide labor productivity growth (total economy’s labor productivity growth in 2002-2012 = 100)
 Agriculture                                                                                                                        31.2           -19.6           11.6
 Mining                                                                                                                             -3.0            7.9             4.9
 Manufacturing                                                                                                                       0.6           12.4            12.9
 Utilities                                                                                                                          -3.4            4.3             0.9
 Construction                                                                                                                       -1.1           17.1            16.0
 Trade services                                                                                                                      2.8           15.9            18.7
 Transport services                                                                                                                 -1.0           11.7            10.7
 Business services                                                                                                                  -7.0           29.8            22.8
 Gov’t services                                                                                                                      5.8           -5.2             0.6
 Personal services                                                                                                                  -0.5            1.4             0.9
 Total                                                                                                                              24.3            75.7       100
Source: Authors’ calculation based on the data of national accounts and Census 2002 and 2012 drawn from Tanzanian government documents ((NBS, 2006, 2014a, 2014b, and 2014d)



                                                                                        27
         Table 2. Contribution to new employment by sector, formal and informal 2002-2012
                                   Total                             Formal                          Informal
                                Number of      Share in total    Number of         Share in total   Number of       Share in total
                                net increase    net increase     net increase       net increase    net increase     net increase

Agriculture                         446,677             11.2            -3,865               -0.1       450,542              11.3
Mining                              404,212             10.1             9,021                0.2       395,192                9.9
Manufacturing                       313,882               7.8          103,049                2.6       210,833                5.3
Utilities                           194,960               4.9          194,960                4.9               -              0.0
Construction                        281,864               7.0           21,185                0.5       260,679                6.5
Trade services                      966,807             24.2             1,304                0.0       965,503              24.1
Transport services                  182,383               4.6           18,497                0.5       163,886                4.1
Business services                   105,635               2.6           56,924                1.4        48,711                1.2
Public sector                       224,579               5.6          224,579                5.6                              0.0
Personal services                   881,289             22.0                   0              0.0       881,289              22.0
Total private non-agriculture
                                  3,331,032             83.2           404,940               10.1     2,926,093              73.1
Total private economy             3,375,978             84.4           845,077              21.1      2,530,901              63.2
Total non-agriculture             3,555,611             88.8         629,519                15.7      2,926,093              73.1
 Source: Authors calculation based on data from the Formal Employment and Earnings Survey and the Census 2002
 and 2012 (NBS, 2006, 2007, 2014c, and 2014d)




                                                                28
Table 3. MSME Summary Statistics
                                                                      Value unit
 Names of variables                                Observations                        Mean          S.D.      Min          Max
                                                                       or range
 Business Characteristics
 Number of employees per firm                           5,653           Person           1.48        1.652        1           80
 Number of full-time employees per firm                 5,653           Person          1.286        0.958        0           31
 Annual employment growth                               5,653          [-.09,.25]       0.022        0.054     -0.09        0.25
 % of firms registered with Brella                      5,653            [0,1]           0.03        0.171        0            1
 % of firms with tax ID                                 5,653            [0,1]          0.053        0.224        0            1
 % of firms with business run out of home               5,653            [0,1]          0.515          0.5        0            1
 % of firms in the rural area                           5,653                           0.741        0.438        0            1
 Average monthly value added per firm                   5,653         1,000 TZS          328      367,939      0.50        2,538
 Average monthly sales per firm                         5,653         1,000 TZS          461      434,142      3.00        2,600
 Firm's age                                             5,595            Year           6.333        6.022        1           35
 % of firms with business as full-time                  5,653            [0,1]          0.799        0.401        0            1
 Keeps accounts in ledger                               5,653            [0,1]          0.327        0.327        0            1
 Hires paid workers                                     5,653            [0,1]          0.101        0.301        0            1
 >20 customers per day                                  5,653            [0,1]          0.289        0.453        0            1
 Firms powers business with electricity                 5,653            [0,1]          0.162        0.368        0            1
 Owner/household characteristics
 Age of owner                                           5,653            Year              37           11       16           91
 Whether owner is female                                5,653            [0,1]           0.52         0.50        0            1
 % of firms households that are not poor                5,653            [0,1]           0.45         0.50        0            1
 % of firms households that are moderately poor         5,653            [0,1]           0.35         0.48        0            1
 % of firms households that are very poor               5,653            [0,1]           0.20         0.40        0            1
 % firms with business as main source of income         5,653            [0,1]           0.40         0.49        0            1
 % firms with farming as main source of income          5,653            [0,1]           0.19         0.39        0            1
 % firms with business as only source of income         5,653            [0,1]           0.33         0.47        0            1
 Owner saves in formal bank account                       5,653           [0,1]          0.08         0.27         0            1
Notes: Brella is Tanzania's Business Registration and Licensing Agency opened in 1999. Measures of poverty were computed at the
household level and using Tanzania's LSMS. TZS denote Tanzanian Shillings. Source: Authors calculations using the MSME Survey
2010 (Financial Sector Deepening Trust, 2012).




                                                                29
Table 4. Sectoral distribution of MSME firms
                                      Number in sample          % in total
 Extraction                                          21                 0.4
 Manufacturing                                      975                17.2
   Grain milling                                     95                 1.7
   Beverage                                         466                 8.2
   Textile                                          189                 3.3
   Wood                                              30                 0.3
   Building materials                                59                 1.0
   Furniture                                         89                 1.6
 Trade services                                   4,479                79.2
   Wholesale                                        145                 2.6
   Retail with shops                                865                15.3
   Retail with stalls                             1,376                24.3
   Retail on street                                 402                 7.1
   Beverage services                                441                 7.8
   Food services                                  1,250                22.1
 Transport                                           17                 0.3
 Business services                                   31                 0.5
 Repair and personal services                       130                 2.3
 Total                                            5,653
Source: Authors’ calculation using MSME survey 2010 (Financial Sector Deepening Trust, 2012)




                                     30
Table 5: MSME contribution to national employment (1,000 person)
                                                           National     Formal
                                                           economy     economy       Census -       MSMEs
                                                            (Census     (FEES          FEES         (MSME
                                                             2012)       2012)       (3) = (1)-      2010)
                                                              (1)         (2)            (2)          (4)
 Manufacturing                                                      585          260            325           648
 Trade services                                                  2,067           240          1,827         3,104
     Wholesale and Retail Trade                                   1,738          119          1,619         1,893
       Wholesale                                                    110                                         90
       Service Workers Shop and Stall Sales Workers               1,061                                     1,586
       Street Vendors and Related Workers                           567                                       217
     Hotel, restaurants and food services                           329          119            210         1,173
 Transport                                                          311            62           249
     Transport and Storage                                          238            43           195
     Information and Communication                                   73            19            54
 Construction                                                       439            45           394
 Other private services                                           1,349                       1,349           178
 Other private non-agriculture                                      861          205            655             20
 Total private non-agriculture                                    5,612           812        4,800          3,912
Note: We applied individual weights in the calculation, which is different from the weights applied in the National
Baseline Survey Report for MSME (FSDT 2012). Because of this, and also because some firms did not have ISIC
code in the data and hence are not included in our calculation, the total MSME employment number of 4 million in
this table is lower than that in FSDT (2012) in which is around 5 million.
Sources: Authors calculation using Census 2012 report (NBS, 2014d), FEES report (NBS, 2014c), and MSME survey
data (Financial Sector Deepening Trust, 2012).




                                                      31
Table 6: MSME contribution to national and sectoral GDP (in current billion TZS)
                                            National economy             Formal economy                    MSME
                                           (National account,          (ASIP       (ASIP
                                                                                                    (MSME 2010)
                                                 2010)                  2008)       2009)
 Total Manufacturing                                      3,022                                                538
   Beverage                                                               183           499                    164
   Food processing                                                         26           494                      65
   Textile                                                                842           117                    166
   Wood products excluding furniture                                    1,108             5                      18
   Furniture                                                              207            21                      53
   Building related materials                                              12           252                      71
 Trade services                                           5,163                                               5,141
   Wholesale and Retail Trade
                                                          4,442                                               3,941
     Wholesale                                                                                                  394
     Retail with shops
                                                                                                              3,151
     Street vendors                                                                                             396
   Hotel and Restaurants
                                                            721                                               1,200
 Transport                                                3,689                                                   -
   Transport and Storage                                  2,537                                                   -
   Information and Communication                          1,152
 Construction                                             3,146
 Other private services
                                                          5,042                                                 196
 Other private non-agriculture                            3,175                                                  10
 Total private non-agriculture
                                                          23,237                                              5,884
 Total economy                                            43,571
Note: Value-added calculation is extremely difficult for MSME survey given that many small firms did not keep an
account. The methodology for such calculation is documented in Appendix.
Sources: Authors calculation using data of National accounts after rebasing (NSB, 2014b), ASIP (Ministry of Industry
and Trade, 2010 and 2012) and the MSME survey 2010 (Financial Sector Deepening Trust, 2012)




                                                          32
Table 7: Business owner motivations and job satisfaction (%)

                                                           Share of Business
  Reasons for business choice
                                                               Owners
   I saw a market opportunity                                     47.63
   My capital could only finance this business                    42.79
   I had previous experience in this line                         17.05
   Friends/relatives are in this line of business                 16.42

                                                           Share of Business
  Job Satisfaction
                                                               Owners

   If you were offered a full-time salary paying job,
                                                                  46.57
   would you take it? (% reporting yes)

   Who would you rather work for?
                                                                  63.92
       Government
       Large private company                                      23.99

Source: Authors calculation using the MSME survey data 2010 (Financial Sector Deepening Trust,
2012)




                                      33
Table 8: Definitions of Groups of In-between Firms

                                                     # of         VA per
                                  # of firms       employees    worker ($US)     # of employees per firm
           Firms with labor
           productivity >
           economy-wide
           manufacturing labor
 Group 1   productivity              143,483        245,056         9,746                 1.71
           Firms with labor
           productivity >
           economy-wide trade
           services labor
 Group 2   productivity              261,375        449,783         6,463                1.72
                                       Share of MSME total                       Ratio to MSME average
                                                     # of        Total value-
                                  # of firms       employees       added          Lprody         Firm size
           Firms with labor
           productivity >
           economy-wide
           manufacturing labor
 Group 1   productivity                5.70             6.18        30.7           4.98             1.08
           Firms with labor
           productivity >
           economy-wide trade
           service labor
 Group 2   productivity               10.38          11.34          37.4           3.30             1.09
Note: We consider only firms that keep written accounts; Group 1 is included in Group 2.
Source: Authors’ calculation using MSME survey data 2010 (Financial Sector Deepening Trust, 2012)




                                                   34
Table 9: Marginal effects of probit estimations using two definitions of in-between firms
                                                     Manufacturing                                   Trade
Variables                                National      Urban       Rural             National      Urban        Rural

                                                0.0147                                    0.0284
Whether business is urban
                                              (0.0170)                                  (0.0243)
                                           -0.0697*** -0.0629** -0.0691***            -0.115***    -0.134***      -0.0955***
Female
                                              (0.0158)   (0.0283)   (0.0165)            (0.0233)     (0.0417)        (0.0221)
                                             0.0431**    0.00751 0.0632**              0.0617**        0.0242      0.0778***
Firm operates full time
                                              (0.0200)   (0.0303)   (0.0243)            (0.0249)     (0.0418)        (0.0265)
                                            0.0620***      0.0365 0.0823***            0.125***     0.116***        0.132***
Firm keeps account ledger
                                              (0.0145)   (0.0272)   (0.0131)            (0.0224)     (0.0384)        (0.0202)
                                             -0.0442*     -0.0322  -0.0539*              -0.0134       0.0260      -0.0685**
Firm has paid workers
                                              (0.0224)   (0.0321)   (0.0275)            (0.0254)     (0.0335)        (0.0268)
                                              0.00459   -0.00158      0.0226              0.0222    -0.00210           0.0489
Firm has tax id
                                              (0.0302)   (0.0486)   (0.0367)            (0.0382)     (0.0575)        (0.0473)
                                            0.0573***      0.0397 0.0739***           0.0850***     0.0780**       0.0879***
Firm has more than 20 customer daily
                                              (0.0149)   (0.0283)   (0.0126)            (0.0180)     (0.0299)        (0.0197)
                                               -0.0404    -0.0648    -0.0347             -0.0274      -0.0304         -0.0204
Whether firm is registered with brella
                                              (0.0334)   (0.0541)   (0.0381)            (0.0450)     (0.0780)        (0.0440)
Whether business is run out of the         -0.0557*** -0.0941***     -0.0236         -0.0725***    -0.120***          -0.0244
household                                     (0.0141)   (0.0247)   (0.0159)            (0.0150)     (0.0277)        (0.0175)
Whether electricity is used to power        0.0777***   0.113***      0.0248           0.113***     0.119***        0.107***
business                                      (0.0212)   (0.0290)   (0.0217)            (0.0281)     (0.0363)        (0.0311)
Whether business saves in a formal          0.0646*** 0.0732**       0.0549*          0.0786***     0.0857**        0.0797**
bank account                                  (0.0198)   (0.0287)   (0.0303)            (0.0294)     (0.0420)        (0.0387)
 Observations                                    5,599      5,593      5,601               5,599        5,607           5,601
Standard errors in parentheses
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
Notes: 1- Regional and industry fixed effects were included in all regressions but are not reported here.
       2- 740 firms were classified as in-between according to the manufacturing cut
       3- 1509 firms were classified as in-between according to the trade cut
Source: Authors’ estimation using MSME survey data 2010 (Financial Sector Deepening Trust, 2012)




                                                            35
Figure 1: GDP and sectoral GDP annual growth rate in 1988-1999 and 2000-2015 (%)
  9.0                                                                   8.5
                                                                                 7.9
  8.0     Agriculture         Industry
          Manufacturing       Services                                                    7.1
  7.0                                                                                              6.7
          Total GDP

  6.0


  5.0
                                                                4.3
  4.0
              3.2
                                                3.0
  3.0                   2.6
                                 2.4      2.4

  2.0


  1.0


   -
                              1988-1999                                       2000-2015

Source: Authors’ calculation using data of WDI (World Bank, 2016). The sector-wise GDP annual growth uses the
period of 1990-1999 due to data limitation.




                                                      36
                    Figure 2: Comparison of the Distribution of Annual Value Added Per Worker between
                    Formal and Informal Firms in the MSME survey


                    .25
                                                         Kernel density estimate
                          .2
                    .15
          Density



                          .1
                    .05
                           0




                               -10                        -5                        0                5
                                                                      lnVAworker

                                                                            BRELA== 1
                                                                            BRELA == 0
                               kernel = epanechnikov, bandwidth = 0.8500




                                                         Kernel density estimate
                    .25
                      .2
                    .15
         Density



                      .1
                    .05
                           0




                               -10                        -5                        0                5
                                                                     lnVAworker

                                                                            Tax ID== 1
                                                                            Tax ID == 0
                               kernel = epanechnikov, bandwidth = 0.8500




Note: BRELA is Tanzania’s Business Registration and Licensing Agency. Only 3.7% of MSMEs are registered with
BRELA. When we take the log of value added per worker, firms with negative value added per worker are dropped. Firms
with negative value added represent 5% of the sample. We tried a variety of alternative representations of the data and
taking the log of annual value added made the graphs easiest to read. Visually, including firms with negative value added
would shift the densities to the left slightly. For this reason, we don’t use these densities to estimate the actual share of the
distribution that falls between any two values. This type of calculation is done using the actual data.
Source: Authors’ estimation using the MSME survey data 2010 (Financial Sector Deepening Trust, 2012)



                                                                       37
           Figure 3: Comparison of the Distribution of Annual Value Added Per Worker to
           Economy-wide Productivity

            .25
              .2
            .15                                 Kernel density estimate
 Density



              .1
            .05
                  0




                      -10                        -5                          0                           5
                                                            lnVAworker
                      kernel = epanechnikov, bandwidth = 0.4500




Notes: Vertical lines are the log of average economy-wide productivity in agriculture (green), trade services (blue) and
manufacturing (purple). Annual average value added per worker in 2010 in agriculture is 1.08 million TZSH, in trade
services 2.49 million TZSH and in manufacturing 5.16 million TZSH. At a nominal exchange rate of .TZSH 1,428.57 to
1 USD, these numbers work out to 756 USD, 1,743 USD and 3,612 USD respectively. When we take the log of value
added per worker, firms with negative value added per worker are dropped. Firms with negative value added represent 5%
of the sample. We tried a variety of alternative representations of the data and taking the log of annual value added made
the graphs easiest to read. Visually, including firms with negative value added would shift the densities to the left slightly.
For this reason, we don’t use these densities to estimate the actual share of the distribution that falls between any two
values. This type of calculation is done using the actual data.
Source: Authors’ estimation using the MSME survey data 2010 (Financial Sector Deepening Trust, 2012)




                                                              38
Appendix
Table 1a: T-tests comparing the means of selected individual and business traits using the
manufacturing cut.


                                                               Mean (Not    Mean (In-
                                                               In-Between   Between          P-values
                                                                 Firms)      Firms)
                                     Business Owner Characteristics
 Socio-economic characteristics
 Education (Above Primary Level)                                  1.49         1.85            0.00
 Marital Status                                                   0.90         0.87            0.21
 Owner's Age                                                      36.73        35.14           0.01
 Female                                                           0.60         0.39            0.00
 Owner is Not Poor                                                0.49         0.61            0.00
 Owner would leave business for a full salary                     0.48         0.39            0.01
 Owner is Moderately Poor                                         0.33         0.28            0.04
 Owner has started Other Businesses                               1.15         1.18            0.26
 Main Source of Income is the Business                            0.10         0.11            0.46
 Main Source of Income is Farming                                 0.06         0.10            0.08
 Owner's business practices/attitudes towards business
 Owner is Member of Business Savings Club                         0.37         0.42            0.22
 Owner is Member of a Business Association                        0.17         0.10            0.00
 Owner has taken Expert Advice                                    0.02         0.05            0.10
 Saw Business as a Market Opportunity                             0.45         0.52            0.01
 Views Business as Growing                                        0.54         0.73            0.00
 Owner's knowledge about business practices
 Owner has Formal Bank Account                                    0.06         0.15            0.00
 Owner uses Debit Card for Business                               0.05         0.12            0.00
 Owner Saves Money in a Bank Account                              0.07         0.15            0.00
 Owner does not Believe in Interest                               0.21         0.14            0.00
 Owner uses Profits to Expand Business                            0.17         0.22            0.05
 Owner uses Profits to Buy Stocks in Advance                      0.41         0.50            0.00
 Owner uses Profits to Invest in Business                         0.17         0.22            0.05
 Owner uses Profits to Invest in Buildings and land               0.06         0.10            0.01
 Labor History
 Previously Unemployed                                            0.07         0.09            0.25
 Previously a Home Maker                                          0.22         0.11            0.00
 Previously worked in the Education Sector                        0.04         0.05            0.70
 Previously Employed in Large Private Enterprise                  0.04         0.09            0.01
 Previously Employed in Similar Sized Private Enterprise          0.02         0.03            0.19
 Previously Ran a Similar Sized Enterprise                        0.14         0.15            0.75
 Previously a Civil Servant                                       0.02         0.04            0.20
 Previously engaged in Farming/Rearing of Livestock               0.38         0.37            0.53
 Owner was Trained on Previous Job                                0.04         0.06            0.34
 Owner was Trained in a Course                                    0.02         0.02            0.41



                                                     39
 Owner’s Access to Financial Services
 Owner has Borrowed for Business                                           0.18           0.23         0.05
 Firm has Received Financial Services                                      0.05           0.10         0.01
 Owner uses a Sacco                                                        0.02           0.03         0.15
 Owner regularly Sends & Receives Money for Business                       0.14           0.23         0.00
                                            Business Characteristics
 Firm Characteristics
 Firm Age                                                                  6.39           6.77         0.32
 Business runs Full Time                                                   0.78           0.88         0.00
 Business is run out of the Household                                      0.50           0.37         0.00
 Firm has Market Access                                                    0.68           0.73         0.08
 Business near Similar Businesses                                          0.73           0.82         0.00
 Firm keeps Written Accounts in a Ledger                                   0.29           0.52         0.00
 Firm maintains Business Budget                                            0.07           0.07         0.86
 Firm started with a Business Plan                                         0.01           0.02         0.08
 Firm has some License                                                     0.15           0.31         0.00
 Firm pays Income Tax                                                      0.04           0.09         0.00
 Firm Advertises                                                           0.02           0.02         0.73
 Firm pays Workers in Cash                                                 0.13           0.12         0.89
 Workers received Technical Training                                       0.19           0.12         0.00
 Workforce Increased for the Business in the Past Year                     0.08           0.07         0.42
 Firm Has Regional customers                                               0.19           0.31         0.00
 Number of Daily Customers is More than 20                                 0.26           0.42         0.00
 Firm's Suppliers are Individuals                                          0.48           0.41         0.03
 Firm's Suppliers are Small Traders                                        0.54           0.51         0.45
 Firm's Suppliers are Nationwide                                           0.04           0.09         0.00
 Business Registered with Brela                                            0.04           0.04         0.96
 Business Has a Tax ID                                                     0.04           0.11         0.00
 Business Gets Inputs on Credit                                            0.09           0.12         0.07
 Business has Rental Agreement for B.Premises                              0.09           0.15         0.00
 Infrastructure and Technology
 Firm Owner has a Mobile Phone                                             0.54           0.75         0.00
 Owner uses Mobile to Conduct Business                                     0.42           0.70         0.00
 Firm Owner has a Calculator                                               0.13           0.29         0.00
 Business has Office Equipment                                             0.17           0.19         0.38
 Business Owns a Cooling Facility                                          0.04           0.10         0.00
 Firm has Received Legal Services                                          0.01           0.02         0.13
 Firm has Received Technical Services                                      0.04           0.04         0.67
 Firm Has Security Services                                                0.16           0.18         0.48
 Firm has Received Financial Services                                      0.05           0.10         0.01
 Business uses Electricity to Light Business                               0.17           0.32         0.00

Note: 740 sampled firms were classified as in-between according to the manufacturing cut
Source: Authors’ estimation using the MSME survey data 2010 (Financial Sector Deepening Trust, 2012)




                                                         40
Table 2a: Marginal effects of the probit estimations using only firms that keep an accounts ledger
                                                   Manufacturing                                Trade
Variables                                 National    Urban          Rural        National      Urban      Rural

                                            0.00317                                 0.00679
Whether business is urban
                                            (0.0134)                                (0.0185)
                                         -0.0342***    0.00522 -0.0631***        -0.0590***     -0.0133 -0.0830***
Female
                                            (0.0118)   (0.0209)   (0.0123)          (0.0138)   (0.0236)    (0.0143)
                                          0.0648***   0.0713** 0.0592***          0.0589***   0.0701** 0.0494**
Firm operates full time
                                            (0.0170)   (0.0316)   (0.0186)          (0.0193)   (0.0347)    (0.0210)
                                           -0.0268*     -0.0371  -0.00740           0.00231      0.0139   -0.00885
Firm has paid workers
                                            (0.0151)   (0.0233)   (0.0172)          (0.0258)   (0.0415)    (0.0198)
                                              0.0332     0.0289  0.0582**             0.0426     0.0297     0.0618*
Firm has tax id
                                            (0.0210)   (0.0312)   (0.0285)          (0.0279)   (0.0387)    (0.0343)
                                          0.0518*** 0.0581*** 0.0519***           0.0740*** 0.0888*** 0.0677***
Firm has more than 20 customer daily
                                            (0.0108)   (0.0189)   (0.0117)          (0.0144)   (0.0255)    (0.0164)
                                           -0.00220      0.0191    -0.0260            0.0202     0.0503    0.00114
Whether firm is registered with brella
                                            (0.0293)   (0.0419)   (0.0386)          (0.0348)   (0.0579)    (0.0402)
Whether business is run out of the        -0.0252** -0.0625*** -0.000196          -0.0309** -0.0894***       0.0135
household                                   (0.0121)   (0.0208)   (0.0129)          (0.0152)   (0.0252)    (0.0151)
Whether electricity is used to power      0.0644*** 0.0819***    0.0467**          0.116***   0.122***    0.121***
business                                    (0.0133)   (0.0188)   (0.0200)          (0.0193)   (0.0247)    (0.0272)
Whether business saves in a formal        0.0475***      0.0323 0.0614***         0.0695***      0.0344   0.114***
bank account                                (0.0164)   (0.0230)   (0.0233)          (0.0222)   (0.0309)    (0.0283)
 Observations                                  1,792      1,790      1,792             1,792      1,794       1,792
Standard errors in parentheses
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
Notes:1- Regional and industry fixed effects were included in all regressions but are not reported here.
      2- 404 firms were classified as in-between according to the manufacturing cut
      3- 727 firms were classified as in-between according to the trade cut
Source: Authors’ estimation using the MSME survey data 2010 (Financial Sector Deepening Trust, 2012)




                                                          41
Table 3a: Employment shares and annualized growth rate by sector in 2002-2012
                                 Share of employment (%)   Annual growth rate (%)
                                   2002          2012
 Agriculture                        81.1          65.8              0.4
 Mining                             0.5           2.6               20.9
 Manufacturing                      1.9           3.2               8.0
 Utilities                          0.3           1.3               18.7
 Construction                       1.1           2.4               10.8
 Trade services                     7.7           11.3              6.5
 Transport services                 0.9           1.7               9.2
 Business services                  0.3           0.8               13.6
 Government services                2.9           3.5               4.4
 Personal services                  3.3           7.4               11.2
 Total private economy              97.1          96.5              2.4
 Total non-agriculture              18.9          34.2              8.8
 Total private non-agriculture      16.0          30.7              9.4
 Total economy                      100           100               2.5
Source: Authors calculation based on data from Census 2002 and Census 2012.




                                                           42
Online Appendices

Appendix 1. Growth Decomposition Methodology

   We modify the productivity growth decomposition method first developed by McMillan and
Rodrik (2013) to analyze the patterns of structural change in Tanzania as follows:

   Let Yt be the level of GDP at year t for Tanzania, Lt the number of total employment, Yit the
sector level GDP (i.e., sector’s value-added) for each sector i, and Li each sector’s employment.
Economywide labor productivity can be defined as the ratio of GDP to total employment, which can
be further displayed as the sum of sector level labor productivity weighted by the sector’s share of
                                          𝑌 𝐿𝑖
total employment, i.e., y = Y/L = ∑𝑖 𝐿𝑖         𝐿
                                                    = ∑𝑖 𝑦𝑖 𝑆𝑖 , where yi is sector level labor productivity and Si
                                            𝑖
                                                                        𝑦𝑖
is the share of employment in sector i. We then define 𝑃𝐼𝑖 =                 as the relative labor productivity for
                                                                         𝑦

sector i, i.e., the ratio of sector labor productivity to economywide labor productivity.

The change in economywide labor productivity y between t and t-k can thus be defined as

𝑦 𝑡 − 𝑦 𝑡−𝑘 = ∑𝑖(𝑦𝑖𝑡 − 𝑦𝑖𝑡−𝑘 ) 𝑆𝑖𝑡−𝑘 + ∑𝑖 𝑦𝑖𝑡 (𝑆𝑖𝑡 − 𝑆𝑖𝑡−𝑘 )                                              (1)

Equation (1) is identical to the one in McMillan and Rodrik (2013). For the purpose of this discussion,
we further decompose the growth rate of economywide labor productivity.

Let 𝑔𝑦𝑡 be the growth rate of economywide labor productivity between time t and t-k, i.e., 𝑔𝑦𝑡 =
(𝑦 𝑡 − 𝑦 𝑡−𝑘 )/𝑦 𝑡−𝑘 ; 𝑔𝑦𝑡 𝑖 the growth rate for each sector i's labor productivity in the same period,
𝑔𝑦𝑡 𝑖 = (𝑦𝑖𝑡 − 𝑦𝑖𝑡−𝑘 )/𝑦𝑖𝑡−𝑘 ; and 𝑔𝑆𝑡𝑖 the growth rate of each sector’s labor share in the same period,
𝑔𝑆𝑡𝑖 = (𝑆𝑖𝑡 − 𝑆𝑖𝑡−𝑘 )/𝑆𝑖𝑡−𝑘 .

    The growth rate of economywide labor productivity thus can be decomposed into the labor
productivity growth within each sector and the change in productivity from labor moving between
sectors as follows:

 𝑔𝑦𝑡 = ∑𝑖 𝑔𝑦𝑡 𝑖 𝑆𝑖𝑡−𝑘 𝑃𝐼𝑖𝑡−𝑘 + ∑𝑖 𝑔𝑆𝑡𝑖 𝑆𝑖𝑡−𝑘 𝑃𝐼𝑖𝑡−𝑘 (1 + 𝑔𝑦𝑡 𝑖 )                                          (2)

    The first component of the right hand side of Eq. (2) is the sum of each sector’s within-sector
labor productivity growth rate, weighted by the sector’s labor share in the economy and its relative
productivity, both at the previous period t-k. Meanwhile the second component is the contribution


                                                           43
of structural change. This is the sum of the rate of change in each sector’s labor share weighted by
the sector’s labor share in the economy and its relative productivity in the previous period, t-k,
augmented by sector’s labor productivity growth rate since that period.

    Given that 𝑆𝑖𝑡−𝑘 , 𝑃𝐼𝑖𝑡−𝑘 , and 1 + 𝑔𝑦𝑡 𝑖 are always positive, the contribution of within-sector
productivity growth for a particular sector i to economywide labor productivity growth is determined
by the sign of its within-sector labor productivity growth rate 𝑔𝑦𝑡 𝑖 , i.e., if sector i sees a positive
(negative) labor productivity growth rate, 𝑔𝑦𝑡 𝑖 , this sector’s within component positively (negatively)
contributes to the economywide labor productivity growth. Similarly, the structural change
contribution from a particular sector to overall labor productivity growth is determined by the sign
of the rate of change for its labor share in the economy, 𝑔𝑆𝑡𝑖 . If a sector’s share of total employment
falls (rises), and the sign for 𝑔𝑆𝑡𝑖 is negative (positive), this sector negatively (positively) contributes
to economywide labor productivity growth through structural change.

The magnitude of structural change’s contribution from a particular sector, however, is affected by
the initial year’s sectoral share of employment, i.e., 𝑆𝑖𝑡−𝑘 and the initial year’s relative productivity of
                          𝑦 𝑡−𝑘
this sector, i.e., 𝑃𝐼𝑖𝑡−𝑘 = 𝑦𝑖𝑡−𝑘, augmented by the sector’s labor productivity growth, 1 + 𝑔𝑦𝑡 𝑖 .




Appendix 2. Employment Information for the Formal Economy

   There are three surveys in Tanzania with data relevant to the formal economy: the first is the
Formal Earnings and Employment Survey (FEES), for which data is available for 2002, 2010 and 2013;
the second is the Central Register of Establishments (CRE), of which data is only available for 2009
and 2010; and the third is the Annual Survey of Industrial Production (ASIP), which only covers
formal firms with more than 10 employees in manufacturing and mining. Constrained by the years the
censuses were conducted (2002 and 2012), we use the FEES 2002 and 2013 data to analyze the formal
economy as part of the whole economy. To ensure consistency between the population census and
FEES datasets across sectors, if the employment number in FEES for a particular sector was higher
than that noted in the Census, we relied on the FEES data for our analysis. This was done in order to
minimize inflated employment figures for certain sectors, since technically FEES covers only the




                                                    44
formal part of the economy and is a subset of the Census’s employment data that cover the economy
as a whole. Fortunately, there are very few such cases.

    In those rare cases, we made adjustments to the FEES total employment numbers using a carefully
devised approach unique to each sector. Specifically, the employment values of business services and
government services are adjusted from the original Census 2002 numbers to match the FEES 2002
numbers. In order to keep the total employment number the same as in Census 2002, the number of
total personal services is reduced accordingly. Further, formal employment in the utilities sector in
2002 and 2012 and personal services in 2012 is adjusted so that the utilities sector contains only formal
employment only and personal services contains no formal employment. Accordingly, formal
employment in construction in 2002 and trade services in 2012 is reduced so that the total formal
employment number matches the FEES reports for these two years. It should be noted that overall
these adjustments resulted in small changes, and at no point did we adjust the total employment
numbers reported in the Census or FEES.

    After completing such adjustments, we were able to analyze formal employment and number of
formal firms by different firm size groups based on the micro-data of FEES and ASIP. Again, we
ensured comparability of these two data sources when we used them for the analysis. ASIP covers
formal firms in the industrial sectors with 10 or more total employees whereas FEES covers a sample
of registered establishments with between 5 and 49 regular employees in Mainland Tanzania. Given
that the sampling method differs between ASIP and FEES for the smaller sized formal firms (i.e.,
firms with less than 50 employees), the comparison between the two datasets focuses on industrial
firms with at least 50 employees, as such firms should be fully sampled in both surveys. However, in
reality neither survey could get a 100% response rate among the firms they were supposed to cover.
For this reason, the missing firms in ASIP were added back to the original dataset using data provided
by similar firms that responded to the survey, in order to get the number of firms in the ASIP data to
equal the numbers of firms the survey was supposed to cover.

    This method differs from the one we used with FEES in which sample weights are assigned to a
surveyed firm such that it can represent all similar firms. In this case, for firms with employees 50 and
more, the weights should have been designed according to the response rate, which is provided for
some years in FEES reports. However, from the micro-dataset we obtained for FEES 2002 and 2013,
and compared with the response rate reported in FEES 2013, the weights assigned to manufacturing
firms with 50 or more employees seemed to be too high. For example, according to FEES 2013 report,

                                                   45
the response rate of private firms with 50 or more employees is 88.4% and is 100% for public firms
of the same size in 2013. This implies that the average weight for a firm with 50 or more employees
should not be higher than 1.13 (i.e., 1/0.884). In reality, the weights for such manufacturing firms
range from 1.422 to 2.522 in the 2013 FEES dataset, with a mean of 1.775. Moreover, there is no
significant difference in the weight ranges in the data between medium size firms with 50-99
employees and large or very large-scale firms with 100-499 and 500+ employees, respectively. Using
these high weights without making any adjustments may have inflated the growth in large-scale firms
and exaggerated the results. Therefore, we overcome this issue by adjusting the numbers of firms and
employment for the manufacturing firms with 100-499 and 500_ regular employees. Specifically, we
assign manufacturing firms with 100-499 employees the minimum weight of 1.422 observed in the
data for such firms. Furthermore, we did not assign any weight for manufacturing firms with 500 or
more employees, based on the assumption that larger firms’ response rates are higher than those of
smaller firms. Given that 44 such firms that responded in FEES 2013 and there are only 12 similar
scale firms in FEES 2002, we assume that the largest firms were fully covered in the FEES and
therefore would not need to be weighted.

    Overall, the robustness assessment between the four main data sources mentioned above
highlights that the employment numbers, as well as total number of firms by industry and firm size,
are comparable across the datasets. This provided us with the confidence to utilize these datasets
simultaneously for our analysis, in an effort to investigate the primary role of the private non-
agriculture sectors in recent economic growth and job creation in Tanzania.

Appendix 3 – Calculation of Labor Productivity for MSMEs

    According to the “National Baseline Survey Report for Micro, Small, and Medium Enterprises in
Tanzania”, it was estimated that small businesses in the MSME sector contributed about 27% to
Tanzania’s GDP in 2010 (Ministry of Trade and Industry, 2012, p15). We arrive at a similar estimate
for the MSME sector’s total value added, although we do so using a different methodology that takes
into account the seasonality of business volumes for small firms.

    As seasonal fluctuations affect firm level value added for small businesses, particularly since many
businesses are located in the rural areas, we calculated the monthly sales value at the firm level before
calculating total annual value-added. The MSME survey takes seasonality into consideration by asking
respondents to report values of sales for a good, an average and a bad month in a


                                                   46
year. It also asked the respondents whether each of the 12 months of the past year was a good, average
or bad month. Among the total sample of full-time firms, 4,497 sampled full-time firms reported sales
values in a good, bad and average month, while 3,943 firms also rated each month as good, bad or
average in terms of sales. Using this we directly calculate the seasonality adjusted annual sales at the
firm level for these 3,943 firms.

    For the remaining 554 sampled full-time firms that identified fewer than 12 months as good,
average or bad classification, we assume all missing months to be bad sales months. There are also
some sampled full-time firms that did not provide the relevant sales information, and for such firms
we use the average sales of the firms’ industries to replace the missing sales information.

    In addition, there are 1,131 sampled part-time firms in our sample as well. For such firms, if they
reported sales numbers and months according to whether a particular month was good, bad or average,
we made similar total sales and value added calculations as for the full-time firms. If a part-time firm
did not identify certain months according to the three sales status we treat these missing months as
‘no sales’ months (i.e., considering them as being seasonally out of businesses). With these adjustments,
we are confident that while the calculated value of MSME sales could have been underestimated, it is
unlikely to have been overestimated.

    Table A3-1 below presents the distribution of average sales months among full-time and part-time
firms. In the table, the x-axis represents the number of the months that firms identified as an ‘average
sales’ month, while the y-axis depicts the distribution (in percentage) of total full-time and part-time
firms by number of average sales months. The result presented in table A3-1 first shows that no firm
(either full-time or part-time) considers having ‘average sales’ for more than 10 months in a year. In
fact, the majority of firms (more than 90% of total) consider themselves to experience fewer than 6
months of average sales in a year, with the distribution being similar between the full-time and part-
time firms, indicating that the fluctuation in sales is a common phenomenon for all MSME firms.




                                                   47
    Table A3-1: Distribution of sampled MSME firms according to number of months that are
average in sales

         %
     30.0

     25.0

     20.0

     15.0

                                                                                Fulltime firms
     10.0
                                                                                Parttime firms
         5.0

         -
               0     1      2     3      4     5     6     7         8      9      10     11     12
                                              Number of months

    Note: For the part-time firms’ no-sales months, we treat them as bad months in the calculation here for simplification.
    Source: Authors calculation using MSME data




    Unfortunately, the MSME survey information on business expenditures was obtained only for the
most recent month in the interview. We assumed that such expenditure information represents
monthly average at firm level when calculating total value added for the whole year. Based on this
assumption, we multiplied this variable by 12 to get full-time firms’ annual expenditure and by the
actual number of months the part-time firms were operating to get their annual expenditure. We only
considered expenditure of intermediate inputs in the calculation, given that very few firms reported
other types of business expenditures such as water, landlines and electricity. Furthermore, for the firms
with missing expenditure information, we calculated expenditure averages for each sector and assigned
intermediate costs based on which sector the firm belonged to. Finally, we calculated the differences
between annual sales and expenditures of intermediate inputs to derive the value-added at the firm
level.




                                                           48
