NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE BEHAVIORALIST AS POLICY DESIGNER:
THE NEED TO TEST MULTIPLE TREATMENTS TO MEET MULTIPLE TARGETS
Robert Hahn
Robert D. Metcalfe
David Novgorodsky
Michael K. Price
Working Paper 22886
http://www.nber.org/papers/w22886

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2016

We gratefully acknowledge the generous help of Karen Guz and her excellent team at San
Antonio Water System, who implemented the field experiment discussed here. The views in this
paper represent those of the authors and do not necessarily represent those of the institutions with
which they are affiliated, nor those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2016 by Robert Hahn, Robert D. Metcalfe, David Novgorodsky, and Michael K. Price. All
rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without
explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

The Behavioralist as Policy Designer: The Need to Test Multiple Treatments to Meet Multiple
Targets
Robert Hahn, Robert D. Metcalfe, David Novgorodsky, and Michael K. Price
NBER Working Paper No. 22886
December 2016
JEL No. C93,D12,H41,Q25
ABSTRACT
We explore Tinbergen’s fundamental insight that policymakers need at least as many policy
instruments as targets. We extend this idea using a large natural field experiment in water
resource management. We use social comparisons and loss-framed messages to help achieve two
goals of our partner utility: getting consumers to purchase drought-resistant plants and reducing
water use. Our results show that seemingly related behavioral instruments can affect different
household decisions. By themselves, social comparisons and loss framing have no significant
impact on the number of rebate requests; when combined, however, they lead to a 36% increase
in requests. Only loss framing leads to a significant increase in the purchase of drought-resistant
plants, and only the social comparison reduces water consumption. These results highlight the
importance of testing different combinations of instruments, particularly when policymakers have
multiple goals and the relationship between instruments and goals is uncertain.

Robert Hahn
University of Oxford
robert.hahn@smithschool.ox.ac.uk
Robert D. Metcalfe
University of Chicago
Saieh Hall for Economics
5757 S. University Avenue
Chicago IL, 60637
rdmetc@gmail.com

David Novgorodsky
University of Chicago
Saieh Hall for Economics
1126 E. 59th St.
Chicago IL, 60637
davidnov@uchicago.edu
Michael K. Price
Experimental Economics Center
Andrew Young School of Policy Studies
Georgia State University
P.O. Box 3992
Atlanta, GA 30302-3992
and NBER
mprice25@gsu.edu

1

Introduction

Jan Tinbergen, a Nobel laureate in economics, demonstrated that a policy maker needs at least as many policy
instruments as she has targets, if her aim is to achieve those targets (Tinbergen 1952).1 Tinbergen’s theoretical
formulation presumes that we understand the impact of the policy instruments on targets. In behavioral
science, we are only now beginning to understand the relationship between instruments, or treatments, and
their subsequent impact on various policy targets.
We utilize a natural field experiment to advance this body of work and elucidate the connection between
Tinbergen’s instruments and targets. Building on Tinbergen’s fundamental insight, we argue that there is a
need to test multiple policy treatments to meet multiple targets. The need to test multiple treatments follows
from Tinbergen’s insight about targets and instruments, and the observation that the impact of treatments on
targets is often uncertain.
Specifically, we analyze how various policy treatments that are seemingly related affect the take-up of a new
technology (a short-run target) and the overall consumption of a commodity (a long-run target) using an
experiment in water resource management. We chose water management for our application because water
scarcity is becoming a major global public policy challenge with multiple targets (Olmstead 2010; Eliasson
2015). Water suppliers generally face the challenge of meeting growing demand in the face of limited supply.
In typical markets, supply-demand imbalances are addressed through price adjustments. However, most water
suppliers have limited flexibility to raise prices in times of shortage. In addition, they must meet several other
competing objectives, such as ensuring that the water needs of low-income are satisfied and having adequate
storage. This balancing act will likely become more challenging in the future given the increasing likelihood
of severe droughts in parts of the U.S. (Cook, Ault, and Smerdon 2015). Many water utilities have responded
to this challenge by incentivizing residential and commercial customers to conserve water by changing habits
and adopting technology —- a strategy typically referred to as demand-side management (DSM). 2
In recent years, programs that offer customers rebates for adopting water-efficient technologies have become
one of the more popular forms of DSM —- particularly in environments where changing prices is infeasible.
Unfortunately, the impact of such programs is often limited because of either low participation rates and the
tenuous link between adopting the technology and overall water consumption.
In the language of Tinbergen, water policymakers have two broad targets that reflect objectives over different
time horizons. In the short-run, policymakers are interested in promoting the adoption of water-efficient
technologies as a way to meet a long-run goal of promoting water conservation. Water efficient technologies,
by definition, reduce consumption of water per unit of service or output, appropriately measured. However,
1. Tinbergen’s targets can be thought of as “objectives” that may reflect aims over different time horizons or across distinct market
segments. The policy instruments can be thought of as different incentives or framings of incentives designed to promote a given
objective. In keeping with his initial framing, we use the terms targets and instruments.
2. Water utilities use both pricing strategies, such as increasing block pricing, and non-price strategies. Non-price strategies
include social norms to reduce water use, public education campaigns, restrictions on particular types of water use (e.g., lawns),
rationing, rebate programs for drought-resistant plants, swimming pool filter replacements, low-flow personal appliances, turf removal,
drip irrigation systems, and subsidized leak audits and repair.

2

adoption of these technologies need not result in greater water conservation (i.e., reductions in overall water
use). The impact of adopting these technologies on overall water use is an empirical question.
We draw upon insights from the behavioral economics literature to redesign the marketing of DSM programs
to help meet these targets. We implemented our natural field experiment in partnership with the San Antonio
Water System (SAWS). In the experiment, we sent letters to approximately 23,000 residential homes, reminding
them of the existence of a rebate for partially replacing their lawn with drought-resistant plants. Through our
partnership, we are able to measure behavior across a variety of margins that influence overall patterns of
water use. Specifically, we are able to observe how our policies affect three key variables of interest: (i) the
number of requests for rebates of a new technology — in this case, drought-resistant plants; (ii) the actual
purchases of one or more drought-resistant plants through the rebate program3; and (iii) the monthly water
use of households in the experimental sample for a nine month period after the intervention. In what follows,
we refer to increasing the actual purchase of drought-resistant plants and reducing overall water consumption
as final goals or targets.
Households in a benchmark treatment received a purely informative letter providing details on the program
and rebate available for participants (see the Online Appendix for an example of this letter in full). We
compare these households to counterparts that received either (i) a loss-framed letter, (ii) a letter with social
norm content, or (iii) a letter with both loss-framed content and social norm content (see the Online Appendix
for a summary of the content that varied across treatments). Results from the experiment suggest several
interesting findings regarding both the adoption decision and subsequent patterns of water use.
In analyzing participation decisions, we break the analysis up into two distinct outcomes: rebate requests,
and rebate redemptions for the actual purchase of new drought-resistant plants. We find that neither social
norms nor loss framing in isolation were effective strategies for increasing the likelihood a household requests
rebates. However, receiving a letter with both social norm information and loss framing increases the number
of households requesting rebates by 36% relative to the benchmark treatment. In contrast, only loss framing
was an effective strategy in inducing final purchases of the new technology.
Analyzing subsequent unconditional changes in monthly water use, we find that the pure social norm letter
was the only treatment to yield significant reductions in water use (approximately 1.4%) over the nine
post-treatment months. These results show how seemingly related policy interventions can affect behaviors
relevant for outcomes over different time horizons, and that Tinbergen’s fundamental insight extends to
policies based upon behavioral economics.
Our research builds on several distinct literatures. First and foremost, our study contributes to a growing body
of work exploring how principals can draw upon insights from behavioral economics to motivate workers
and/or promote behavioral change. For example, there is a growing body of work exploring how one can
leverage the power of loss aversion —- stemming from prospect theory (Kahneman and Tversky 1979) — as a
way to frame incentives and promote a desired outcome such as worker effort. The central tenant of this work
3. We use variants of the phrases “drought-resistant landscaping,” “technology adoption,” and “lawn replacement” interchangeably
throughout.

3

is that reference points matter and individuals value losses more than gains. A direct implication of such
models is that framing incentives through the lens of what is given up should an agent fail to meet a target
should have a greater impact on subsequent patterns of effort than if the incentive is framed through what
would be gained should the target be reached. Importantly, behavior consistent with this prediction has been
shown in a variety of field experiments (Armantier and Boly 2015; Hong, Hossain, and List 2015; Hossain
and Li 2013; Hossain and List 2012; Levitt et al. 2016; de Quidt 2014) exploring the framing of incentives
and subsequent worker effort.4
Our study advances this literature along two dimensions. To the best of our knowledge, we are the first to
compare the effects of framing on outcomes that reflect concerns over different time-horizons. In doing so,
we highlight that framings that make salient an intermediate objective such as the redemption of a landscape
coupon may have little (or even a perverse) impact on longer run objectives such as changes in monthly water
use and vice versa. We believe such concerns are particularly relevant in the context of attempts to motivate
effort, and could be relevant for both workers and consumers. For example, workers may be motivated in the
short-run by social comparisons or loss-framed incentives, but such contracts could have perverse effects on
retention if workers dislike such contracts.5
Our findings also contribute to the literature on social norms and the use of normative appeals as a means to
promote behavioral change. To date, this literature has largely focused on using such appeals to induce changes
along a single margin, such as dollars contributed to a charitable cause (Croson and Shang 2008; Shang and
Croson 2009) or the amount of water or energy used by residential households (Allcott 2011; Ferraro and
Price 2013; Allcott and Rogers 2014; Brent, Cook, and Olsen 2015).6 In our study, however, we focus on
multiple margins that reflect objectives over different time-horizons —- participation in utility-sponsored
programs, the adoption of new technologies, and changes in monthly water use. In this regard, our study
is closest in spirit to an emerging literature that explores the use of social norms to induce participation in
in-home energy audits as a means to promote the adoption of improved technologies (Allcott and Greenstone
2015; LaRiviere et al. 2016). However, our study differs from this work in that we are the first to explore the
use of social norms as a way to motivate consumers to adopt resource-efficient technologies and promote the
longer-run objective of conservation.
Our experiment also builds on theoretical work on framing. Recent research clarifies how the same policy
4. Other attempts to leverage insights from behavioral economics as a way to frame incentives and motivate worker effort include
Englmaier, Roider, and Sunde (2016), who show that language that makes the marginal incentive underlying a piece-rate scheme
salient affects subsequent effort levels; Blanes-i-Vidal and Nossol (2011), who show how the provision of information on relative rank
influences subsequent effort levels; and Kessler and Leider (2012), who show how handshake agreements can be used to establish
norms and promote greater co-operation in settings with incomplete contracts.
5. Kessler and Leider (2012) provide some evidence from laboratory experiments. In their experiments, subjects were less willing
to use “handshake” agreements over time despite the fact that the use of such agreements lead to increased earnings.
6. In the context of environmental and resource economics, this work has focused on providing households with a comparison
between their own use and that of their “like” neighbors. Allcott (2011) and Allcott and Rogers (2014) document that households
receiving a letter with such normative content (relative to control households receiving no letter) reduce their electricity use
immediately by approximately two percent, and among the households receiving repeated letters, this immediate reduction is made
(largely) persistent. Related work in residential water conservation using similar randomized interventions finds reductions in
residential water use of roughly the same magnitude (Ferraro and Price 2013; Schultz et al. 2016; Brent, Cook, and Olsen 2015), but
with greater persistence (Bernedo, Ferraro, and Price 2014).

4

instrument can be framed differently depending on the information available to the policymaker about
preferences of the agents (Roels and Su 2013). Similarly, we contribute to work exploring whether frames
influence preferences or beliefs (Ellingsen et al. 2012). Our field research suggests that different types of
framing appear to make salient different actions that target a given outcome, such as the decision to adopt
a new technology or the decision to conserve water. Specifically, our paper is the first to test the effect of
different framings across distinct outcomes of interest and demonstrate that each framing ultimately influences
behavior along a distinct margin of choice.
Finally, our research contributes to a growing body of work exploring how best to use insights from behavioral
economics to achieve policy goals more effectively.7 Specifically, our research highlights how subtle changes
in the advertisement of a voluntary program can have large impacts on subsequent participation rates and
conservation efforts. To our knowledge, we are the first to explore this question in the context of environmental
and resource economics and the adoption of water-efficient technologies.8 More broadly, our findings speak to
an important methodological issue in experimental economics –– improvement of participation in voluntary
programs. Low participation rates and the subsequent consequences have been explored in a number of
contexts (e.g., Thaler and Sunstein 2003; Currie 2004; Bertrand et al. 2010; Fowlie, Greenstone, and Wolfram
2015). Results from our experiment suggest that loss framing can increase participation rates in voluntary
programs at little or no cost.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows: Section 2 describes the experimental design and the
motivation for design choices. Section 3 clarifies design limitations (institutional and otherwise) and describes
testable hypotheses given the design. Section 4 summarizes the data features and summary statistics of the
population under study. Section 5 presents the results of our natural field experiment across the extensive and
intensive margins. Section 6 briefly concludes.

2

Experimental Design

The treatments we developed were designed to help inform a policymaker’s choice of the most effective
interventions for promoting technology adoption as a means of managing residential water use. To implement
this natural field experiment, we partnered with SAWS, a water utility with an active history of promoting
conservation measures.9 SAWS gave us access to approximately 23,000 households (i.e., the experimental
7. There is similar research in other policy-relevant areas such as food choice (List and Samek 2015), educational attainment
(Levitt et al. 2016), and tax compliance (Hallsworth et al. 2014).
8. Previous work in the water area has traditionally looked at DSM programs as a whole. The strategy for estimating the causal
impact on water use does not typically use randomized controlled trials (Renwick and Archibald 1998; Renwick and Green 2000).
Continuing this line of work, Bennear, Lee, and Taylor (2013) use a matching difference-in-differences estimation strategy. They
find that while replacing an old (pre-1991) toilet with a high-efficiency toilet reduces total indoor water use by seven percent (in
line with engineering estimates), approximately two-thirds of households that take-up a rebate for such a technology improvement
were already planning on replacing their toilet prior to the announcement of the rebate, and most with high-efficiency toilets. More
broadly, our work fits into the recent literature on optimal environmental policy and the evaluation of such policy with experimental
and quasi-experimental approaches (see, e.g., Kotchen and Grant 2011; Jacobsen and Kotchen 2013; Kahn and Wolak 2013; and
Hortaçsu, Madanizadeh, and Puller 2015).
9. See http://www.saws.org/conservation/.

5

sample) who were the highest residential water users in its area that had not previously redeemed a landscaping
rebate. The aim of the experiment was to explore methods to reduce the water use of these customers
through changing the “landscape stock,” i.e., encouraging households to switch to less water-intensive
landscaping arrangements. In particular, SAWS wished to encourage “WaterSaver” landscaping that utilizes
drought-resistant plants and shrubs, which can survive with little or no irrigation.10 This water-efficient
technology is focused explicitly on outdoor water use, and is similar to technology that was subsidized during
the 2015 Californian water drought.
To inform the design of our experiment, we draw upon the behavioral economics literature. We use two
interventions that have been shown to influence outcomes across a variety of markets and settings: social
comparisons and a loss framing. We randomized households into four different treatment groups using a
two-by-two experimental design summarized in Table 1. Households in each treatment group were sent
a personalized letter advertising the “WaterSaver” program. Each treatment cell was represented roughly
equally and contains around 5,800 households. The content of the different letter types is described below
and examples of the letters are displayed in the Online Appendix.
In the benchmark experimental condition (called the Gain Framing treatment), we sent letters to households
that informed them of the rebate offer as well as the limited-time nature of the offer.11 The most prominently
displayed text at the top of the letter states “You can have a FREE $100 landscape coupon.”12 In line
with other field experiments that employ framing to alter perception of rewards (e.g., Ganzach and Karsahi
1995; Bertrand et al. 2010; and Hossain and List 2012), we interpret this treatment as a message with “gain”
framing. It is consistent with the default message that many firms and water utilities employ when advertising
the benefits of participating in a program.
To explore gain-loss asymmetry observed in other contexts, our Loss Framing treatment presents the identical
information as the Gain Framing treatment, but alters the top-line text to say “Do not lose your chance to
have a FREE $100 landscape coupon.” The comparison of post-treatment rebate requests and redemptions
across the Gain and Loss Framing treatments serves as our first experimental evaluation.
To complement the previous two treatments, we also investigate the efficacy of social comparisons in
motivating take-up of landscape rebates and reduction in water use.13 In the Social Comparison treatment,
we reproduce the content and the emphasized first line of the Gain Framing treatment, but add personalized
information on how each household’s total water use in 2013 compared to the average home serviced by the
water utility. In particular, households receiving a Social Comparisons letter saw bolded text of the form
“...you used XX,XXX gallons more water in 2013 than the average home....”
10. See http://www.saws.org/Conservation/Outdoor/Coupon/.
11. As a point of clarification, all households in our experimental sample are sent one of the four letters. We treat the Gain Framing
letter as the benchmark/control group in our field experiment as it represents the kind of letter most similar to past letters sent by the
water utility.
12. This prominent text uses the word “coupon” to refer to what we, throughout, call a rebate, in line with the broader literature on
such programs.
13. There has been some research on examining the use of social norm information (see Hossain and Li 2013; Roels and Su 2013),
but not in the context of product adoption and then subsequent usage of that product.

6

Such a treatment serves multiple purposes. First, it allows us to investigate whether the same type of social
comparisons that have been shown to promote changes in both electricity (see, e.g., Allcott 2011; Allcott
and Rogers 2014; and Costa and Kahn 2013) and water use (Ferraro and Price 2013; Brent, Cook, and
Olsen 2015) among residential consumers can also affect investments in efficient technology. Second, it
allows us to provide an apples-to-apples comparison of the relative effectiveness of two successful behavioral
interventions —- loss framing and social comparisons —- as a way to inform policymakers about the most
effective strategies for marketing voluntary programs.
The final treatment, called the Combined Framing treatment, combines the Loss and Social Comparison
treatments. This treatment is largely exploratory in nature as models predicting an increase in rebate request
and take-up due to loss framing have little or no overlap with models predicting increased rebate take-up
and decreased water use due to social comparisons. This lack of overlap makes exploring such a treatment
particularly interesting from a policy perspective. Specifically, if Loss and Social Comparison treatments
influence choice along margins that are largely independent, a single letter containing both types of messaging
may simultaneously act on both margins and have a greater impact on behavior than either message in
isolation.
Our three outcome variables are: 1) the number of rebates requested; 2) the number of rebates redeemed; and
3) water use over time. We had access to data on pre- and post-randomization water consumption (covering
January 2013 — December 2014) for all households in the experimental sample. We also had data identifying
households that requested and households that redeemed the landscape rebate, which we use as a proxy for
improvements to the efficiency of the “landscape stock”. Finally, our data contain information on the number
of requested and redeemed rebates per household.
Figure 1 summarizes the timing of our experiment. The treatment conditions represent different types of
letters sent to the households on March 24, 2014, all of which advertised a $100 rebate offered to residents of
single-family homes towards the purchase of drought-resistant plants. In order to request the $100 rebate,
households needed to visit a project-specific webpage in the water utility’s domain and complete a brief
online application or call a utility’s call center before April 30, 2014 (approximately 30 days after receiving
the letter in the mail).14

3

Hypotheses

We identify three components of our letter that may affect our three outcomes of interest: rebate requests,
rebate redemptions, and water use. 15 First, the very act of receiving a letter with informative content may
14. Of the 396 households that requested a rebate during the observation period, one made the request after April 30, 2014 (on May
1, 2014). We include this one household in the total count of experimentally-relevant rebate redemptions, but the results are robust to
analyzing the data as if this request never occurred. Results of this robustness check are available upon request. As a limitation, we
only observe drought-resistant plant purchase among households redeeming their rebate. In theory it is possible that the different
treatment letters also differentially affect technology adoption outside of the rebate program (for example replacing a single square
foot of lawn without claiming rebate dollars). In our analysis, we do not address this margin of response.
15. For simplicity, we exclude the intensive margin of rebate requests and redemption in parts of this discussion.

7

affect each margin, as shown in many standard neoclassical models (Ackerberg 2001). Models of bounded
rationality (Shin 1985;DellaVigna 2009; Sexton 2015; Karlan et al. 2016), cue-triggered utility (Laibson
2001), and observation (“Hawthorne”) effects (Levitt and List 2007) may work through this channel as well.
Yet, unlike the neoclassical model, these behavioral alternatives suggest that receipt of the letter should have
a greater impact on rebate requests than on subsequent rates of redemption. Second, the framing of the
rebate offer may affect the rebate margin through, for example, loss aversion (Kahneman and Tversky 1979).
Finally, the inclusion of a social comparison may effect both the use and rebate margins. Models of household
production (Becker 1965), social learning (Conley and Udry 2010; Çelen, Kariv, and Schotter 2010), social
norms (Festinger 1954; Cialdini, Reno, and Kallgren 1990; Kessler and Leider 2012; Krupka, Leider, and
Jiang 2016), and moral utility (Levitt and List 2007) would all suggest responsiveness to social comparison
content in a letter. The models do not, however, say much about the margins on which consumers or workers
are most likely to respond.
We highlight two elements of our design that limit the range of hypotheses that we can test, which were
based on the preferences of our partner utility. First, because all subjects were sent some letter, we do not
have the variation that would allow us to learn about the effects of receiving an informative letter relative
to the counterfactual of receiving no letter. One earlier study in the water area by Ferraro and Price (2013)
suggested that this treatment effect was not significantly different from zero; however, the baseline treatment
in that study was designed to explore whether providing information on strategies to conserve water affected
subsequent patterns of monthly use, so it is not clear it generalizes to the interventions studied here. From an
academic perspective, we are thus unable to directly identify “Hawthorne” effects, bounded rationality, or any
of the other models described above insofar as they pertain to predicting behavior of households receiving
informative letters versus no letter. The second limiting element of our design is that letters were only sent
to the highest water users. This limits our ability to document heterogeneous treatment effects along the
dimension of pre-intervention water use.16
Based on the literature, we can offer some conjectures on how different treatments would affect the likely
take-up of the WaterSaver landscaping offer. First, given the existing literature on loss versus gain framing,
we would expect that framing the letter content from the “loss” domain would induce more individuals to
request a WaterSaver landscape rebate than those in the Gain Framing treatment. On the redemption and
use dimension, the likely impact is less clear. We are unaware of any prior work comparing gain versus loss
framing in energy or water markets.
Unlike the Gain and Loss Framing letters, the Social Comparison letter has a broad empirical basis in which
to ground our priors. In particular, the existing field-experimental literature on social comparisons in water
use (Ferraro and Price 2013; Brent, Cook, and Olsen 2015) suggests water use should be lower among
households receiving a Social Comparison letter versus a Gain Framing letter if the channel is, in fact, the
social comparison itself. More specifically, the existing social comparisons literature addressing energy
16. The social comparison literature on public utilities suggests that households using the most water and electricity are less
responsive to price changes (Mansur and Olmstead 2012), more responsive to social comparisons in the short-term (Allcott 2011;
Ferraro and Price 2013; Brent, Cook, and Olsen 2015), and show greater persistence in the treatment effect over time (Allcott and
Rogers 2014; Bernedo, Ferraro, and Price 2014).

8

and water consumption typically employs a bundled treatment. The treatment is the combined stimulus of
receiving a letter that includes tips on how to conserve and a social comparison (although see Allcott and
Greenstone 2015 and LaRiviere et al. 2016 for recent notable exceptions).
Crucially, the social comparison content of the letter is not varied independently from the assignment to
receive any letter at all. If it is the case that the social comparison, and not the act of receiving a letter, is
key, we would expect to see a reduction in water use in the Social Comparison treatment relative to the Gain
Framing treatment. Whether we would also see an increase in rebate requests or redemptions in the Social
Comparison treatment relative to the Gain Framing treatment is an open question. The only existing study
experimentally evaluating the effect of social comparisons on participation in water efficiency programs
(Brent, Cook, and Olsen 2015) involves a bundled treatment that limits the ability to relate changes in behavior
to receipt of the social comparison in and of itself. Furthermore, current theoretical models do not provide
clear guidance on the effect of social comparisons on these two rebate margins.17 Finally, as mentioned
earlier, the Combined Framing treatment is largely exploratory in nature.

4

Data and Summary Statistics

Data for the experimental analysis was provided by SAWS and includes a panel of monthly water use
for 23,282 households covering the period from January 2013 to December 2014.18 In addition, SAWS
provided information on participation in the WaterSaver program, including whether a household claimed the
previously-mentioned $100 landscape rebate along with the date and number of claims.
Table 2 summarizes key covariates across the four treatment conditions. All of the covariates were measured
prior to the beginning of the field experiment except the last one in the table, which is the proportion of
households in each treatment for whom we have a complete 24 month time-series. The two summary measures
of average water use in the fourth and fifth rows correspond to winter and summer 2013 water use, respectively.
The final row of the table reports the results of a randomization test of equality of the multivariate distribution
of covariates in the Gain Framing against each treatment (Hansen and Bowers 2008. We cannot reject the null
hypothesis of equal pre-treatment covariate distributions.19
Nonetheless, comparing, for example, parcel area in the Gain and Loss Framing treatments, one may be
17. For example, a neoclassical model of household production (Becker 1965) would predict that a reduction in water use in
response to social comparisons is positively correlated with an increase in rebate request and redemption. Both represent the actions
of a household presented with the information that they may not be on their production possibility frontier in terms of transforming
water into household services. On the other hand, a particular formulation of a moral cost model might suggest that a social
comparison introduces guilt for households consuming “above the norm” that could be resolved either through reducing use, or
through requesting (but not necessarily redeeming) the rebate (or some combination of both). These two examples illustrate that the
theory on the likely impact of social comparisons on the use of rebates is ambiguous.
18. 391 of the 23,282 households (representing 8,776 monthly water bills) in the experimental sample have less than the complete
24 months of water use data, ranging from 14 months to 23 months. The distribution of these 391 households across treatments is:
101 in the Gain Framing, 104 in the Loss Framing, 87 in the Social Comparison, and 99 in the Combined Framing.
19. We use this test in order to leverage the fact that for covariate balance, the sharp null hypothesis (that is, that covariate
distributions are identical across treatment and control) is appropriate. In addition, such a test should have improved power against
alternatives with identical means of the covariate distribution, but differing higher moments.

9

concerned because homes in the Gain Framing treatment are, on average, larger. This difference is due more
to outliers in the covariate distribution than an imbalance, per se. Knowledge of these distributional features
prior to treatment assignment led us, when determining treatment assignment, to use a block randomization
where we block on deciles of age of the home, parcel area, total value of the home, and average water use in
winter 2013.20

5
5.1

Results
Rebate Requests, Rebate Redemptions, and Indirect Effects on Water Use

Table 3 summarizes the raw rebate request and redemption counts by treatment. In total, 396 households (of
23,282) requested a landscaping rebate. Of these 396 households, 90 were in the Gain Framing treatment,
105 were in the Loss Framing treatment, 77 were in the Social Comparison treatment, and the remaining 124
were in the Combined Framing treatment. Inspecting unadjusted counts, there appears to be evidence that
Gain Framing, Loss Framing, and Social Comparisons treatments all performed roughly equally in terms of
inducing rebate request, while the Combined Framing seems to stand out as having increased rebate request
rate. Only the Loss Framing treatment appears to stand out when measuring rebate redemption rates. None
of the treatments appear to have had a substantial impact on the number of rebates requested (redeemed)
conditional on requesting (redeeming) any.
This evidence is suggestive, so we examine regression-adjusted estimates of several different quantities
of interest. To frame the discussion, we can think of responses occurring along two distinct extensive
rebate margins and three distinct intensive rebate margins. The two extensive margins are the unconditional
propensity of a household to request, and subsequently redeem, a landscape rebate.21 The intensive margins
relate to the fact that households could request (and, hence, redeem) as many as eight rebates for their home as
part of the WaterSaver program. As the intensive margin outcomes are only observed if a household responds
along the extensive margin, we should note that the effect of treatment on the number of rebates requested and
redeemed cannot be interpreted as causal, per se.22 Nonetheless, we view such results as descriptive and
relevant for policymakers.
20. The results of this block randomization by covariate are presented in the Online Appendix.
21. As our treatment content is delivered through letters and letter opening is fundamentally unobservable, both our summary in
Table 3 and the regression-adjusted estimates should be interpreted as estimates of the intention to treat (ITT). Throughout, when we
refer to average treatment effects we are thus referring to average ITT effects. Given our focus on policy relevance, we should note
that with any intervention delivered through mail, this caveat holds.
22. As our treatments may induce different types of consumers to request a rebate, estimates for intensive margin effects may
confound unobserved differences in types across treatments and the subsequent effects of treatment on redemption for a given type of
consumer.

10

Starting from the extensive margins of rebate request and redemption, we estimate models of the form23:
re q

1{Request Counti > 0}  β 0

X

+

re q

f

re q

β f Ti + X 0i γ re q + u i

(1)

f ∈ {L, SC, C}

X

1{Redeem Counti > 0}  β 0re d +

f

d
0 re d
β re
+ u ire d
f Ti + X i γ

(2)

f ∈ {L, SC, C}

X

1{Redeem Counti > 0|Request Counti > 0}  β̃ 0re d +

f

d
0 re d
β̃ re
+ ũ ire d
f Ti + X i γ̃

(3)

f ∈ {L, SC, C}

Throughout, Request Counti and Redeem Counti are count variables recording the number of rebates that
f

household i requested and redeemed, respectively. Each Ti is a dummy variable for being sent a letter with
content f , where dummies are used for the loss framing (L), the social comparison (SC), and the combined
treatment (C). Finally, X i is a vector of pre-intervention household covariates found in Table 2. For equation
1 and 2, each β f is the marginal change in propensity to request (redeem) a landscape rebate due to content f
for household i. By estimating these two equations, we recover an estimate of β 0 (the average propensity
to request or redeem the rebate among individuals in the Gain Framing treatment) as well as each β f , the
average treatment effect of receiving a letter with content f instead of the Gain Framing letter.
In addition, we explore the number of rebates requested and redeemed by the average complier along each
extensive margin by estimating models of form:

re q

Request Counti |Request Counti > 0  θ0

+

X

re q

f

re q

θ f Ti + X 0i δ re q + e i

(4)

f ∈ {L, SC, C}

Redeem Counti |Redeem Counti > 0  θ0re d +

X

f

d
0 re d
+ e ire d
θ re
f Ti + X i δ

(5)

f ∈ {L, SC, C}

Table 4 presents empirical estimates where rebate requests are the dependent variable (equations 1 and 4),
whereas Table 5 presents the estimates where rebate redemptions are the dependent variable (equations 2, 3,
and 5). We discuss each in turn.
The first column of Table 4 reports the results of estimating a “short” version of equation 1 which excludes
the vector of household characteristics. The findings from this table confirm the takeaway from Table 3 —on average, only the Combined Framing letter generated a statistically significant increase in rebate request
rates.24 The Combined Framing letters increased rebate request by .006 percentage points, a 36 percent
increase in rebate request rate relative to the Gain Framing letter. Point estimates and confidence intervals
after including pre-intervention covariates (column 2) are essentially unchanged. Starting from column
3, we report the results of estimating equation 4, which captures the difference in the number of rebate
23. Results on the probability of rebate request and redemption are qualitatively similar when estimated using logit and probit
models via maximum likelihood. The interested reader can find the results of these alternative specifications in the Online Appendix.
24. Note, however, that we do not reject a Wald test of equality of treatment effects across Loss Framing and Combined treatments
(p ≈ 0.17).

11

requests across the three letter treatments versus the Gain Framing treatment. As a direct analog to Table
3, we first note that in the Gain Framing treatment, the average household requested roughly 1.56 rebates
(conditional on requesting any). From these regression estimates, there is no evidence that individuals in the
Combined Framing treatment requested rebates more intensely in addition to being more likely to request any.
If anything, only individuals in the Social Comparison treatment have a higher request intensity (a roughly
9% higher rate of rebate request), albeit this estimate is only marginally significant.
In Table 5, we keep part of the structure of Table 4 with the “short” regression of redemption rates in column
1 and the “long” regression —- equation 2 —- in column 2. The results across these two columns are
essentially unchanged, but they differ from the findings on the request rate in Table 4. In particular, the
Combined Framing only generated a marginally significant increase in redemption rates (.002 percentage
points). However, the Loss Framing generated a statistically significant increase in redemption rates (.003
percentage points). Due to the overall low redemption rates, both of these extensive margin effects are
substantial in terms of percentage change in redemption rate. Continuing to columns 3 and 4, we estimate
versions of equation 3 to explore the answer to the (descriptive) question: on average, in which treatment was
persistence across the request margin into the redemption margin (that is, the conversion rate) the greatest?
We find that rebate requesters in the Loss Framing treatment had a conversion rate nearly double that in
the Gain Framing treatment. We find a similar (but smaller) difference in conversion rate with the Social
Comparison letter, although this difference is only marginally significant. Finally, we explore the intensive
rebate redemption margin in columns 5 and 6 and find no strong evidence that the number of redemptions
differs across the treatments on average when conditioning on redeeming at least one rebate.
How do these findings mesh with various theoretical predictions for the take-up of new water-saving
technology? Using the point estimates, the Loss Framing letter moves rebate request rates in the direction
predicted by a theory of loss aversion. Furthermore, we see that the Combined Framing generates larger
increases in rebate request than either the Loss Framing or Social Comparison letters in isolation, but that this
only partly translates to actual rebate redemptions. We believe that this finding is novel and suggests that loss
framing and social norm appeals may be complements in inducing requests, but substitutes in inducing actual
take-up.
Beyond concordance with theory, an important consideration is the economic significance of our treatments.
The empirical reality is that, to our knowledge, there are no publicly-available estimates of either the effect of
turf replacement on household water use or the returns on each dollar of subsidy for turf replacement. To fill
this gap, we provide two crude estimates of the amount of water saved due to turf replacement induced by our
Loss Framing treatment relative to the benchmark Gain Framing letter. Neither of these estimates is ideal,
but together they represent the types of data inputs used by water utilities when deciding on demand-side
management policies. The first calculation builds on information from a water conservation program in
southern California administered by Metropolitan Water District of Southern California (MWDSC).25 The
25. In particular, the program in California involves using subsidies of at least $1 per square foot of conventional lawn replaced
with drought-resistant landscaping. This level of the subsidy is the base rate provided by Metropolitan Water District of Southern
California (MWDSC). Many of the water agencies within MWDSC’s service area also provide top-up incentives per square foot
replaced in addition to MWDSC’s subsidy.

12

second calculation utilizes results from Brent (2016) that report the estimated change in water use due to turf
replacement based on an econometric model.
To begin, consider the following evapotranspiration model used26 by MWDSC to project annual water savings
(in gallons) per square foot of turf replaced with drought-resistant plants:
E [Use isa ] 

0.62ETa [PFs − 0.4 · 1{ DR s }]
A i + 0.4 · 1{ DR s }

The dependent variable is the expected annual water use (in gallons) of household i on plot s (of size 1 square
foot) in geographic area a. ETa is the reference evapotranspiration constant for an area a representing the
amount of water lost (in inches) annually from fixed geographic features (such as local climate). PFs is a
multiplicative constant embodying the water requirements of typical plants in plot s. A i is a technological
parameter reflecting the efficiency of the irrigation at household i. Finally, 1{ DR s } is an indicator for plot s
being comprised of drought-resistant plants. During its planning phase, MWDSC used this model to estimate
water use (and, hence, water savings) for households that either did or did not replace their typical plants with
drought-resistant plants, fixing parameters as follows:
ETa  50.2 inches/year
PFs  0.8
A i  0.4
Using these parameters, the annual water saving per square foot of turf replaced is approximately 47 gallons.27
We use this model to calculate the expected reduction in water use due to the Loss Framing letter as compared
to a typical marketing letter (Gain Framing).28 As noted in Table 3, 17 households redeemed 29 rebates total
in the Gain Framing treatment as compared to 35 households that redeemed 58 rebates in the Loss Framing
treatment, a difference of 29 rebates. Under the assumption that redeeming a rebate is equivalent to replacing
exactly29 200 square feet of turf (and using Table 3 counts directly), an additional 5,800 square feet of turf
26. We rephrase the notation of the model used by MWDSC to keep it as similar as possible to our own empirical models and to
highlight the underlying assumptions of the model.
27. For comparison, recent turf replacement studies in southern Nevada (Sovocol, Morgan, and Bennett 2006) and Mojave,
California (Mojave Water Agency 2014) use annual per-square-foot savings in excess of 50 in forecasting water savings due to the
style of turf replacement encouraged in our field experiment. Note that implicit in our calculation is the assumption that households
without turf replacement use the theoretical maximum water quantity for outdoor use. Recent survey evidence has suggested that
such theoretical maxima may be substantially above actual use for all but the highest users (Water Research Foundation 2016). Given
that our study focuses on the highest users in the utility’s service area, our assumptions are in line with this survey evidence. In
addition, we will assume that water savings accrue once in the year the landscape is changed, as opposed to in perpetuity.
28. We focus on the Loss Framing letter because it is the most successful of the three treatment letters in inducing rebate redemption,
but this exercise can be extended to the other treatments. In principle, since this evapotranspiration model excludes any unobserved
heterogeneity in either net benefits of the choice of take-up of drought-resistant landscaping or total water use conditional on choices,
we could use it calculate water use changes within-household for all our treatments.
29. As mentioned earlier, we do not observe rebate redemptions outside of the rebate program and we do not observe if households
that redeem a rebate for drought-resistant plants actually change their landscape. However, each letter mentioned the suggested
removal of 200 square feet of turf to plant drough-resistant plants which motivates our choice. We maintain this assumption
throughout this Section 5.1.

13

were replaced due to the Loss Framing30
Taken together with the estimated annual water savings per square foot mentioned above, our analysis implies
an annual savings of approximately 272,600 gallons of water. Considering that the average annual water
consumption in our field experiment is approximately 260,000 gallons in the year prior to treatment, the 29
additional turf replacements offset the annual water use of the average household and then some. At what
financial cost31 do these water savings arise? Given our counterfactual is the receipt of a benchmark letter,
the only additional costs with the Loss Framing letter (since changing letter content is zero cost) are the costs
of funding the 29 additional rebates. At $100 per rebate, a total of $2,900 would be spent to save 272,600
gallons, or roughly $10.64 per thousand gallons of water saved.32
Without institutional detail on how the various evapotranspiration parameters are developed, we worry
about estimates from such a model being without strong intuition and insufficiently detailed to evaluate the
assumptions. Thus, we consider another estimation approach due to Brent (2016) who estimates a version of
a discrete-continuous choice model using data from households in Phoenix, Arizona.
Under this approach, households are first assumed to select a given landscape arrangement and then, conditional
on this arrangement, how much water to consume. Importantly, this approach allows Brent (2016) to estimate
that households moving from the wet to the dry landscape group (an analogy to our turf replacement) reduce
their monthly water consumption by roughly 20%. Given that the average monthly water use of mixed
landscape households in Brent (2016) is roughly 16,500 gallons, this amounts to a monthly water savings of
3,300 gallons (or roughly 39,600 gallons annually) per converting household. Assuming that these converting
households are comparable to the households in our experiment that adopt drought-resistant turf, the 29
additional turf replacements caused by receipt of the Loss Framing letter would amount to 1,148,400 gallons
of water saved annually. Accounting for the additional subsidies paid in the Loss Framing treatment, these
estimates imply a cost of approximately $2.52 for every thousand gallons saved.33

5.2

Direct Effect on Water Use

In addition to the impact on take-up of drought-resistant landscaping, we are able analyze the impact of
our randomized content treatments on subsequent monthly water use. To do so, we employ a difference-indifferences approach; in particular, we estimate models of the following form:
ln{Useit }  α + νi + η t + β 0 Postit +

X

f

γ f (Ti × Posti t ) + u it

(6)

f ∈ {L, SC, C}

30. 29 additional turf replacements · 200 square feet per replacement  5,800 square feet of turf replaced.
31. Note that we cannot quantify any welfare costs (either directly due to the content, or indirectly though unobserved behavior
change) that the Loss Framing letter imposes on households relative to Gain Framing letter, thus this exercise is in the vein of program
administrator cost tests.
32. For comparison, Ferraro and Price (2013), using a set of varied letter contents, report reduction in water use due to social
comparisons, and report an estimate of $0.575 of utility cost per thousand gallons of water saved.
33. We provide a detailed discussion of this calculation in the appendix.

14

Throughout, our dependent variable is the log of household i’s water use in month-year t.34 Postit is an
indicator keeping track of whether the use is prior to or after our treatment letters were sent. As with our
f

previous regressions, Ti is an indicator for a household ever receiving a letter with content f . Thus, the
f

interaction of each Ti with Postit allows us to estimate a causal parameter — the average treatment effect of
receiving a letter with content f when the counterfactual is receiving a Gain Framing letter. In addition, we
introduce household fixed effects νi to control for time-invariant individual heterogeneity in water use and
month-year fixed effects η t to control for time-varying / seasonal determinants of water use. The results of
this estimation are found in Table 6, where, given that randomization occurred at the level of the household,
we cluster the standard errors at the household level.
Beginning with column 1, we see a pattern of treatment effects emerge that differs from those realized when
exploring the effect of treatment on the rebate redemption decision. Specifically, only the Social Comparison
letter generated a statistically significant change in use (a reduction in use of 1.4%). Interestingly, the direction
and magnitude of this effect is largely consistent with the existing evidence on the effect of social comparisons
on use (Allcott 2011; Ferraro and Price 2013; and Brent, Cook, and Olsen 2015).35For perspective, our
estimated change in monthly use is equivalent to that which would be expected in the short-run if average
prices were to increase by approximately 3.5 to 4.7 percent.36
Exploring the remaining results, the lack of statistically significant evidence for a change in use due to the
loss framing is consistent with our earlier hypothesis given that the framing only applies to the rebate and the
effect on rebate redemption was relatively small. As such, it is unlikely that our ITT estimate of the effect of
the loss framed letter on use would be able to identify changes in use that arise solely through its impact on
changes in landscape stock. Similarly, we find no statistically significant evidence that including both a loss
framing and a social comparison on a letter reduces use beyond any potential use reductions due to the Gain
Framed letter. That said, the direction of the estimated effect is in the predicted direction.37
We can also move beyond the above static estimates to explore the treatment effects in each month of the
observation period. Specifically, we estimate an augmented version of equation (6) by fully interacting each
of the three treatment dummies with a dummy for each month-year, and additionally include household fixed
effects in the estimating equation. Afterwards, we capture and plot the vector of estimates β̂ in event time in
Figure 2 together with the 95 percent confidence interval around each estimate.38
34. As a robustness check for the functional form of the dependent variable, we explored using percentage change in use levels
relative to the average use of the Gain treatment post intervention. The results were partly inconsistent with those when estimating
in logs; however, when we estimate the percentage change specification excluding the top and bottom 1% of use, the results are
qualitatively and quantitatively similar to the log specifications. In addition, our later analysis of treatment effects over time looks
nearly identical across the log specification and the percentage change specification dropping outliers. The entirety of this exploration
can be found in the Online Appendix.
35. Yet, it is important to note that our counterfactual is quite different from the existing literature. As such, this result may suggest
that it is the content of the social comparison that drives the observed change in use.
36. These calculations are based on an average, short-run price elasticity of water that falls in the range of -0.3 to -0.4 (Olmstead,
Hanemann, and Stavins 2007; Olmstead and Stavins 2009; Mansur and Olmstead 2012).
37. Note, however, that we do not reject a Wald test of equality of intent-to-treat effects across Social Comparison and Combined
Framing treatments (p ≈ 0.71).
38. We build these confidence intervals off of standard errors that are clustered at the household level.

15

This exploration is of particular interest given that evidence from electricity markets suggests we should
observe rapid decay of treatment effects in the absence of additional treatment letters (Allcott and Rogers
2014; Asensio and Delmas 2016), and more general evidence of decay of non-pecuniary policy instruments in
the field (Gneezy and List 2006; DellaVigna et al. 2016). At the same time, past evidence from water markets
suggests relative persistence of social comparison treatment effects (Ferraro and Price 2013; Brent, Cook, and
Olsen 2015).
The temporal pattern in Figure 2 reveals one insight and raises one concern. The insight is that we see within
nine months (if not sooner), the difference in use between households that received a Social Comparison letter
and households that received a Gain Framing letter has all but vanished. This finding suggests that while
sending letters may generate reductions in water use in the short-term, the long-term impact is significantly
less pronounced.39
However, a simple ocular check of Figure 2 also uncovers one concern —- the apparent difference in water
use of households in the Social Comparison treatment relative to the Gain Framing treatment in the two
months prior to treatment.40 In particular, given that this difference contributes towards average pre-treatment
water use differential (see the Social Comparison row in columns 1 and 3 of Table 6), we may worry that the
difference-in-differences estimator from our regressions may merely capture a differential pre-trend.
To explore how much this pre-treatment difference contributes to the estimated difference-in-differences
treatment effect, we re-estimate the empirical models in Table 6 excluding data from the one pre-treatment
month with a statistically significant pre-treatment use difference (month “-1” in the event time of Figure 2).
The results, found in Table 7, are largely unchanged in magnitude, although are now only significant at the ten
percent level.

6

Conclusion

This paper builds on Tinbergen’s fundamental insight regarding policy instruments and targets. Tinbergen
argued that that policymakers need at least as many policy instruments as targets to achieve those targets. We
extend this idea using a natural field experiment in water management. Our research highlights the need to
test several behavioral mechanisms when policymakers have multiple targets over different time horizons, and
the relationship between instruments and targets is uncertain.
Our field experiment attempts to understand how to use insights from behavioral economics to encourage
technology adoption and reduce water use. We tested four treatments designed to encourage the adoption
of a turf-replacement technology and water conservation. Households were sent various treatment letters,
including a gain framing, a loss framing, a social comparison, and a combination of a loss framing a social
comparison. We find that the combination of a social comparison and loss framing leads to a 36% increase in
39. This result is in line with regression discontinuity results described in Allcott (2011) but at odds with the short and long-term
results in Ferraro and Price (2013) and related work.
40. We do not find a similar pattern when producing identical event-study figures for the Loss Framing and Combined Framing
treatments. These figures are displayed in the Online Appendix.

16

rebate requests relative to a benchmark letter, but it is only the loss framing on its own that reliably increases
actual rebate redemption. In the nine months after treatment, the only intervention that led to a significant
reduction in water use relative to the standard letter was the social comparison treatment, which resulted in a
1.4% drop in consumption.
Taken together, our results suggest that our treatment letters make salient different actions and influence
behavior along different dimensions. Importantly, messages that make salient the incentives for participating
in the “WaterSaver” program influence short- and intermediate-run objectives (rebate claims and redemptions)
but have little impact on long-run patterns of use. Messages that focus on relative consumption patterns, in
contrast, have little impact on participation in the “WaterSaver” program but nonetheless lead to significant
reductions in monthly water use (the long-run outcome of interest). In this regard, our findings support
Tinbergen’s conjecture – at least two distinct policy instruments were required to meet the dual targets of
technology adoption and reductions in water use over longer time horizons.
Notwithstanding our findings, we believe that the problem Tinbergen originally described may need to
be reframed. In his original formulation, Tinbergen presumes that one can specify whether targets are
independent (e.g., inflation and unemployment, or technology adoption and water conservation). In fact,
we do not always know whether policy targets are ex-ante independent. It may be the case, for example,
that technology adoption and conservation are interrelated and thus could be influenced by a single policy
instrument.
A more general point is that many economic production processes, and the policies that improve these
processes, need to be discovered or better understood. It is our belief that behavioral scientists and natural
field experiments have a critical role to play in this discovery process. We believe our paper provides a
blueprint that highlights how to use field experiments to test different behavioral interventions, especially
when policymakers have multiple objectives for which the underlying production process is unknown.

17

References
Ackerberg, Daniel. 2001. “Empirically Distinguishing Informative and Prestige Effects of Advertising.”
RAND Journal of Economics 33 (2): 100–118.
Allcott, Hunt. 2011. “Social Norms and Energy Conservation.” Journal of Public Economics 95 (9): 1082–
1095.
Allcott, Hunt, and Michael Greenstone. 2015. “Measuring the Welfare Effects of Energy Efficiency Programs.”
Working paper.
Allcott, Hunt, and Todd Rogers. 2014. “The Short-Run and Long-Run Effects of Behavioral Interventions:
Experimental Evidence from Energy Conservation.” American Economic Review 104 (10): 3003–3037.
Armantier, Olivier, and Amadou Boly. 2015. “Framing of Incentives and Effort Provision.” International
Economic Review 56 (3): 917–938.
Asensio, Omar Isaac, and Magali A. Delmas. 2016. “The Dynamics of Behavior Change: Evidence from
Energy Conservation.” Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization 126 (Part A): 196–212.
Becker, Gary S. 1965. “A Theory of the Allocation of Time.” The Economic Journal 75 (299): 493–517.
Bennear, Lori S., Jonathan M. Lee, and Laura O. Taylor. 2013. “Municipal Rebate Programs for Environmental
Retrofits: An Evaluation of Additionality and Cost-Effectiveness.” Journal of Policy Analysis and
Management 32 (2): 350–372.
Bernedo, Maria, Paul J. Ferraro, and Michael K. Price. 2014. “The Persistent Impacts of Norm-Based
Messaging and Their Implications for Water Conservation.” Journal of Consumer Policy 37 (3): 437–
452.
Bertrand, Marianne, Dean Karlan, Sendhil Mullainathn, Eldar Shafir, and Johnathan Zinman. 2010. “What’s
Advertising Content Worth? Evidence from a Consumer Credit Marketing Field Experiment.” Quarterly
Journal of Economics 125 (1): 263–306.
Blanes-i-Vidal, Jordi, and Mareike Nossol. 2011. “Tournaments without Prizes: Evidence from Personnel
Records.” Management Science 57:1721–1736.
Brent, Daniel A. 2016. “Estimating Water Demand Elasticity at the Intensive and Extensive Margin.” Working
paper.
Brent, Daniel A., Joseph H. Cook, and Skylar Olsen. 2015. “Social Comparisons, Household Water Use, and
Participation in Utility Conservation Programs: Evidence from Three Randomized Trials.” Journal of
the Association of Environmental and Resource Economists 2 (4): 597–627.
Çelen, Boğaçhan, Shachar Kariv, and Andrew Schotter. 2010. “An Experimental Test of Advice and Social
Learning.” Management Science 56 (10): 1687–1701.

18

Cialdini, Robert, Raymond Reno, and Carl Kallgren. 1990. “A Focus Theory of Normative Conduct: Recycling
the Concept of Norms to Reduce Littering in Public Places.” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology
58:1015–1026.
Conley, Timothy, and Christopher Udry. 2010. “Learning About a New Technology: Pineapple in Ghana.”
American Economic Review 100 (1): 35–69.
Cook, Benjamin I., Toby R. Ault, and Jason E. Smerdon. 2015. “Unprecedented 21st century drought risk in
the American Southwest and Central Plains.” Science Advances 1 (1).
Costa, Dora L., and Matthew E. Kahn. 2013. “Energy Conservation "Nudges" and Environmentalist Ideology:
Evidence from a Randomized Residential Electricity Field Experiment.” Journal of the European
Economic Association 11 (3): 680–702.
Croson, Rachel, and Jen Shang. 2008. “The Impact of Downward Social Information on Contribution
Decisions.” Experimental Economics 11 (3): 221–233.
Currie, Janet. 2004. “The Take Up of Social Benefits.” NBER Working Paper 10488.
de Quidt, Jonathan. 2014. “Your Loss Is My Gain: A Recruitment Experiment with Framed Incentives.”
Working paper.
DellaVigna, Stefano. 2009. “Psychology and Economics: Evidence from the Field.” Journal of Economic
Literature 47 (2): 315–375.
DellaVigna, Stefano, John A. List, Ulrike Malmendier, and Gautam Rao. 2016. “Estimating Social Preferences
and Gift Exchange at Work.” Working paper.
Eliasson, Jan. 2015. “The rising pressure of global water shortages.” Nature 517 (7532): 6.
Ellingsen, Tore, Magnus Johannesson, Johanna Mollerstromb, and Sara Munkhammar. 2012. “Social Framing
Effects: Preferences or Beliefs?” Games and Economic Behavior 76 (1): 117–130.
Englmaier, Florian, Andreas Roider, and Uwe Sunde. 2016. “The Role of Communication of Performance
Schemes: Evidence from a Field Experiment.” Management Science forthcoming.
Ferraro, Paul J., and Michael K. Price. 2013. “Using Nonpecuniary Strategies to Influence Behavior: Evidence
from a Large-Scale Field Experiment.” Review of Economics and Statistics 95 (1): 64–73.
Festinger, Leon. 1954. “A Theory of Social Comparison Processes.” Human Relations 7 (2): 117–140.
Fowlie, Meredith, Michael Greenstone, and Catherine Wolfram. 2015. “Do Energy Efficiency Investments
Deliver? Evidence from the Weatherization Assistance Program.” Working paper.
Ganzach, Yoav, and Nili Karsahi. 1995. “Message Framing and Buying Behavior: A Field Experiment.”
Journal of Business Research 32:11–17.
Gneezy, Uri, and John A. List. 2006. “Putting Behavioral Economics to Work: Testing for Gift Exchange in
Labor Markets Using Field Experiments.” Econometrica 74 (5): 1365–1384.
19

Hallsworth, Michael, John A. List, Robert D. Metcalfe, and Ivo Vlaev. 2014. “The Behavioralist as Tax
Collector: Using Natural Field Experiments to Enhance Tax Compliance.” NBER Working Paper 20007.
Hansen, Ben B., and Jake Bowers. 2008. “Covariate Balance in Simple, Stratified, and Clustered Comparative
Studies.” Statistical Science 23 (2): 219–236.
Hong, Fuhai, Tanjim Hossain, and John A. List. 2015. “Framing Manipulations as Contest: A Natural Field
Experiment.” Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization 118:372–382.
Hortaçsu, Ali, Seyed Ali Madanizadeh, and Steven L. Puller. 2015. “Power to Choose? An Analysis of
Consumer Inertia in the Residential Electricity Market.” Working paper.
Hossain, Tanjim, and King King Li. 2013. “Crowding Out in the Labor Market: A Prosocial Setting Is
Necessary.” Management Science 60 (5): 1148–1160.
Hossain, Tanjim, and John A. List. 2012. “The Behavioralist Visits the Factory: Increasing Productivity Using
Simple Framing Manipulations.” Management Science 58 (12): 2151–2167.
Jacobsen, Grant D., and Matthew J. Kotchen. 2013. “Are Building Codes Effective at Saving Energy?
Evidence from Residential Billing Data in Florida.” Review of Economics and Statistics 95 (1): 34–49.
Kahn, Matthew E., and Frank A. Wolak. 2013. “Using Information to Improve the Effectiveness of Nonlinear
Pricing: Evidence from a Field Experiment.” Working paper.
Kahneman, Daniel, and Amos Tversky. 1979. “Prospect Theory: An Analysis of Decision under Risk.”
Econometrica 47 (2): 263–291.
Karlan, Dean, Margaret McConnell, Sendhil Mullainathan, and Jonathan Zinman. 2016. “Getting to the Top
of Mind: How Reminders Increase Saving.” Management Science forthcoming.
Kessler, Judd B., and Stephen Leider. 2012. “Norms and Contracting.” Management Science 58 (1): 62–77.
Kotchen, Matthew J., and Laura E. Grant. 2011. “Does Daylight Saving Time Save Energy? Evidence from a
Natural Experiment in Indiana.” Review of Economics and Statistics 93 (4): 1172–1185.
Krupka, Erin L., Stephen Leider, and Ming Jiang. 2016. “A Meeting of the Minds: Contracts and Social
Norms.” Management Science forthcoming.
Laibson, David. 2001. “A Cue-Theory of Consumption.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 116 (1): 81–119.
LaRiviere, Jacob, Scott Holladay, David Novgorodsky, and Michael K. Price. 2016. “Asymmetric Effects of
Non-Pecuniary Signals on Search and Purchase Behavior for Energy-Efficient Durable Goods.” Working
paper.
Levitt, Steven D., and John A. List. 2007. “What Do Laboratory Experiments Measuring Social Preferences
Reveal About the Real World?” Journal of Economic Perspectives 21 (2): 153–174.

20

Levitt, Steven D., John A. List, Susanne Neckermann, and Sally Sadoff. 2016. “The Behavioralist Goes to
School: Leveraging Behavioral Economics to Improve Educational Performance.” American Economic
Journal: Economic Policy forthcoming.
List, John A., and Anya Savikhin Samek. 2015. “The Behavioralist as Nutritionist: Leveraging Behavioral
Economics to Improve Child Food Choice and Consumption.” Journal of Health Economics 39 (C):
135–146.
Mansur, Erin T., and Sheila M. Olmstead. 2012. “The Value of Scarce Water: Measuring the Inefficiency of
Municipal Regulations.” Journal of Urban Economics 71 (3): 332–346.
Olmstead, Sheila M. 2010. “The Economics of Managing Scarce Water Resources.” Review of Environmental
Economics and Policy 4 (2): 179–198.
Olmstead, Sheila M., Michael W. Hanemann, and Robert N. Stavins. 2007. “Water Demand Under Alternative
Price Structures.” Journal of Environmental Economics and Management 54 (2): 181–198.
Olmstead, Sheila M., and Robert N. Stavins. 2009. “Comparing Price and Non-Price Approaches to Water
Conservation.” Water Resources Research 45 (4).
Renwick, Mary E., and Sandra O. Archibald. 1998. “Demand Side Management Policies for Residential
Water Use: Who Bears the Conservation Burden?” Land Economics 74 (3): 343–359.
Renwick, Mary E., and Richard D. Green. 2000. “Do Residential Water Demand Side Management Policies
Measure Up? An Analysis of Eight California Water Agencies.” Journal of Environmental Economics
and Management 40:37–55.
Roels, Guillaume, and Xuanming Su. 2013. “Add to Favorites Email to a Colleague Download Citation
Track Citations Permissions Article Metrics (full-text views and PDF downloads over the previous year)
Downloaded 305 times Bookmark and Share Prev Next Optimal Design of Social Comparison Effects:
Setting Reference Groups and Reference Points.” Management Science 60 (3): 606–627.
Schultz, P. Wesley, Alyssa Messina, Giuseppe Tronu, Eleuterio F. Limas, Rupanwita Gupta, and Mica
Estrada. 2016. “Personalized Normative Feedback and the Moderating Role of Personal Norms: A Field
Experiment to Reduce Residential Water Consumption.” Environment and Behavior 48 (5): 686–710.
Sexton, Steven. 2015. “Automatic Bill Payment and Salience Effects: Evidence from Electricity Consumption.”
Review of Economics and Statistics 97 (2): 229–241.
Shang, Jen, and Rachel Croson. 2009. “A Field Experiment in Charitable Contribution: The Impact of Social
Information on the Voluntary Provision of Public Goods.” Economic Journal 119 (540): 1422–1439.
Shin, Jeong-Shik. 1985. “Perception of Price When Price Information Is Costly: Evidence from Residential
Electricity Demand,” Review of Economics and Statistics 67 (4): 591–598.
Sovocol, Kent A, Mitchell Morgan, and Doug Bennett. 2006. “An In-Depth Investigation of Xeriscape as a
Water Conservation Measure.” Journal of American Water Works Association 98 (2): 82–93.
21

Thaler, Richard H., and Cass R. Sunstein. 2003. “Libertarian Paternalism.” American Economic Review 93
(2): 175–179.
Tinbergen, Jan. 1952. On the Theory of Economic Policy. Amsterdam: North-Holland Publishing Company.

22

Figure 1: Event Timeline
4/30/2014

3/24/2014
1/1/2013

12/31/2014

Post-Treatment

Begin Observation Period

End Observation Period

23
Treatment
letters
sent
Last day of
rebate
eligibility

Note: We begin observing monthly water use for our sample of approximately 23,000 households as of January 1, 2013. On March 24, 2014, we
randomized households into the control group and three treatment conditions, and sent out treatment letters. Households had until April 30, 2014 to
respond to the rebate (duration denoted in red). We observe post-treatment monthly water use through the final monthly bill of 2014 (duration denoted
in gray).

Table 1: Experimental Design and Treatment Assignment in Field Experiment
Gain Framing

Loss Framing

No Comparison

5,821

5,819

Social Comparison

5,819

5,823

Note: Elements of each cell indicate the number of households
assigned to each treatment. Throughout, the Gain Framing
treatment is used as the relevant baseline or control group.
In addition, we refer to the treatment cell representing the
intersection of Loss Framing and Social Comparison as the
Combined Framing treatment throughout.

24

Table 2: Covariate Composition by Treatment

Age of Home (In Years)
Parcel Area (Square Feet)
Total Value of Home (in USD)
Average Water Use - Winter (Gallons per Month)

25

Average Water Use - Summer (Gallons per Month)

I(Full Time-Series)

Sample Size
Randomization Test (Hansen & Bowers (2008))

Gain Framing

Loss Framing

Social Comparison

Combined Framing

24.80

24.80

24.88

24.84

(0.26)

(0.26)

(0.26)

(0.26)

40,447.31

31,762.49

39,258.62

37,008.25

( 3,879.44)

( 1,885.62)

( 4,387.23)

( 2,519.45)

395,203.98

396,462.86

396,399.05

407,939.35

( 4,345.44)

( 4,407.54)

( 4,356.72)

( 5,149.08)

16,578.20

16,152.83

16,348.76

16,263.91

(405.94)

(135.98)

(161.74)

(141.31)

26,839.44

27,983.64

27,176.86

27,493.79

(178.75)

(931.61)

(182.55)

(386.03)

0.98

0.98

0.99

0.98

(<0.01)

(<0.01)

(<0.01)

(<0.01)

5,821

5,819

5,819

5,823

p  0.361

p  0.833

p  0.259

Note: Each row represents a covariate that we use in our cross-sectional regression-adjusted estimates to improve precision. Each column
represents one of the four treatment groups. All households in the water utility’s service area received a letter advertising a $100 landscape
rebate good towards the purchase of drought-resistant plants, but the additional content varied by treatment. The Gain Framing treatment
describes households who received a letter advertising a $100 landscape rebate framed as a potential gain if claimed (this serves as our benchmark
group throughout). The Loss Framing treatment mirrored the Gain Framing treatment, but framed the $100 landscape rebate as a potential
lost opportunity if not claimed. The Social Comparison treatment mirrored the Gain Framing treatment with additional information about
how household i’s use in the previous year compares to an average household served by the water utility. Finally, the Combined Framing
treatment combines the relevant features of Loss Framing and Social Comparison treatments in the same letter. All households in the sample used
substantially more water than the average household served by the water utility, so the Social Comparison always told households how much more
water they had used in the previous year relative to the average household. For the case of age of home, parcel area, total value of home, and
average winter water use, we calculated the relevant decile for each covariate and use these deciles (instead of the continuous counterparts) as part
of the block-randomized treatment assignment. Tabulations of the results of the block randomization are available in the Online Appendix.

Table 3: Rebate Request and Redemption by Treatment (Unadjusted)

26

Count of HHs

Mean Number of

Count of HHs

Mean Number of

Total

Requesting

Rebates per Request

Redeeming

Rebates per Redemption

Sample Size

Gain Framing

90

1.56

17

1.71

5,821

Loss Framing

105

1.60

35

1.66

5,819

Social Comparison

77

1.70

24

1.67

5,819

Combined Framing

124

1.52

29

1.62

5,823

Total

396

1.59

105

1.66

23,282

Note: The table records raw counts of rebates requested and rebates redeemed in each treatment. "Counts of HHs" columns record
the extensive margin count of the number of households either requesting any rebates or redeeming any rebates, respectively, by
treatment. Since households could request and redeem more than one rebate, we also record the mean number of rebates requested
and redeemed by treatment. All households in the water utility’s service area received a letter advertising a $100 landscape rebate
good towards the purchase of drought-resistant plants, but the additional content varied by treatment. The Gain Framing treatment
describes households who received a letter advertising a $100 landscape rebate framed as a potential gain if claimed (this serves as our
benchmark group throughout). The Loss Framing treatment mirrored the Gain Framing treatment, but framed the $100 landscape
rebate as a potential lost opportunity if not claimed. The Social Comparison treatment mirrored the Gain Framing treatment with
additional information about how household i’s use in the previous year compares to an average household served by the water utility.
Finally, the Combined Framing treatment combines the relevant features of Loss Framing and Social Comparison treatments in the
same letter. All households in the sample used substantially more water than the average household served by the water utility, so the
Social Comparison always told households how much more water they had used in the previous year relative to the average household.

Table 4: Impact of Treatment Letters on Rebate Request
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

0.003

0.002

0.044

0.038

(0.002)

(0.002)

(0.071)

(0.072)

-0.002

-0.002

0.146*

0.139*

(0.002)

(0.002)

(0.074)

(0.074)

0.006**

0.006**

-0.031

-0.032

(0.002)

(0.003)

(0.069)

(0.070)

0.015***

0.013***

1.556***

1.512***

(0.002)

(0.005)

(0.053)

(0.273)

No

Table 1 Covariates

No

Table 1 Covariates

R2

0.001

0.001

0.017

0.024

N

23,282

23,125

396

395

Loss Framing
Social Comparison
Combined Framing
Gain Framing / Constant

Controls

Note: The dependent variable in columns 1 and 2 is an indicator for whether household i requested any
rebates, while the dependent variable in columns 3 and 4 is the number of rebates requested conditional
on requesting any. All households in the experimental sample received a letter at the same time, but
the content of the letter varied. Loss Framing is an indicator for receiving a letter advertising a $100
landscape rebate, but framed as a potential lost opportunity if not claimed. Social Comparison is an
indicator for receiving a letter identical to the control group but with additional information about how
household i’s use compares to an average household. Combined Framing is an indicator for receiving a
letter combining the relevant features of Loss Framing and Social Comparison treatments in the same
letter. The Gain Framing coefficient is the constant in the regression and denotes letters that advertised a
$100 landscape rebate framed as a potential gain, which we are treating as the benchmark group. All
standard errors are robust to heteroskedasticity. Control variables include the full set of covariates in
Table 1. The addition of control for the age of the home reduces the sample size by 157 households,
which are those households where the year the home was built is unavailable.
∗ p < 0.1, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗ ∗ ∗ p < 0.001

27

Table 5: Impact of Treatment Letters on Rebate Redemption
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

0.003**

0.003**

0.144**

0.148**

-0.049

-0.095

(0.001)

(0.001)

(0.062)

(0.063)

(0.139)

(0.144)

0.001

0.001

0.123*

0.125*

-0.039

-0.079

(0.001)

(0.001)

(0.067)

(0.068)

(0.149)

(0.156)

0.002*

0.002*

0.045

0.049

-0.085

-0.141

(0.001)

(0.001)

(0.056)

(0.056)

(0.145)

(0.149)

0.003***

0.000

0.189***

-0.217**

1.706***

1.549***

(0.001)

(0.001)

(0.041)

(0.099)

(0.113)

(0.178)

No

Table 1 Covariates

No

Table 1 Covariates

No

Table 1 Covariates

R2

0.000

0.001

0.017

0.034

0.003

0.061

N

23,282

23,125

396

395

105

105

Loss Framing
Social Comparison
Combined Framing
Gain Framing / Constant

28

Controls

Note: The dependent variable in columns 1 and 2 is an indicator for whether household i redeemed any rebates. In columns 3 and 4, the
dependent variable is an indicator for whether household i redeemed any rebates conditional on requesting any rebates. Finally, in columns 5
and 6, the dependent variable is the number of rebates redeemed conditional on redeeming any. All households in the experimental sample
received a letter at the same time, but the content of the letter varied. Loss Framing is an indicator for receiving a letter advertising a $100
landscape rebate, but framed as a potential lost opportunity if not claimed. Social Comparison is an indicator for receiving a letter identical to
the control group but with additional information about how household i’s use compares to an average household. Combined Framing is an
indicator for receiving a letter combining the relevant features of Loss Framing and Social Comparison treatments in the same letter. The Gain
Framing coefficient is the constant in the regression and denotes letters that advertised a $100 landscape rebate framed as a potential gain,
which we are treating as the benchmark group. All standard errors are robust to heteroskedasticity. Control variables include the full set of
covariates in Table 1. The addition of control for the age of the home reduces the sample size by 157 households, which are those households
where the year the home was built is unavailable.
∗ p < 0.1, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗ ∗ ∗ p < 0.001

Table 6: Impact of Letter Treatments on Log Water Use

Loss Framing X Post
Social Comparison X Post
Combined Framing X Post
Post
Loss Framing
Social Comparison
Combined Framing
Gain Framing

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

0.003

0.002

0.003

0.002

(0.007)

(0.007)

(0.007)

(0.007)

-0.014**

-0.014**

-0.014**

-0.014**

(0.007)

(0.007)

(0.007)

(0.007)

-0.011

-0.011

-0.011

-0.011

(0.007)

(0.007)

(0.007)

(0.007)

0.063***

0.061***

-0.335***

-0.338***

(0.005)

(0.005)

(0.007)

(0.007)

0.002

0.002

(0.007)

(0.007)

0.013*

0.014**

(0.007)

(0.007)

0.009

0.009

(0.007)

(0.007)

9.643***

9.541***

(0.005)

(0.006)

Household Fixed Effects

No

Yes

No

Yes

Month-Year Fixed Effects

No

No

Yes

Yes

R2

0.002

0.287

0.156

0.441

N

556,527

556,527

556,527

556,527

Note: The dependent variable is log total water use of household i in billing period t.
All households in the experimental sample received a letter at the same time, but the
content of the letter varied. Loss Framing is an indicator for receiving a letter advertising
a $100 landscape rebate, but framed as a potential lost opportunity if not claimed. Social
Comparison is an indicator for receiving a letter identical to the control group but with
additional information about how household i’s use compares to an average household.
Combined is an indicator for receiving a letter combining the relevant features of Loss
Framing and Social Comparison treatments in the same letter. The omitted letter-type is
one that advertised a $100 landscape rebate framed as a potential gain, which we are
treating as the benchmark group. Post is an indicator for months after the treatment
letters were sent. All standard errors are clustered at the household level, i.e., the level
at which the randomization occurred. A total of 1,633 monthly bills (spanning 919
households) are excluded from this log use specification due to zero recorded monthly
use.
∗ p < 0.1, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗ ∗ ∗ p < 0.001

29

-.1

Estimated Average Treatment Effect
-.05
0
.05

.1

Figure 2: Estimated Average Treatment Effect of Social Comparison Letter on Log Water Use Over
Time

-13-12 -11 -10 -9 -8 -7 -6 -5 -4 -3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9
Event Time
ATE

95% CI

Note: The figure depicts the average treatment effect of a Social Comparison letter, plotted in
event time. All estimates are regression-adjusted estimates after controlling for household
and month-year fixed effects. The dependent variable is log total water use of household i in
billing period t. All standard errors are clustered at the household level.

30

Table 7: Impact of Letter Treatments on Log Water Use — Excluding 2/2014

Loss Framing X Post
Social Comparison X Post
Combined Framing X Post
Post
Loss Framing
Social Comparison
Combined Framing
Gain Framing

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

0.003

0.002

0.003

0.002

(0.007)

(0.007)

(0.007)

(0.007)

-0.013*

-0.013*

-0.013*

-0.013*

(0.007)

(0.007)

(0.007)

(0.007)

-0.011

-0.011

-0.011

-0.011

(0.007)

(0.007)

(0.007)

(0.007)

0.031***

0.030***

-0.336***

0.061***

(0.005)

(0.005)

(0.007)

(0.007)

0.002

0.002

(0.007)

(0.007)

0.012*

0.012*

(0.007)

(0.007)

0.009

0.009

(0.007)

(0.007)

9.675***

9.542***

(0.005)

(0.006)

Household Fixed Effects

No

Yes

No

Yes

Month-Year Fixed Effects

No

No

Yes

Yes

R2

0.000

0.287

0.147

0.434

N

533,433

533,433

533,433

533,433

Note: The dependent variable is log total water use of household i in billing period t.
All households in the experimental sample received a letter at the same time, but the
content of the letter varied. Loss Framing is an indicator for receiving a letter advertising
a $100 landscape rebate, but framed as a potential lost opportunity if not claimed. Social
Comparison is an indicator for receiving a letter identical to the control group but with
additional information about how household i’s use compares to an average household.
Combined is an indicator for receiving a letter combining the relevant features of Loss
Framing and Social Comparison treatments in the same letter. The omitted letter-type is
one that advertised a $100 landscape rebate framed as a potential gain, which we are
treating as the benchmark group. Post is an indicator for months after the treatment
letters were sent. All standard errors are clustered at the household level, i.e., the level
at which the randomization occurred. A total of 1,633 monthly bills (spanning 919
households) are excluded from this log use specification due to zero recorded monthly
use. In addition, all monthly bills for the month of February 2014 are excluded.
∗ p < 0.1, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗ ∗ ∗ p < 0.001

31

Appendix: Cost-Effectiveness Calculation
Brent (2016) estimates a version of a discrete-continuous choice model using data from households in Phoenix,
Arizona. Under this approach, households are first assumed to select a given landscape arrangement and
then, conditional on this arrangement, how much water to consume. The types of landscape arrangement are
discretized into three categories: dry (high water-efficiency), mixed, or wet (low water efficiency) landscape
arrangements. The terms “dry”, “mixed,” and “wet” are not merely colloquial in Brent (2016). They
correspond to a time series pattern of a household’s landscape, which is scored using a vegetation index to
reflect water intensity.
After coding all households into one of the three categories, Brent (2016) estimates conditional water demand
functions (crucially, conditioning on landscape type), the propensity to change landscape from wet to dry,
and the change in water demand due to changing landscape. This final piece directly informs our interest
in the economic significance of our own results on adoption of drought-resistant landscaping. In particular,
Brent (2016) finds that households moving from the wet to the dry landscape group (an analogy to our turf
replacement) reduce their monthly water consumption by roughly 20%.
In Table 1a of Brent (2016), we see that the average monthly water use of mixed landscape households is
roughly 16,500 gallons, meaning that change from wet to dry landscaping amounts to a monthly water savings
of 3,300 gallons (or roughly 39,600 gallons annually) per converting household.41 Assuming that these
converting households are comparable to the households in our experiment42 that adopt drought-resistant turf,
the 29 additional turf replacements caused by receipt of the Loss Framing letter (relative to the counterfactual
of receiving the Gain Framing letter) would amount to 1,148,400 gallons of water saved annually43, an
estimate about four times higher than our earlier estimate using the evapotranspiration model, which would
imply a cost of approximately $2.52 for every thousand gallons saved.

41. Brent (2016) reports average use for this group in Table 1a in terms of centum cubic feet (CCF), which we convert to gallons –
1 CCF to 748 gallons.
42. Mapping changes in landscape type of the kind observed in our field experiment into changes in vegetation index scores (used in
Brent (2016)) is not possible as we do not have detailed geographic information on the households in our study. For this reason, our
preferred interpretation of this exercise is as qualitative. In addition, we do not know the current landscape stock of the households in
our experiment at the time of randomization, meaning we cannot ex-ante evaluate whether the average household in our experiment is
more like the wet, dry, or mixed households in Brent (2016). Finally, under the definition of conversion from wet landscape to dry
landscape defined in Brent (2016), 3% of households convert, which is approximately twice as large as the adoption rates that we
estimate in our setting.
43. 39,600 annual gallons saved per converting household * 29 converting households = 1,148,400 annual gallons saved.

i

Online Appendix: Figures and Tables

ii

Figure A1: Gain Framing Letter

Double-click to edit.
ROSS TOMMY E
10418 Colts Foot
Boerne, TX 78006-8519
SAWS Acct: 000138609-0138610-0001

March 24, 2014

YOU CAN HAVE A FREE $100 LANDSCAPE COUPON
Double-click
Dear ROSS
TOMMYto
E,
edit.
You have been specially selected to receive a free $100 WaterSaver Landscape Coupon from San
Antonio Water System (SAWS). Please apply for the coupon online by April 30, 2014 to take advantage of
this opportunity and learn about ways to save money and water.
This program gives you a $100 discount on drought-tolerant plants that are extremely well suited to your
San Antonio property. This allows you to turn part of your traditional lawn into an attractive, droughttolerant garden that requires less water. This program should also help you to reduce your water bills. No
matter what type of property you have, you can benefit from this coupon.
WHAT YOU NEED TO DO:
Website: Go online to www.saws.org/coupon to complete an application. Your coupon will arrive in the
mail.
Telephone: Call us at 210-704-SAVE if you have questions.
NEXT STEPS:
After you have removed 200 square feet of grass and capped the irrigation in the new bed, redeem your
coupon at any of the participating retailers. You may also request a free expert landscape consultation to
give you planting tips, to offer suggestions on where to put the new bed, and to check your irrigation
system by calling the number listed above. The consultant will also provide you with other tips to save
even more money on your water bills.
Thank you for participating in this program and for helping to conserve a valuable resource.
Sincerely,
Vickie Castilleja
Conservation Planner

2800 U.S. Hwy. 281 North

P.O. Box 2449 San Antonio, TX 78298 2449 www.saws.org

iii

Double-click to edit.
ROSS TOMMY E
Figure A2: Key Content Variation Across Treatments
10418 Colts Foot
Boerne, TX 78006-8519
SAWS Acct: 000138609-0138610-0001
Gain-Framing Letter

March 24, 2014

YOU CAN HAVE A FREE $100 LANDSCAPE COUPON
Double-click
Dear ROSS
TOMMYto
E,
edit.
You have been specially selected to receive a free $100 WaterSaver Landscape Coupon from San
March
24, 2014
Antonio Water System (SAWS). Please apply for the coupon online by April 30, 2014 to take
advantage
of
Double-click
to edit.
CASEY
SHERRY
R
this opportunity and learn about ways to save money and water.
25606 Desert Rainbow
Boerne,
TX 78006-8569
This
program
gives you a $100 discount on drought-tolerant plants that are extremely well suited to your
SAWS
Acct:
000138605-0138606-0001
Loss-Framing
Lettertraditional lawn into an attractive, droughtSan Antonio property. This allows you to turn
part of your
tolerant garden that requires less water. This program should also help you to reduce your water bills. No
matter what
of LOSE
property
you have,
you can
benefitAfrom
this coupon.
DOtype
NOT
YOUR
CHANCE
TO HAVE
FREE
$100 LANDSCAPE COUPON
Double-click
to R,
Dear CASEY
SHERRY
WHAT YOU NEED TO DO:
edit.
You have been specially selected to receive a free $100 WaterSaver Landscape Coupon
from
San
March
24,in2014
Website:
Go online
to (SAWS).
www.saws.org/coupon
to the
complete
an
application.
Your
coupon
will
arrive
the
Antonio
Water
System
Please
apply
for
coupon
on-line
by
April
30,
2014,
or
you
will
lose
this
Double-click
to edit. DANETTE
ANDERSON
SHEILA
mail.
opportunity
andSpgs
forego a chance to learn about ways to save money and water.
11214
Anaqua
Telephone:
Call us at 210-704-SAVE if you have questions.
Boerne, TX 78006-8493
This program
gives you a $100 discount on drought-tolerant plants that are extremely well suited to your
SAWS
Acct:: 000603764-0109457-0002
NEXT STEPS
Social Comparison Letter
San Antonio property. This allows you to turn part of your traditional lawn into an attractive, droughttolerant garden that requires less water. This program should also help you to reduce your water bills. No
After you have removed
200CAN
square
feetAofFREE
grass and
capped
the irrigation in the new bed, redeem your
YOU
HAVE
$100
LANDSCAPE
matter what type of property
you have,
you can benefit
from
this coupon. COUPON
coupon at any of the participating retailers. You may also request a free expert landscape consultation to
give you
planting tips,
to offer
suggestions
on where to put the new bed, and to check your irrigation
Double-click
to edit.
Dear
ANDERSON
SHEILA
DANETTE
,
system
by
calling
the
number
listed
above.
The
consultant will also provide you with other tips to save
WHAT YOU NEED TO DO:
even
more
money
on
your
water
bills.
You have been specially selected to receive a free $100 WaterSaver Landscape Coupon from San
Website:
Go online
www.saws.org/coupon
to complete
an application.
Your coupon
arrive
in the
Antonio
Water
Systemto(SAWS).
We have selected
you because
you used 87593
gallonswill
more
water
in
Thank
you for participating in this program and for helping to conserve a valuable resource.
mail. than
2013
the average home in San Antonio.
Telephone: Call us at 210-704-SAVE if you have questions.
March 24, 2014
Sincerely,
Please
apply online
by April 30, 2014 to take advantage of this opportunity and learn about ways to save
Double-click
to edit.
MCCALL
MATT
NEXT STEPS
:
money
and water.
678 Rosewood
Vickie
CastillejaAve
Boerne,
78006-2132
Conservation
Planner
After
youTX
have
removed
square
feet on
of grass
and capped
the irrigation
the new well
bed,suited
redeem
your
This
program
gives
you a200
$100
discount
drought-tolerant
plants
that are in
extremely
to your
SAWS
Acct:
000605577-0189153-0002
Combined
Framing
Letter a free expert landscape consultation to
coupon
at
any
of
the
participating
retailers.
You
may
also
request
San Antonio property. This allows you to turn part of your traditional lawn into an attractive, droughtgive yougarden
planting
to offer
whereshould
to putalso
the help
new you
bed,toand
to check
your bills.
irrigation
tolerant
thattips,
requires
lesssuggestions
water. This on
program
reduce
your water
No
Otype
NOT
LOSE
YOUR
CHANCE
TO
HAVE
Afrom
FREE
$100
LANDSCAPE
systemwhat
byDcalling
number
above.
The
consultant
will coupon.
also provide
you withCOUPON
other tips to save
matter
ofthe
property
youlisted
have,
you can
benefit
this
even more money on your water bills.
Double-click
Dear MCCALL
MATT ,
Thank
you
for participating
in this program and for helping to conserve a valuable resource.
edit.
W
HAT to
YOU
NEED
TO DO:
You have been specially selected to receive a free $100 WaterSaver Landscape Coupon from San
Sincerely,
Website:
Go online
www.saws.org/coupon
to complete
an application.
Your gallons
coupon more
will arrive
in per
the
Antonio Water
Systemto(SAWS).
We have selected
you because
you use 72635
water
2800 U.S. Hwy. 281 North P.O. Box 2449 San Antonio, TX 78298 2449 www.saws.org
mail.
year than the average home in San Antonio.
Vickie Castilleja
Telephone:
Call us at 210-704-SAVE if you have questions.
Conservation
Planner
Please apply online
by April 30, 2014, or you will lose this opportunity and forego a chance to learn about
N
EXT STEPS
: money and water.
ways
to save
After
you havegives
removed
square
feet on
of grass
and cappedplants
the irrigation
the new well
bed,suited
redeem
This program
you a200
$100
discount
drought-tolerant
that are in
extremely
to your
your
coupon
at
any
of
the
participating
retailers.
You
may
also
request
a
free
expert
landscape
consultation
to
San Antonio property. This allows you to turn partivof your traditional lawn into an attractive, droughtgive
you
planting
tips,
to
offer
suggestions
on
where
to
put
the
new
bed,
and
to
check
your
irrigation
tolerant garden that requires less water. This program should also help you to reduce your water bills. No
system
by calling
number
listed
above.
Thebenefit
consultant
will coupon.
also provide you with other tips to save
matter what
type ofthe
property
you
have,
you can
from this
even more money on your water bills.
Thank
you NEED
for participating
in this program and for helping to conserve a valuable resource.
WHAT YOU
TO DO:

Frequency Across Treatments
.05
.1
.15

.2

Figure A3: Treatment Assignment (Proportion) by Local Decile of Age of Home

0
2
1
3
3
1
0
2

2
1
3
0

0
3
2
1

1
3
0
2

3
2
0
1

0
1
2
3

2
1
3
0

2
1
3
0

0

0
2
1
3

1

2

3

4
5
6
7
8
Pre-Treatment Decile of Age of Home

9

10

Note: The figure summarizes one measure of balance of treatment assignment along the decile of pre-treatment age
of home. Exact balance across all deciles and all 4 treatment conditions would require each decile represent 1/10 (the
solid red line) of the assigned households for each treatment. Actual treat assignment proportions can be identified
by the treatment number. The Gain Framing treatment is denoted as 0. The Loss Framing treatment is denoted as 1.
The Social Comparison treatment is denoted as 2. Finally, the Combined Framing treatment is denoted as 3.

v

Frequency Across Treatments
.05
.1
.15

.2

Figure A4: Treatment Assignment (Proportion) by Local Decile of Parcel Area

0
2
3
1

3
2
0
1

2
1
0
3

2
1
3
0

2
1
0
3

1
0
3
2

3
0
1
2

1
0
3
2

3
2
1
0

0

1
3
0
2

1

2

3

4
5
6
7
8
Pre-Treatment Decile of Parcel Area

9

10

Note: The figure summarizes one measure of balance of treatment assignment along the decile of pre-treatment
parcel area of the home (in square feet). Exact balance across all deciles and all 4 treatment conditions would
require each decile represent 1/10 (the solid red line) of the assigned households for each treatment. Actual treat
assignment proportions can be identified by the treatment number. The Gain Framing treatment is denoted as 0. The
Loss Framing treatment is denoted as 1. The Social Comparison treatment is denoted as 2. Finally, the Combined
Framing treatment is denoted as 3.

vi

Frequency Across Treatments
.05
.1
.15

.2

Figure A5: Treatment Assignment (Proportion) by Local Decile of Total Value of Home

3
1
0
2

2
3
0
1

2
1
0
3

1
0
2
3

2
0
3
1

1
3
2
0

3
0
2
1

0
3
1
2

1
3
2
0

0

1
3
0
2

1

2

3
4
5
6
7
8
Pre-Treatment Decile of Total Value of Home

9

10

Note: The figure summarizes one measure of balance of treatment assignment along the decile of pre-treatment
total value of the home (in U.S. dollars). Exact balance across all deciles and all 4 treatment conditions would
require each decile represent 1/10 (the solid red line) of the assigned households for each treatment. Actual treat
assignment proportions can be identified by the treatment number. The Gain Framing treatment is denoted as 0. The
Loss Framing treatment is denoted as 1. The Social Comparison treatment is denoted as 2. Finally, the Combined
Framing treatment is denoted as 3.

vii

Frequency Across Treatments
.05
.1
.15

.2

Figure A6: Treatment Assignment (Proportion) by Local Decile of Winter Water Use

0
3
1
2

0
1
2
3

3
2
1
0

0
3
1
2
0
2
1
3

1
3
2
0

1
2
0
3

2
3
1
0

0
3
2
1

0

2
3
1
0

1

2

3
4
5
6
7
8
Pre-Treatment Decile of Average Water Use (Winter)

9

10

Note: The figure summarizes one measure of balance of treatment assignment along the decile of pre-treatment
Winter 2013 average water use (in gallons). Exact balance across all deciles and all 4 treatment conditions would
require each decile represent 1/10 (the solid red line) of the assigned households for each treatment. Actual treat
assignment proportions can be identified by the treatment number. The Gain Framing treatment is denoted as 0. The
Loss Framing treatment is denoted as 1. The Social Comparison treatment is denoted as 2. Finally, the Combined
Framing treatment is denoted as 3.

viii

Table A1: Age of Home Decile by Treatment Assigned
Gain Framing

Loss Framing

Social Comparison

Combined Framing

1th Decile

753

729

731

725

2th Decile

596

622

631

603

3th Decile

480

462

478

459

4th Decile

602

624

599

636

5th Decile

571

527

535

546

6th Decile

617

650

582

617

7th Decile

471

482

486

473

8th Decile

569

559

614

620

9th Decile

565

558

552

541

10th Decile

557

571

573

559

Sample Size

5,781

5,784

5,781

5,779

Note: Each row represents a decile of home age. A total of 157 households are missing data on the year
their home was built (used to construct home age). Of these 157, 40 are in the Gain Framing treatment,
35 are in Loss Framing treatment, 38 are in the Social Comparison treatment, and the remaining 44
are in the Combined Framing treatment. Each column represents one of the four treatment groups.
All households in the water utility’s service area received a letter advertising a $100 landscape rebate
good towards the purchase of drought-resistant plants, but the additional content varied by treatment.
The Gain Framing treatment describes households who received a letter advertising a $100 landscape
rebate framed as a potential gain if claimed (this serves as our benchmark group throughout). The Loss
Framing treatment mirrored the Gain Framing treatment, but framed the $100 landscape rebate as a
potential lost opportunity if not claimed. The Social Comparison treatment mirrored the Gain Framing
treatment with additional information about how household i’s use in the previous year compares to an
average household served by the water utility. Finally, the Combined Framing treatment combines the
relevant features of Loss Framing and Social Comparison treatments in the same letter. All households
in the sample used substantially more water than the average household served by the water utility, so
the Social Comparison always told households how much more water they had used in the previous
year relative to the average household.

ix

Table A2: Parcel Area Decile by Treatment Assigned
Gain Framing

Loss Framing

Social Comparison

Combined Framing

1th Decile

570

610

545

601

2th Decile

625

555

591

557

3th Decile

567

560

581

617

4th Decile

585

585

586

574

5th Decile

553

594

617

566

6th Decile

567

580

624

559

7th Decile

588

601

569

573

8th Decile

602

568

552

604

9th Decile

591

592

567

576

10th Decile

573

574

587

596

Sample Size

5,821

5,819

5,819

5,823

Note: Each row represents a decile of parcel area. Each column represents one of the four treatment
groups. All households in the water utility’s service area received a letter advertising a $100 landscape
rebate good towards the purchase of drought-resistant plants, but the additional content varied by
treatment. The Gain Framing treatment describes households who received a letter advertising a $100
landscape rebate framed as a potential gain if claimed (this serves as our benchmark group throughout).
The Loss Framing treatment mirrored the Gain Framing treatment, but framed the $100 landscape
rebate as a potential lost opportunity if not claimed. The Social Comparison treatment mirrored the
Gain Framing treatment with additional information about how household i’s use in the previous year
compares to an average household served by the water utility. Finally, the Combined Framing treatment
combines the relevant features of Loss Framing and Social Comparison treatments in the same letter.
All households in the sample used substantially more water than the average household served by the
water utility, so the Social Comparison always told households how much more water they had used in
the previous year relative to the average household.

x

Table A3: Total Home Value Decile by Treatment Assigned
Gain Framing

Loss Framing

Social Comparison

Combined Framing

1th Decile

577

582

560

606

2th Decile

572

600

561

594

3th Decile

587

548

598

595

4th Decile

568

602

610

549

5th Decile

594

610

580

544

6th Decile

604

540

614

570

7th Decile

579

588

579

583

8th Decile

591

579

572

588

9th Decile

590

563

567

609

10th Decile

559

607

578

585

Sample Size

5,821

5,819

5,819

5,823

Note: Each row represents a decile of total home value in U.S. dollars. Each column represents one of
the four treatment groups. All households in the water utility’s service area received a letter advertising
a $100 landscape rebate good towards the purchase of drought-resistant plants, but the additional
content varied by treatment. The Gain Framing treatment describes households who received a letter
advertising a $100 landscape rebate framed as a potential gain if claimed (this serves as our benchmark
group throughout). The Loss Framing treatment mirrored the Gain Framing treatment, but framed the
$100 landscape rebate as a potential lost opportunity if not claimed. The Social Comparison treatment
mirrored the Gain Framing treatment with additional information about how household i’s use in the
previous year compares to an average household served by the water utility. Finally, the Combined
Framing treatment combines the relevant features of Loss Framing and Social Comparison treatments in
the same letter. All households in the sample used substantially more water than the average household
served by the water utility, so the Social Comparison always told households how much more water
they had used in the previous year relative to the average household.

xi

Table A4: Winter Average Water Use Decile by Treatment Assigned
Gain Framing

Loss Framing

Social Comparison

Combined Framing

1th Decile

642

624

600

633

2th Decile

558

568

609

573

3th Decile

606

603

602

582

4th Decile

568

591

602

610

5th Decile

538

516

524

497

6th Decile

655

636

593

640

7th Decile

551

582

553

578

8th Decile

545

546

591

574

9th Decile

572

606

572

560

10th Decile

586

547

573

576

Sample Size

5,821

5,819

5,819

5,823

Note: Each row represents a decile of winter average household water use. Each column represents
one of the four treatment groups. All households in the water utility’s service area received a letter
advertising a $100 landscape rebate good towards the purchase of drought-resistant plants, but the
additional content varied by treatment. The Gain Framing treatment describes households who received
a letter advertising a $100 landscape rebate framed as a potential gain if claimed (this serves as our
benchmark group throughout). The Loss Framing treatment mirrored the Gain Framing treatment, but
framed the $100 landscape rebate as a potential lost opportunity if not claimed. The Social Comparison
treatment mirrored the Gain Framing treatment with additional information about how household i’s
use in the previous year compares to an average household served by the water utility. Finally, the
Combined Framing combines treatment the relevant features of Loss Framing and Social Comparison
treatments in the same letter. All households in the sample used substantially more water than the
average household served by the water utility, so the Social Comparison always told households how
much more water they had used in the previous year relative to the average household.

xii

Table A5: Impact of Treatment Letters on Rebate Request — Logit

Loss Framing
Social Comparison
Combined Framing
Gain Framing / Constant

Controls
N

(1)

(2)

0.157

0.151

(0.145)

(0.145)

-0.158

-0.158

(0.156)

(0.156)

0.326**

0.330**

(0.140)

(0.140)

-4.154***

-4.300***

(0.106)

(0.601)

No

Table 1 Covariates

23,282

23,125

Note: The dependent variable is an indicator for whether household
i requested any rebates. All households in the experimental sample
received a letter at the same time, but the content of the letter varied.
Loss Framing is an indicator for receiving a letter advertising a $100
landscape rebate, but framed as a potential lost opportunity if not
claimed. Social Comparison is an indicator for receiving a letter
identical to the control group but with additional information about
how household i’s use compares to an average household. Combined
Framing is an indicator for receiving a letter combining the relevant
features of Loss Framing and Social Comparison treatments in the
same letter. The Gain Framing coefficient is the constant in the logit
regression and denotes letters that advertised a $100 landscape rebate
framed as a potential gain, which we are treating as the benchmark
group. All standard errors are robust to heteroskedasticity. Control
variables include the full set of variables on which randomization
was blocked, in particular: the year the home was built, household
parcel size, household total value, average water use in winter 2013,
and average water use in summer 2013. In addition, we include
an indicator for whether the household had a full 24 months of
billing history or not. The addition of control for the age of the
home reduces the sample size by 157 households, which are those
households where the year the home was built is unavailable.
∗ p < 0.1, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗ ∗ ∗ p < 0.001

xiii

Table A6: Impact of Treatment Letters on Rebate Request — Probit

Loss Framing
Social Comparison
Combined Framing
Gain Framing / Constant

Controls
N

(1)

(2)

0.062

0.060

(0.057)

(0.058)

-0.061

-0.060

(0.061)

(0.061)

0.130**

0.135**

(0.056)

(0.056)

-2.158***

-2.214***

(0.042)

(0.220)

No

Table 1 Covariates

23,282

23,125

Note: The dependent variable is an indicator for whether household
i requested any rebates.. All households in the experimental sample
received a letter at the same time, but the content of the letter varied.
Loss Framing is an indicator for receiving a letter advertising a $100
landscape rebate, but framed as a potential lost opportunity if not
claimed. Social Comparison is an indicator for receiving a letter
identical to the control group but with additional information about
how household i’s use compares to an average household. Combined
Framing is an indicator for receiving a letter combining the relevant
features of Loss Framing and Social Comparison treatments in the
same letter. The Gain Framing coefficient is the constant in the probit
regression and denotes letters that advertised a $100 landscape rebate
framed as a potential gain, which we are treating as the benchmark
group. All standard errors are robust to heteroskedasticity. Control
variables include the full set of variables on which randomization
was blocked, in particular: the year the home was built, household
parcel size, household total value, average water use in winter 2013,
and average water use in summer 2013. In addition, we include
an indicator for whether the household had a full 24 months of
billing history or not. The addition of control for the age of the
home reduces the sample size by 157 households, which are those
households where the year the home was built is unavailable.
∗ p < 0.1, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗ ∗ ∗ p < 0.001

xiv

Table A7: Impact of Treatment Letters on Rebate Redemption — Logit

Loss Framing
Social Comparison
Combined Framing
Gain Framing / Constant

(1)

(2)

0.726**

0.731**

(0.296)

(0.297)

0.346

0.345

(0.318)

(0.318)

0.536*

0.538*

(0.306)

(0.306)

-5.833***

-5.202***

(0.243)

(0.369)

No

Table 1 Covariates

23,282

22,742

Controls
N

Note: The dependent variable is an indicator for whether household
i redeemed any rebates. All households in the experimental sample
received a letter at the same time, but the content of the letter varied.
Loss Framing is an indicator for receiving a letter advertising a $100
landscape rebate, but framed as a potential lost opportunity if not
claimed. Social Comparison is an indicator for receiving a letter
identical to the control group but with additional information about
how household i’s use compares to an average household. Combined
Framing is an indicator for receiving a letter combining the relevant
features of Loss Framing and Social Comparison treatments in the
same letter. The Gain Framing coefficient is the constant in the logit
regression and denotes letters that advertised a $100 landscape rebate
framed as a potential gain, which we are treating as the benchmark
group. All standard errors are robust to heteroskedasticity. Control
variables include the full set of variables on which randomization
was blocked, in particular: the year the home was built, household
parcel size, household total value, average water use in winter 2013,
and average water use in summer 2013. In addition, we include
an indicator for whether the household had a full 24 months of
billing history or not. The addition of control for the age of the
home reduces the sample size by 157 households, which are those
households where the year the home was built is unavailable.
∗ p < 0.1, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗ ∗ ∗ p < 0.001

xv

Table A8: Impact of Treatment Letters on Rebate Redemption — Probit

Loss Framing
Social Comparison
Combined Framing
Gain Framing / Constant

Controls
N

(1)

(2)

0.245**

0.250**

(0.099)

(0.100)

0.115

0.118

(0.105)

(0.106)

0.179*

0.184*

(0.102)

(0.102)

-2.757***

-2.543***

(0.079)

(0.120)

No

Table 1 Covariates

23,282

22,742

Note: The dependent variable is an indicator for whether household
i redeemed any rebates. All households in the experimental sample
received a letter at the same time, but the content of the letter varied.
Loss Framing is an indicator for receiving a letter advertising a $100
landscape rebate, but framed as a potential lost opportunity if not
claimed. Social Comparison is an indicator for receiving a letter
identical to the control group but with additional information about
how household i’s use compares to an average household. Combined
Framing is an indicator for receiving a letter combining the relevant
features of Loss Framing and Social Comparison treatments in the
same letter. The Gain Framing coefficient is the constant in the probit
regression and denotes letters that advertised a $100 landscape rebate
framed as a potential gain, which we are treating as the benchmark
group. All standard errors are robust to heteroskedasticity. Control
variables include the full set of variables on which randomization
was blocked, in particular: the year the home was built, household
parcel size, household total value, average water use in winter 2013,
and average water use in summer 2013. In addition, we include
an indicator for whether the household had a full 24 months of
billing history or not. The addition of control for the age of the
home reduces the sample size by 157 households, which are those
households where the year the home was built is unavailable.
∗ p < 0.1, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗ ∗ ∗ p < 0.001

xvi

Table A9: Impact of Letter Treatments on Water Use (Percentage Change Specification)

Loss Framing X Post
Social Comparison X Post
Combined Framing X Post
Post
Loss Framing
Social Comparison
Combined Framing
Gain Framing

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

-0.011

-0.013

-0.011

-0.013

(0.015)

(0.015)

(0.015)

(0.015)

-0.009

-0.009

-0.009

-0.009

(0.009)

(0.009)

(0.009)

(0.009)

-0.012

-0.014

-0.012

-0.014

(0.010)

(0.010)

(0.010)

(0.010)

0.048***

0.049***

-0.190***

0.209***

(0.007)

(0.007)

(0.016)

(0.009)

0.009

0.009

(0.015)

(0.015)

0.007

0.007

(0.009)

(0.009)

0.012

0.012

(0.010)

(0.010)

0.952***

0.853***

(0.007)

(0.008)

Household Fixed Effects

No

Yes

No

Yes

Month-Year Fixed Effects

No

No

Yes

Yes

R2

0.000

0.104

0.019

0.122

N

558,160

558,160

558,160

558,160

Note: The dependent variable is the level of water use of household i in billing
period t, normalized by the post-treatment average use in the Gain Framing treatment.
All households in the experimental sample received a letter at the same time, but
the content of the letter varied. Loss Framing is an indicator for receiving a letter
advertising a $100 landscape rebate, but framed as a potential lost opportunity if
not claimed. Social Comparison is an indicator for receiving a letter identical to the
control group but with additional information about how household i’s use compares
to an average household. Combined is an indicator for receiving a letter combining
the relevant features of Loss Framing and Social Comparison treatments in the same
letter. The omitted letter-type is one that advertised a $100 landscape rebate framed
as a potential gain, which we are treating as the benchmark group. Post is an indicator
for months after the treatment letters were sent. All standard errors are clustered at
the household level, i.e., the level at which the randomization occurred. The increase
in sample size in this table relative to Table 6 in the text is due to the inclusion of
1,633 monthly bills (spread across 919 households) with zero water use in a particular
month that are included.
∗ p < 0.1, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗ ∗ ∗ p < 0.001

xvii

Table A10: Impact of Letter Treatments on Water Use (Percentage Change Specification) — Excluding Zero Use

Loss Framing X Post
Social Comparison X Post
Combined Framing X Post
Post
Loss Framing
Social Comparison
Combined Framing
Gain Framing

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

-0.011

-0.012

-0.011

-0.012

(0.015)

(0.015)

(0.015)

(0.015)

-0.009

-0.009

-0.009

-0.009

(0.009)

(0.009)

(0.009)

(0.009)

-0.011

-0.013

-0.011

-0.013

(0.010)

(0.010)

(0.010)

(0.010)

0.052***

0.053***

-0.184***

-0.184***

(0.007)

(0.007)

(0.016)

(0.016)

0.009

0.009

(0.015)

(0.015)

0.006

0.007

(0.009)

(0.009)

0.012

0.012

(0.010)

(0.010)

0.953***

0.853***

(0.007)

(0.008)

Household Fixed Effects

No

Yes

No

Yes

Month-Year Fixed Effects

No

No

Yes

Yes

R2

0.000

0.104

0.019

0.122

N

556,527

556,527

556,527

556,527

Note: The dependent variable is the level of water use of household i in billing
period t, normalized by the post-treatment average use in the Gain Framing treatment.
All households in the experimental sample received a letter at the same time, but
the content of the letter varied. Loss Framing is an indicator for receiving a letter
advertising a $100 landscape rebate, but framed as a potential lost opportunity if
not claimed. Social Comparison is an indicator for receiving a letter identical to the
control group but with additional information about how household i’s use compares
to an average household. Combined is an indicator for receiving a letter combining
the relevant features of Loss Framing and Social Comparison treatments in the same
letter. The omitted letter-type is one that advertised a $100 landscape rebate framed
as a potential gain, which we are treating as the benchmark group. Post is an indicator
for months after the treatment letters were sent. All standard errors are clustered at
the household level, i.e., the level at which the randomization occurred. A total of
1,633 monthly bills (spanning 919 households) with a recorded water use of zero are
excluded from this specification.
∗ p < 0.1, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗ ∗ ∗ p < 0.001

xviii

Table A11: Impact of Letter Treatments on Water Use (Percentage Change Specification) — Excluding Outliers

Loss Framing X Post
Social Comparison X Post
Combined Framing X Post
Post
Loss Framing
Social Comparison
Combined Framing
Gain Framing

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

0.007

0.006

0.007

0.006

(0.006)

(0.006)

(0.006)

(0.006)

-0.013**

-0.012**

-0.014**

-0.013**

(0.006)

(0.006)

(0.006)

(0.006)

-0.007

-0.008

-0.007

-0.008

(0.006)

(0.006)

(0.006)

(0.005)

0.054***

0.054***

-0.183***

-0.187***

(0.004)

(0.004)

(0.005)

(0.005)

0.004

0.004

(0.006)

(0.006)

0.011*

0.011*

(0.006)

(0.006)

0.008

0.008

(0.006)

(0.006)

0.909***

0.815***

(0.004)

(0.005)

Household Fixed Effects

No

Yes

No

Yes

Month-Year Fixed Effects

No

No

Yes

Yes

R2

0.002

0.339

0.131

0.475

N

547,056

547,056

547,056

547,056

Note: The dependent variable is the level of water use of household i in billing
period t, normalized by the post-treatment average use in the Gain Framing treatment.
All households in the experimental sample received a letter at the same time, but
the content of the letter varied. Loss Framing is an indicator for receiving a letter
advertising a $100 landscape rebate, but framed as a potential lost opportunity if
not claimed. Social Comparison is an indicator for receiving a letter identical to the
control group but with additional information about how household i’s use compares
to an average household. Combined is an indicator for receiving a letter combining
the relevant features of Loss Framing and Social Comparison treatments in the same
letter. The omitted letter-type is one that advertised a $100 landscape rebate framed
as a potential gain, which we are treating as the benchmark group. Post is an indicator
for months after the treatment letters were sent. All standard errors are clustered at
the household level, i.e., the level at which the randomization occurred. A total of
11,104 monthly bills (spanning 4,725 households) with a recorded water use in the
top or bottom one percent of use (i.e., outliers) are excluded from this specification.
∗ p < 0.1, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗ ∗ ∗ p < 0.001

xix

-.1

Estimated Average Treatment Effect
-.05
0
.05

.1

Figure A7: Estimated Average Treatment Effect of Loss Framing Letter on Log Water Use Over Time

-13-12 -11 -10 -9 -8 -7 -6 -5 -4 -3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9
Event Time
ATE

95% CI

Note: The figure depicts the average treatment effect of a Loss Framing letter, plotted in
event time. All estimates are regression-adjusted estimates after controlling for household
and month-year fixed effects. The dependent variable is log total water use of household i in
billing period t. All standard errors are clustered at the household level.

xx

-.1

Estimated Average Treatment Effect
-.05
0
.05

.1

Figure A8: Estimated Average Treatment Effect of Combined Framing Letter on Log Water Use Over Time

-13-12 -11 -10 -9 -8 -7 -6 -5 -4 -3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9
Event Time
ATE

95% CI

Note: The figure depicts the average treatment effect of a Combined Framing letter, plotted in
event time. All estimates are regression-adjusted estimates after controlling for household
and month-year fixed effects. The dependent variable is log total water use of household i in
billing period t. All standard errors are clustered at the household level.

xxi

