                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                              MEASURING “SCHMEDULING”

                                       Alex Rees-Jones
                                       Dmitry Taubinsky

                                      Working Paper 22884
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w22884


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                          December 2016, Revised August 2019




An earlier version of this paper circulated as “Heuristic Perceptions of the Income Tax: Evidence
and Implications for Debiasing.” We thank Doug Bernheim, Stefano DellaVigna, Emmanuel
Farhi, Xavier Gabaix, Alex Gelber, Jacob Goldin, Alex Imas, Damon Jones, Erzo F.P. Luttmer,
Kyle Rozema, Josh Schwartzstein, Richard Zeckhauser, Jonathan Zinman and many seminar
participants for helpful comments and advice. We thank Andrew Joung, Sargent Shriver, and
Linda Yao for excellent research assistance. We gratefully acknowledge research funding from
the Pension Research Council/Boettner Center for Pension and Retirement Research at the
Wharton School of the University of Pennsylvania, and from the Urban Institute. The opinions
expressed in this paper are solely the authors’, and do not necessarily reflect the views of any
individual or institution listed above, nor of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2016 by Alex Rees-Jones and Dmitry Taubinsky. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Measuring “Schmeduling”
Alex Rees-Jones and Dmitry Taubinsky
NBER Working Paper No. 22884
December 2016, Revised August 2019
JEL No. D03,D04,D1,H0,K34

                                          ABSTRACT

What mental models do individuals use to approximate their tax schedule? Using incentivized
forecasts of the U.S. Federal income tax schedule, we estimate the prevalence of the
“schmeduling” heuristics for constructing mental representations of nonlinear incentive schemes.
We find evidence of widespread reliance on the “ironing” heuristic, which linearizes the tax
schedule using one’s average tax rate. In our preferred specification, 43% of the population irons.
We find no evidence of reliance on the “spotlighting” heuristic, which linearizes the tax schedule
using one’s marginal tax rate. We show that the presence of ironing rationalizes a number of
empirical patterns in individuals’ perceptions of tax liability across the income distribution.
Furthermore, while our empirical framework accommodates a rich class of other misperceptions,
we find that a simple model including only ironers and correct forecasters accurately predicts
average underestimation of marginal tax rates. We replicate our finding of prevalent ironing, and a
lack of other systematic misperceptions, in a controlled experiment that studies real-stakes
decisions across exogenously varied tax schedules. To illustrate the policy relevance of the ironing
heuristic, we show that it augments the benefits of progressive taxation in a standard model of
earnings choice. We quantify these benefits in a calibrated model of the U.S. tax system.


Alex Rees-Jones
Cornell University
Economics Department
404 Uris Hall
Ithaca, NY 14850
and NBER
arr34@cornell.edu

Dmitry Taubinsky
University of California, Berkeley
Department of Economics
530 Evans Hall #3880
Berkeley, CA 94720-3880
and NBER
dmitry.taubinsky@berkeley.edu




A online appendix and survey appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w22884
1        Introduction
Financial incentives often feature nonlinearities, leading to complex decision environments. Eco-
nomic models of fully optimizing and fully informed decision-makers offer a rationale for this com-
plexity: in the presence of information asymmetries, standard results in mechanism design show
that the optimal incentive scheme is often nonlinear. In practice, however, understanding these in-
centives appears to be difficult for many decision-makers. For example, the challenges of optimizing
with nonlinear incentive schemes are starkly apparent in insurance plan choice (Bhargava et al.,
2017), cell-phone usage (Grubb and Osborne, 2015), and water and energy consumption (Carter
and Milon, 2005; Ito, 2014). In the context of taxation, a growing literature documents behavior
inconsistent with full optimization with respect to tax credits (Miller and Mumford, 2015; Feld-
man et al., 2016; Chetty and Saez, 2013; Chetty et al., 2013), and surveys of taxpayers document
misunderstanding of features of the income tax schedule (reviewed in section 2.2).1
        As recently shown by Farhi and Gabaix (2018) and others,2 the canonical mechanism-design
frameworks for optimal taxation can be modified to account for these types of mistakes, with the
modifications leading to new and quantitatively important implications for public policy. However,
a reasonably precise understanding of the mistakes, and how they vary with policy parameters, is
necessary to implement the “behavioral sufficient statistics” approach of these frameworks. From
an empirical and practical standpoint, this necessarily complicates policy analysis because subop-
timal responses can arise from many widely varied heuristics. However, in cases where it can be
established that people rely on a small set of parsimoniously-modeled heuristics, it is possible to
measure and integrate them into standard mechanism design.
        In this paper, we undertake this task for two potentially focal approaches to simplifying a non-
linear incentive schedule: the models of “ironing” and “spotlighting” discussed and popularized in
Liebman and Zeckhauser’s “Schmeduling” (2004).3 These models capture individuals’ tendency
to approximate complex, non-linear schedules with less complex linear ones. When applying the
spotlighting heuristic, the individual assumes that the slope of the linearized schedule is equal to
his marginal incentive. When applying the ironing heuristic, the individual assumes that the slope
of the linearized schedule is equal to his average incentive. These heuristics—and in particular
ironing—capture the pervasive difficulty of “thinking on the margin.”4 Due in part to their intu-
itive appeal, the schmeduling heuristics are often suggested as potential mechanisms underlying
misoptimized responses to tax incentives (see, e.g., Congdon et al., 2009; Finkelstein, 2009; Chetty
    1
     Supporting the notion that understanding the tax schedule is challenging, a recent literature documents large
cognitive costs from complex tax filing (see, e.g., Benzarti, 2017; Aghion et al., 2017).
   2
     See, e.g., Gerritsen (2016), Blomquist and Micheletto (2006), Kanbur et al. (2008), Kanbur et al. (2006), as well
as Bernheim and Taubinsky (2018) for a review.
   3
     See also Sobel (1984) for an early formulation of ironing by consumers facing nonlinear price schedules.
   4
     The difficulty of thinking on the margin should be apparent to anyone who has taught undergraduate microe-
conomics classes. Beyond such anecdotes, this difficulty has been documented in high-stakes managerial decisions
about product pricing (see, e.g., Altomonte et al., 2015).



                                                          1
et al., 2009; Miller and Mumford, 2015; Rees-Jones and Taubinsky, 2018). But despite the frequent
discussion of these heuristics in the behavioral public economics literature, little existing evidence
informs their importance as an account of tax misperceptions.
   We report on two complementary experimental studies that we designed to identify individuals’
propensity to rely on the schmeduling heuristics. Study 1 relies on detailed survey elicitation of
individuals’ perceptions of the U.S. Federal income tax schedule. The key innovation of the approach
in this study arises from the observation that direct elicitation of individuals’ perceptions of broader
regions of the tax schedule is extremely useful for separately identifying the schmeduling heuristics
from closely related candidate forms of misunderstanding. Such elicitation makes it possible to
study how variation in respondents’ average and marginal tax rates relates to their tax forecasts
for a given level of income. In Study 2, individuals make incentivized choices between receiving
additional taxable or non-taxable income, and face randomly assigned tax schedules. This design
allows us to infer tax perceptions from choice behavior, and to study how tax perceptions respond
to exogenous variation in average and marginal tax rates.
   In section 2 we derive a series of distinguishing predictions for schmedulers’ beliefs about differ-
ent regions of the tax schedule. These predictions describe the biases that arise when forecasting
one’s own marginal tax rate, the steepness of the tax schedule over a broader region of incomes,
the tax liabilities of the relatively rich and the relatively poor and, importantly, how all of these
forecasts evolve with the respondent’s own income. For example, the ironing heuristic leads indi-
viduals to overestimate the taxes paid by low income earners and underestimate the taxes paid by
high income earners, though the overall perception of the tax burden on both the poor and the
rich is increasing in individuals’ incomes. Conversely, the spotlighting heuristic leads to average
underestimation of all tax burdens, with perceptions of the taxes paid by the poor decreasing in
respondents’ incomes. We show that measurements of these kinds of perceptions allow the rela-
tive propensity of each schmeduling heuristic to be separately identified from a rich class of other
candidate misunderstandings.
   In section 3, we describe the design and results of Study 1. We deployed an incentivized tax-
forecasting task to an approximately representative sample of 4,197 U.S. taxpayers. Respondents
forecast the tax due by an example taxpayer who faces an income different from their own, but
who is otherwise constructed to be very similar to themselves on tax-relevant dimensions. Forecasts
are repeatedly elicited for different potential income amounts for the example taxpayer, facilitating
inference on the structure of the schedule that the respondents believe is in place.
   Using these data, we examine the basic structure of perceptions of the U.S. income tax schedule.
Consistent with prior work, we find that taxpayers underestimate the marginal tax rates that
apply in their own tax brackets. Examining perceptions beyond the respondent’s own bracket,
we find a systematic tendency to overestimate the taxes paid by the comparatively poor, to a
degree that becomes more severe as respondents’ own income increases. Conversely, we find a


                                                   2
systematic tendency to underestimate the taxes paid by the comparatively rich, to a degree that
becomes less severe as respondents’ own income increases. Taken together, these results are largely
consistent with the predictions of ironing, are inconsistent with the predictions of spotlighting, and
are inconsistent with models in which misperceptions are invariant to respondents’ incomes.
       Motivated by these reduced-form results, we estimate a structural model of tax perceptions that
embeds populations of ironers, spotlighters, correct forecasters, and a rich class of other candidate
mistakes. We find that tax perceptions are best explained by a model with approximately 43% of
filers adopting the ironing heuristic and no filers adopting the spotlighting heuristic. The remaining
filers appear to overestimate taxes on most of the population by a relatively constant amount,
and underestimate taxes applicable to the top 5 percent of the population. On average, these
remaining filers have perceptions of marginal tax rates not far off from the truth. These results are
qualitatively unchanged in robustness checks that consider various sample restrictions or possible
misunderstandings of the survey prompt.
       Despite the many different ways in which taxpayers could misperceive taxes, we find that a
model accounting for only our estimated rate of ironing is able to precisely explain the systematic
underestimation of marginal tax rates in one’s own tax bracket. This result holds not only when
ironing propensity is estimated using our full sample of elicited perceptions, but also in an out-
of-sample fit assessment that estimates schmeduling propensity while excluding forecasts from the
respondent’s own bracket. This validates our use of individuals’ perceptions of broader regions
of the tax schedule to help estimate the heuristic processes that govern more local perceptions.
Furthermore, this suggests that a parsimonious two-type model of ironers and correct forecasters
provides a satisfactory account of systematic marginal tax rate misperceptions.
       Of course, predicting field behaviors based on our survey study requires caution (see Bernheim
and Taubinsky (2018) for a critical discussion of the use of belief elicitations in behavioral welfare
analyses). Individuals may not necessarily act on the beliefs that they state, or they may be
more prone to think about marginal tax rates when considering an incremental increase in taxable
income.5 Furthermore, misperceptions could be endogenous to the tax schedule; for example,
individuals might be less likely to rely on the ironing heuristic if the tax schedule were simplified.
       To explore these issues, and to examine the robustness of our results beyond our particular
elicitation context, we conducted an incentivized online experiment that reveals the rate of ironing
through individuals’ choices. In Study 2, we presented 3,130 participants with a choice between
an incremental contribution to a taxable account or an incremental contribution to an untaxed
account. Participants were randomized into one of 54 possible tax schedules, which generated
exogenous variation in both marginal and average tax rates. The tax schedules also varied in
complexity: half of the participants were assigned to tax schedules with two tax brackets, while
half were assigned to tax schedules with five tax brackets. Our design closely relates to work by
   5
    A survey study eliciting marginal tax rates could potentially mitigate this concern, but would face other severe
challenges to identification. See the discussion in Section 2.3.


                                                         3
de Bartolome (1995), which uses a single tax schedule and shows that individuals underreact to its
marginal tax rates. By contrast, we exploit exogenous variation in both average and marginal tax
rates to quantify how much of that underreaction may be attributed to ironing.
    We report the results of Study 2 in section 4. Similar to Study 1, we find substantial reliance on
the ironing heuristic: our primary estimates show that 9% of respondents correctly use the marginal
tax rate, 35% of respondents incorrectly use their average tax rate as if it were their marginal tax
rate, and the remainder are unresponsive to variation in either the average or marginal tax rate.
This pattern of results is consistent with a substantial fraction of respondents failing to attend to
taxes (a now-common finding in line with the work of Chetty et al., 2009), but with widespread
use of the ironing heuristic among those that do attend to the tax. We find no evidence of other
systematic misperceptions: a simple three-type model in which individuals either ignore variation
in tax schedules, iron, or react correctly explains over 87.5% of the variation in tax perceptions
arising from variation in schedules.
    We report two other findings that are relevant for assessing the psychological mechanisms driving
ironing. First, we find no evidence that the propensity to rely on the ironing heuristic is endogenous
to the complexity of the tax schedule. This casts some doubt on the possibility that use of the
ironing heuristic is a deliberate choice that depends on the tax system in place. Second, we find
that only 46% of participants choose to costlessly examine marginal tax rates while making their
decision. This suggests either that individuals are confident that information beyond the average
tax rate is not necessary for their decision, or that ironing is an automatic and habitual way of
representing the world—a “mental gap” (Handel and Schwartzstein, 2018).
    In section 5 we illustrate the implications of our findings for tax policy. We embed a population
of ironers in an otherwise standard model of income taxation building on, e.g., Mirrlees (1971)
and Saez (2001). In this model, ironing increases the welfare attained under a convex tax schedule
because reliance on this heuristic generates revenue in a progressive fashion. For the U.S. income tax
system, our preferred estimates imply that the presence of ironing increases welfare by an amount
equivalent to a 2.3% windfall in available government revenue—a quantitatively large effect both
in absolute and relative terms.6 Moving to analysis of policy reform, we find that ironing increases
the welfare costs of moving toward a flat tax. Because ironers do not underestimate marginal
tax rates in a flat tax system, moving to this system generates the additional cost of eliminating
the welfare-enhancing mistakes created by ironing. Our preferred estimates suggest that ironing
increases the welfare costs of moving from the U.S. tax schedule to a revenue-equivalent flat tax
by 14%. Moving to analyses in the tradition of Saez (2001) (and their behavioral extensions in
Farhi and Gabaix, 2018), we find that our estimated prevalence of ironing substantially increases
the optimal top marginal tax rate.
   6
     To illustrate, 2.3% of individual income tax return revenue in our year of study amounts to 32 billion dol-
lars—approximately half of the cost of programs such as the Earned Income Tax Credit ($68 billion in 2014) or the
child tax credit ($57 billion in 2014); for details and other useful benchmarks, see Congressional Budget Office (2013).


                                                           4
    In section 6, we conclude by highlighting what we view as the primary considerations of ex-
ternal validity when evaluating the implications of our results for policy analysis. We highlight
the elements of our analysis that we view as most, and least, susceptible to external validity con-
cerns, summarize the generalizable lessons for tax policy, and highlight productive paths for further
research.
    While economists traditionally favor revealed-preference analysis, recent works have argued that
direct belief elicitation serves a key function in economics: reported beliefs can often discriminate
between models that are indistinguishable from observed behavior alone (Manski, 2004; Gennaioli et
al., 2016). This logic is particularly relevant when studying misperceptions of income tax systems.
Existing quasi-experimental studies (e.g., Feldman et al., 2016) are qualitatively consistent with
the presence of ironing, but cannot identify ironing and spotlighting propensities or establish the
degree to which these heuristics offer a complete characterization of systematic misperceptions.
    We contribute to two distinct lines of research applying survey methods to questions in public
economics. First, our paper contributes to the existing literature on direct elicitation of tax per-
ceptions. Surveys of tax knowledge (e.g., Lewis, 1978; Fujii and Hawley, 1988) suggest that a key
prediction of ironing—underestimation of marginal tax rates—is common. We directly improve on
this literature by providing better powered estimates of marginal tax rate underestimation using
improved elicitation methods. But more importantly, we leverage elicited perceptions of taxes on
incomes outside of one’s bracket to identify the mechanisms driving tax rate misunderstanding.
Tests of tax understanding at different regions of the tax schedule, as in Blaufus et al. (2015) and
Gideon (2017), move in the direction of our empirical design, and suggest misperceptions of taxes
on the comparatively rich and poor that could arise from ironing. Yet as we show in Section 2, none
of the existing survey evidence is able to firmly distinguish ironing from other candidate models
(and indeed, this was not the goal of this previous work).
    Additionally, we relate to a recent literature that elicits individual beliefs about, and preferences
over, inequality (see, e.g., Cruces et al., 2013; Weinzierl, 2014; Kuziemko et al., 2015; Weinzierl,
2017; Alesina et al., 2018). This literature studies individuals’ preferences for redistribution and
their determinants. In contrast, we study individuals’ understanding of the economic incentives
generated by the tax systems in place—a necessary component for the integration of misperceptions
into optimal tax policy analysis.7 To the extent that beliefs about the taxes paid by others are of
direct interest (as they pertain to questions of policy support and political economy), our study
provides an unusually comprehensive study of the beliefs held by U.S. taxpayers.
   7
     Kuziemko et al. (2015) have one question pertaining to perceptions of tax rates: whether the top income tax
rates today are higher or lower than what they were in the 1950s and 1960s.




                                                       5
2      “Schmeduling” and its Predictions
2.1     Definitions

Liebman and Zeckhauser (2004) propose two compelling heuristics for decision-making with a non-
linear incentive schedule like the income tax. In summarizing these heuristics, we denote perceived
income tax schedules by T̃ (z|z ∗ ), and the true income tax schedules by T (z). These report the tax
due as a function of income (z), given the individual’s chosen income (z ∗ ).

Definition 1. The ironing heuristic arises when an individual uses the average price at the
point where he consumes to forecast prices at other consumption levels. In the tax context, this
corresponds to an individual knowing his average tax rate and applying that rate to any amount
                                             T (z ∗ )
of income. Formally, T̃I (z|z ∗ ) =            z∗       · z.

    As illustrated in Figure 1, use of the ironing heuristic corresponds to approximating the non-
linear tax schedule with a secant line drawn through one’s own position on the schedule and the
origin. As noted in Liebman and Zeckhauser, the reliance on this heuristic can be rationalized
given the manner in which tax information is often conveyed to taxpayers. Paystubs typically
present one’s gross earnings and the subtracted tax withholdings, making the average tax salient
and leaving the marginal tax rate unknown. Furthermore, at the time of completion of annual tax
returns, filers must calculate both their total annual taxable income as well as the total annual tax
due, again inviting assessment of the average tax rate. Taxpayers who find these numbers more
accessible could conceivably adopt this forecasting rule as a time-saving heuristic, allowing them
to approximate their own position on the schedule while accessing only a single, salient number.
Despite its convenience, reliance on this heuristic would result in misoptimized labor supply choices
on the intensive margin.

Definition 2. The spotlighting heuristic arises when an individual uses the local slope of his
price schedule to forecast prices at non-local levels. In the tax context, this corresponds to an
individual acting as if his own tax bracket extends to other regions of the tax schedule. Formally,
T̃S (z|z ∗ ) = T (z ∗ ) + T 0 (z ∗ ) · (z − z ∗ ).

    As illustrated in Figure 1, use of the spotlighting heuristic corresponds to approximating the
non-linear tax schedule with a tangent line drawn through one’s own position on the schedule. Use
of this heuristic can be rationalized by noticing that some individuals might take the time to learn
their own local region of the tax schedule—for example, by noting their past-years’ tax burden
and by looking up their statutory marginal tax rate—but might mistakenly forecast these local
parameters beyond the narrow region to which they apply. Compared to the ironing heuristic,
the usage of the spotlighting heuristic is somewhat more cognitively demanding, as it is requires
knowledge of two idiosyncratic parameters (one’s tax burden and marginal tax rate) rather than just
one (the average tax rate, in the case of ironing). Although this heuristic leads to (approximately)

                                                               6
optimized labor supply choices on the intensive margin, it would lead to incorrect labor supply
choices on the extensive margin.8
       Additionally, if taken literally, the use of this heuristic can result in the extreme prediction
that tax burdens on very low incomes are negative, whereas the ironing heuristic results in weakly
positive tax forecasts. An alternative model of this heuristic would replace negative tax forecasts
with forecasts of zero tax. As we will discuss in section 3.3.2, using this alternative definition has
minimal impact on our results.
       Several possible psychological frameworks could underlie these heuristics. One is the psycho-
logical literature that likens human judgments to those of a “naive intuitive statistician” (Fiedler
and Juslin, 2006). This literature argues that decision makers are often able to form reasonably
accurate forecasts of simple sample properties, such as frequencies or averages (for early examples,
see Spencer, 1961, 1963). However, they often fail to account for sampling biases or constraints
in such judgments. As summarized in Juslin et al. (2007), “people tend spontaneously to assume
that the samples they encounter are representative of the relevant populations.” Both schmeduling
heuristics may be considered specific examples of this general decision error. The decision-maker
correctly assess the average tax rate over either all dollars earned that year (in the case of ironing)
or over small changes to his own income (in the case of spotlighting), but then incorrectly applies
this average as the range is changed in a manner rendering their previously considered sample
non-representative.9
       Another possible foundation for these heuristics is the cognitive economy of linear approxima-
tions. Linearization is a common computational technique in economics and other disciplines; it is
possible that non-academics uses similar techniques more heuristically and less deliberately in their
day-to-day decisions. Other possible manifestations of this psychology include exponential growth
bias (Stango and Zinman, 2009; Levy and Tasoff, 2016). The bounded rationality model of Gabaix
(2014) features some of this psychology by assuming the individuals linearize the marginal benefits
of information acquisition or attention allocation; extensions of the model could potentially be used
to formalize linearization as a cognitive shortcut more generally.
       In general, we note that ironing and spotlighting are unlikely to be “primitive biases.” Con-
sequently, until the details of the underlying cognitive processes are fully understood, an analyst
must consider that reliance on these heuristic may be endogenous to features of the tax system.
We will directly test for this possibility in Study 2.


2.2      Predictions of Schmeduling

We now formalize a series of predictions aimed at illustrating the features of tax perceptions that
do, or do not, distinguish between these heuristics. In principle, the use of these heuristics can
   8
    See, e.g., Saez (2002) for a theory and quantification of the importance of extensive margin elasticities.
   9
    A potentially related psychology is narrow-bracketing, which is the tendency of people to treat different dimensions
of a decision separably, without considering how they interact with each other.


                                                           7
be examined at the individual level (related analyses will be presented in section 3.3.4). However,
in practice, common imperfections in survey responses—such as measurement error or rounding
heuristics—can substantially confound individual-level analyses. These issues lead us to formulate
our predictions with respect to the average tax schedule perceived by a population of heuristic
forecasters.
       We first analyze predictions about the levels of misperceptions, and then analyze predictions
about the slope of the misperceptions. We document these predictions for the empirically-relevant
case of progressive—i.e., convex—tax schedules. We also note that in addition to the predictions
spelled out here, both models make the assumption that the forecasted tax schedule is linear and
intersects the true one at the forecaster’s own income. We examine these assumptions in Section
3.3.4.

Prediction 1. Perceptions of taxes on low- and high-income filers.

1-I:           Ironers overestimate the taxes paid by low-income filers and underestimate the taxes
               paid by high-income filers.

1-S:           Spotlighters underestimate the taxes paid by both low- and high-income filers.

The reasoning behind Prediction 1 is apparent in Figure 1. At the individual-level, ironers overesti-
mate the taxes due for individuals with lower earnings than their own and underestimate the taxes
due for individuals with higher earnings than their own. When averaging the perceived schedules of
a population of ironers, this results in Prediction 1-I, with low- and high-income evaluated relative
to an appropriately weighted average of the incomes of the tax forecasters. In contrast, the forecast
corresponding to the spotlighting prediction is always below the true taxes due at the individual
level, resulting in Prediction 1-S.

Prediction 2. Perceptions of taxes on low- and high-income filers, by own income.

2-I:           Higher-income ironers exhibit more overestimation of the taxes paid by low-income filers
               and less underestimation of taxes paid by high-income filers.

2-S:           Higher-income spotlighters exhibit more underestimation of the taxes paid by low-
               income filers and less underestimation of taxes paid by high-income filers.

The reasoning behind Prediction 2 is again apparent in Figure 1. As the ironer’s income is increased,
the slope of the secant line increases, directly leading to Prediction 2-I. As the spotlighter’s income
is increased, the tangent line rotates upward, leading to Prediction 2-S.
       We now consider how the schmeduling heuristics influence perceptions of the steepness of the
tax schedule, both locally and more globally.

Prediction 3. Perceptions of marginal tax rates (MTRs).

                                                    8
3-I:           Ironers underestimate their own MTR.

3-S:           Spotlighters correctly estimate their own MTR.

Claim 3-S follows immediately from the definition of spotlighting: by assumption, spotlighters
know and apply their MTR. Turning to Prediction 3-I, we note that the definition of ironing
does not fundamentally require underestimation of MTRs, but that this underestimation arises for
progressive tax schedules, in which average tax rates (ATRs) are always lower than MTRs.
       As a means of characterizing perceptions of the “steepness” of a broader region of the tax sched-
                                                                                         T̃ (z2 |z ∗ )−T̃ (z1 |z ∗ )
ule, it is convenient to define the perceived slope over income range [z1 , z2 ] to be            z2 −z1             ,
                               T (z2 )−T (z1 )
and the actual slope to be         z2 −z1      .

Prediction 4. Perceived slope of tax schedule.

4-I:           Consider income range Z = [z, z̄] which satisfies zi∗ ∈ Z for all individuals i. Evaluated
               over Z, ironers’ perceived slope underestimates the actual slope.

4-S:           Consider income range Z = [z, z̄] which satisfies zi∗ ∈ Z for all individuals i. There
               exists a threshold z † ∈ Z such that spotlighters earning zi∗ ≤ z † underestimate the
               actual slope over Z, whereas spotlighters earning zi∗ > z † overestimate the actual slope.

As illustrated in Figure 1, the use of the ironing heuristic results in a linear approximation to the
schedule that ultimately is shallower than the schedule itself. Since the schedule is convex, treating
one’s average tax rate as the relevant slope for higher income values will result in an approximate
schedule that underestimates the highest taxes due, and concurrently is “flatter” than the true
schedule. In contrast, spotlighters’ perceptions of the average slope of the full tax schedule depend
more critically on their own income. For lower-income individuals, one’s own marginal tax rate
can be lower than the average slope of the entire schedule. However, for sufficiently high-income
individuals, this effect reverses, leading spotlighters to overestimate the average slope. This contrast
is displayed in the two examples of Figure 1.
       Moreover, because both marginal and average tax rates are rising with one’s own income in a
progressive tax system, the perceived slope over an income range will be increasing in the schmed-
uler’s income:

Prediction 5. Perceived slope of tax schedule, by own income.

5-I:           Ironers’ perceived slope over income range Z is increasing in their earnings, z ∗ .

5-S:           Spotlighters’ perceived slope over income range Z is increasing in their earnings, z ∗ .

While Prediction 5 does not distinguish between the use of the two heuristics, it does clearly
differentiate their use from correct forecasting, or from forecasting based on misperceptions of the
schedule that are not tied to one’s earnings.

                                                     9
       Summary of Existing Survey Evidence: Perceptions of the income tax have long been
of interest in public finance, with a literature on the survey measurement of these perceptions
extending back at least to the 1960s.10 While this literature has asked questions in some ways
related to our own, the different objectives of these papers lead them to collect data of limited
use in identifying the schmeduling heuristics. For example, early papers in this literature (Enrick,
1963, 1964; Wagstaff, 1965) assess if taxpayers know the size of their own tax bill—a feature of tax
perceptions for which ironing, spotlighting, and correct forecasting all make the same prediction.11
Later papers became more interested in assessing taxpayers’ understanding of their marginal tax
rate, which permits an assessment of Prediction 3. The early works of Gensemer et al. (1965) and
Brown (1969) document substantial misperceptions of marginal tax rates, with Brown documenting
a tendency towards marginal tax rate overestimation. Subsequent studies with substantially larger
samples have found average underestimation (Lewis, 1978; Fujii and Hawley, 1988), consistent with
Prediction 3-I and rejecting Prediction 3-S.12 However, viewed in isolation, such findings do not
clearly establish ironing as the mechanism driving this underestimation.
       Fewer results are available to assist in assessing Predictions 1, 2, 4, or 5. Blaufus et al. (2015) ask
a panel of German respondents about their perceptions of the taxes paid by those earning 10,000,
40,000, 300,000, or 2 million euros a year. They find evidence that the tax burden is overestimated
at the bottom of the scale and underestimated at the top of the scale, consistent with Prediction
I-1. Gideon (2017) finds that survey respondents tend to underestimate the top marginal tax rate, a
feature that could lead to underestimation of taxes paid by the rich (as in 1-I) and could arise from
an underestimation of slope of the full tax schedule (as in 4-I). Beyond results such as these, this
literature’s focus on perceptions of taxes at a smaller number of very specific, typically local points
results in a general inability to test the nuanced predictions that firmly separate the schmeduling
heuristics from other potential mechanisms. This motivates the design of our experiment, eliciting
the key class of data absent from this work: perceptions of taxes over a broader variety of incomes,
sampled with continuous support.


2.3       Identifying Schmeduling Propensities

Formally, we characterize the average perceived tax schedule as a mixture model of forecasting
types, given by
  10
     Appendix Table A1 provides a summary of the most relevant survey literature and indicates the schmeduling
predictions that this these papers inform.
  11
     For recent work further examining perceptions of average tax rates, see Ballard and Gupta (2018).
  12
     In more nuanced recent work, Gideon (2017) examines the accuracy of marginal tax rate perceptions across
the income distribution. He finds average underestimation of marginal tax rates for respondents with gross income
exceeding $50,000, and average overestimation for those of lower income.




                                                       10
         E[T̃ (z|z ∗ )|z, z ∗ ] = γI T̃I (z|z ∗ ) + γS T̃S (z|z ∗ ) +
                                                                        X                                 X
                                                                            ωk T̃k (z) + (1 − γI − γs −       ωk )T (z).   (1)
                                                                        k                                 k

In this model, γI denotes the fraction of individuals using the ironing heuristic and γS denotes
the fraction of individuals using the spotlighting heuristic. Non-schmeduling taxpayers may hold
                                                                                    P
alternative perceptions of the schedule (captured by the term                          k   γk T̃k (z)), with the remainder of
taxpayers adopting the correct tax schedule.
    We aim to make minimal assumptions about the structure of the alternative misperceptions
beyond explicitly specifying that they are not a function of earnings choice, and thus are not a
function of either the individual’s average or marginal tax rate. Misperceptions of this sort could
correspond to, e.g., average overestimation of the tax burden or a general tendency to underestimate
marginal tax rates. For example, T̃k could correspond to underestimation of all MTRs by 50%; that
is, T̃k = t0 + 21 T , for some constant t0 ∈ R. Note that although we think it most psychologically
natural to consider γI and γS as probabilities of pure ironing or spotlighting types, we could
instead interpret these parameters as weights in a representative agent model of partial ironing and
spotlighting.
    To obtain intuition for the data requirements for identifying equation (1), consider first a dataset
in which only perceptions of respondents’ own MTR under a fixed schedule are measured (i.e.,
d           ∗      ∗
dz E[T̃ (z|z )|z, z ]|z=z ).       Such observations are plainly insufficient to separately identify γI , γS ,
                         ∗
        P
and       k   ωk T̃k (z). To illustrate, note that correct average perceptions of MTRs could arise from
correct tax forecasting, or from spotlighting, or from some individuals underestimating their own
MTRs due to ironing while others over-estimate MTRs in a perfectly offsetting manner. As another
example, consider a group of individuals facing an average tax rate of 10% and an MTR of 20%,
but perceiving their MTR to be 15%. Such perceptions could be rationalized by a 50-50 mixture
of correct forecasters and ironers. However, they could also be rationalized by a 50-50 mixture of
correct forecasters and individuals who simply underestimate all MTRs by half; or by a 3:1 mixture
of correct forecasters and individuals who underestimate all MTRs by 75%.
    The “ideal” variation for identifying γI and γS is exogenous variation in the marginal and
average tax rates at z ∗ . This would generate exogenous variation in T̃I (z|z ∗ ) and T̃ (z|z ∗ ), which
would lead to clear identification of γI and γS . We employ this kind of exogenous variation in
Study 2.
    In Study 1, we work with the fixed U.S. income tax schedule, and thus cannot utilize this
ideal variation. Instead, we utilize variation in marginal and average tax rates that is obtained
from respondents’ own earned income z ∗ . Under the assumption that residual misperceptions
        ωk T̃k (z)) do not covary with z ∗ , the variation in z ∗ provides the needed variation in average
P
(   k
and marginal tax rates.



                                                                 11
         Formally, we elicit beliefs about T̃ (z|z ∗ ) across a joint distribution of (z, z ∗ ) spanning the rel-
evant range of each variable’s support. With such data, the analyst has access to the empirical
                d            ∗      ∗
moments        dz ∗ E[T̃ (z|z )|z, z ].   Both models of schmeduling offer different, full accounts of the struc-
ture of this derivative. For example, predictions 1 and 2 show that the models predict different signs
for this derivative for z < z ∗ . Moreover, since either correct forecasting or our position-independent
alternatives require that this derivative be zero at all points, this is sufficient to identify both γI
and γS . Conditional on such estimates, the average of all other perceived schedules is identified by
the “residual” structure of E[T̃ (z|z ∗ )|z, z ∗ ] unexplained by the estimated schmeduling propensity.
This illustrates the identifying power of tax perceptions elicited over a broader support of (z, z ∗ ),
and motivates our design of an experiment capturing such perceptions.
         Focusing on forecasts of absolute tax paid, rather than on forecasts of marginal tax rates, is
an important feature of our empirical strategy. Note that a dataset that elicits perceptions of
marginal tax rates at different points on the tax schedule would primarily be identified through the
                                                    d2            ∗      ∗
heuristics’ differing predictions about           dzdz ∗ E[T̃ (z|z )|z, z ]. As   shown in prediction 5, both models
predict that perceptions of MTRs               increase with z ∗ , resulting      in greater colinearity of predictors
since ATR is an increasing function of the MTR in progressive tax schedules. Such an empirical
framework would be less well-powered to differentiate between the two heuristics of interest, and
would also be less robust to assumptions about functional form.13 These concerns guided our
decision to collect a different class of data than has been pursued in many prior works.


3         Study 1: Perceptions of the U.S. Federal Income Tax
3.1         Experimental Design

We administered Study 1 during the tax season of 2015. From March 15th through May 17th,
respondents were recruited for a brief14 web survey hosted on the Qualtrics platform, with recruit-
ment targeting similar sample sizes in all weeks of this sampling window. Subject recruitment
was managed by ClearVoice Research, a market research company that maintains a large, national
population of respondents willing to take brief online surveys.15 Respondents were recruited based
on demographic data previously provided to ClearVoice, allowing us to generate a sample with
demographics that approximate the national age, income, and gender distribution found in the
U.S. census records (for tabulations of demographics in our sample and the census, see Appendix
Table A2).
    13
     For example, consider nonlinear transformations of the schmeduling predictions, as in the alternative definition
of spotlighting that we discuss in Section 2.1.
  14
     Median completion time: 16 minutes. Interquartile range: 11-25 minutes.
  15
     For other economic research making use of the ClearVoice panel, see Benjamin et al. (2014) or Taubinsky and
Rees-Jones (2018).




                                                             12
3.1.1      Experimental Protocol

The Qualtrics survey featured four modules. Screenshots of the full experiment are available in the
Survey Appendix; we summarize the contents here.
    Introductory Module: The first module elicited basic information about respondents’ tax
filing behavior, allowing us to construct a similar hypothetical tax filer in the forecasting module.
Respondents were asked if they had already filed their tax return; who completed (or would com-
plete) that tax return; their filing status; their exemptions claimed; if they claimed the standard
or itemized deduction; their total income; if they filed each of schedule B through F; if they used
TurboTax or similar software; if they or their spouse were born before January 2, 1950; and if
they claimed the Earned Income Tax Credit.16 Additionally, respondents were asked their degree
of confidence in the key parameters determining their tax: their filing status, their exemptions,
their deduction status, and their income. Confidence in these parameters was high. Given ratings
options of “very confident,” “somewhat confident,” and “not confident at all,” 96% of respondents
were “very confident” in their filing status; 89% of respondents were “very confident” in their
number of exemptions; 90% of respondents were “very confident” in their deduction status; 71%
of respondents were “very confident” that their total income reported was within $1,000 of being
correct.
    Forecasting Module: The key questions for our empirical analysis were contained in the
forecasting module. Respondents were presented with a variant of the following prompt, describing
a hypothetical taxpayer whose filing behavior was very similar to their own:17

        This next group of questions is about Fred, a hypothetical taxpayer who is very similar
        to you. Fred is your age, and has a lifestyle similar to yours. Fred filed his 2014 Federal
        Tax Return claiming [own exemptions] exemption(s) and [own status] filing status, like
        you did. Fred also claimed the standard deduction, like you did.18 However, Fred’s
        tax computation is particularly simple, since all of his taxable income comes from his
        annual salary. He has no other sources of taxable income, and is not claiming additional
        credits or deductions.

        For the following questions, we will ask you to estimate the total federal income tax
        Fred would have to pay for different levels of total income. To help motivate careful
        thought about these questions, we are providing a monetary reward for correct answers.
        At the end of the survey, one of these questions will be chosen at random. If your
        answer to that question is within $100 of the correct answer, $1 will be added to your
  16
     Respondents who claimed the Earned Income Tax Credit completed an additional brief battery of questions
regarding their understanding of this tax provision.
  17
     For respondents who had not yet completed their tax return, the verb tense was changed from past to future as
appropriate.
  18
     For filers not claiming the standard deduction, this sentence read: “Unlike you, Fred claimed the standard
deduction.”


                                                       13
         survey compensation.

Following this preamble, respondents made 16 forecasts of taxes due under different amounts of
income, given the following prompt:

         If Fred’s total income for the year were $[X], the total federal income tax that he has
         to pay would be:

The amounts of income substituted into the prompt above were drawn according to three sampling
schemes. Ten forecasts were drawn from the “mid-range sampling distribution.” This is a range
of income values spanning all but the top of the national income distribution, sampling uniformly
from $0 up to a point partially through the fourth tax bracket. This sampling pattern differs by
filing status, leading us to present estimates separately by filing status in some of our analysis. Four
forecasts were drawn uniformly from the “high-income sampling distribution,” starting from the top
of the mid-range income distribution and ranging to approximately $500,000. We call the sample
of all 14 points the “full sampling distribution.” Finally, two draws were included that guarantee
the presence of some forecasts “close” to the respondent’s own income. One draw substituted the
respondent’s own reported income for X above, while the second applied that income plus a random
perturbation taking a value between 0 and 1,000.19 When assessing respondents’ knowledge of the
tax schedule local to their own income, we will restrict data to the “local distribution” consisting
of these two forecasts as well as any of the random forecasts that happen to fall in the respondent’s
own tax bracket. However, when we are not assessing questions about local tax perceptions, we
exclude these two forecasts to preserve a random sampling structure.
       Miscellaneous Questions: After the forecasting task, respondents faced a brief battery of
miscellaneous questions. These included an elicitation of the salience of their income tax, assess-
ments of their health and savings behaviors, an elicitation of their elasticity of charitable giving,
the “big three” financial literacy questions of Lusardi and Mitchell (2014), and a test of knowledge
of their sales tax rate. These also included an attention check, in which the text of the question
instructed the respondent not to selected any of the multiple-choice options below the text. This
assists in screening out respondents providing random answers without reading instructions.20
       Incentives: On the final screen, one of the respondent’s 16 tax forecasts was randomly selected
for incentivization. They were told the correct answer, reminded of their own answer, and awarded
the bonus payment if their response was within $100 of the truth.
  19
     This value fell within the respondent’s own tax bracket for all but 89 respondents.
  20
     The text of the attention check was as follows: “Sometimes participants who take online surveys don’t read
all of the instructions and click through the questions more quickly than they should. We want to make sure that
participants taking this survey are paying attention to the instructions. On this screen, your instructions are simply
to click on the continue button at the bottom of the screen, and not to fill in any of the answer below. Please click
continue now.” Below this prompt, multiple choice options ranging from “Always” to “Never” were present. These
were meant to appear like standard likert-scale responses to a respondent who had not read instructions.




                                                         14
3.2      Sample for Analysis and Dataset Preparation

Over the course of our sampling period, 4,828 individuals completed the full survey. We exclude
respondents according to several criteria. First, we exclude 5 respondents with missing data on
one or more of the tax forecasts. Second, we exclude 73 respondents forecasting either 0 tax or
100% tax for all forecasts, as we believe this reporting pattern indicates either misunderstanding
of the prompt or represents an attempt to quickly click through the survey without meaningfully
responding to questions. Third, we restrict our sample to respondents reporting income ranging
from zero to $250,000, excluding 117 respondents whose self-reported incomes are outside the typical
range of the panel. Finally, we exclude 436 respondents who failed the attention check included in
the miscellaneous questions module. To limit the influence of extreme tax forecasts, we conduct a
rolling Winsorization of tax forecasts to the 1st and 99th percentile values in each $10,000 income
bin.
    This set of restrictions results in a final sample of 4,197 respondents, and a total of 58,758
forecasts of tax liability for randomly drawn incomes. In section 3.3.4, we discuss the robustness
of our empirical results to these dataset construction decisions.


3.3      An Empirical Assessment of Tax Misperceptions

3.3.1     Reduced-Form Tests of Schmeduling

Systematic Over- and Under-Estimation (Schmeduling Predictions 1 and 2): To present
an initial, non-parametric summary of income tax perceptions, Figure 2 plots a kernel-smoothed
estimate of average perceived tax schedules. Since schedules are filing-status specific, we present
estimates separately for the two largest filing-status groups: single and married filing jointly. The
top panels present estimates restricted to the data from the ten income draws of the mid-range
sampling distribution. The lower plots extend the support to include the four income draws from
the high-income sampling distribution.
    The top two panels illustrate two important features of perceived tax schedules. First, on
average, the perceived tax schedule is qualitatively similar to the true tax schedule, though it
displays some systematic error. For example, over the mid-range sampling distribution, respondents
overestimate the tax burden by $679 (clustered s.e.: $185) on average, or 3.2 percentage points
(clustered s.e.: 0.003pp) in effective tax rates. Standard errors are clustered at the respondent
level.
    Second, and perhaps more importantly, these plots also demonstrate that the sign of the average
misperception depends on the amount of income that is being taxed. In both plots, the average
perceived tax schedule appears more linear than the true schedule, with a tendency towards over-
estimation of the tax burden for low amounts of income and underestimation of the tax burden for
high amounts of income. In the lower two plots of Figure 2, which present analyses including the


                                                 15
high-income sampling distribution, this underestimation of taxes on high incomes becomes even
more pronounced. This pattern indicates a general underappreciation of the degree of progressivity
in the current U.S. tax code. The qualitative patterns of these results provide a test of Prediction 1,
formally rejecting the predictions made by the spotlighting model (1-S) while remaining consistent
with the predictions made by the ironing model (1-I).
      Turning to Prediction 2, we next explore the differences in perceived schedules as a function
of respondents’ own income. Figure 3 summarizes the average bias in forecasts as a function of
the true tax due, and plots this bias conditional on respondent’s own income quartile. We present
fitted values from the regression model:
                                XX
               (T̃ − T )i,f =             αb,q ∗ I(incomef ∈ binb ) ∗ I(incomei ∈ quartileq ) + i,f .
                                    b,q


In this regression, we predict the difference between the perceived tax (T̃ ) and the true tax (T )
for person i’s assessment of Fred scenario f . We estimate the average of this forecast error in
$5,000 bins (denoted b), estimated separately by the income quartile of the respondent (denoted
q).21 As seen in this figure, the primary pattern described above—overestimation of low tax
burdens and underestimation of high tax burdens—persists across all four income groups. Despite
this consistent pattern, tax perceptions are significantly different across income quartiles. Wald
tests reject joint equality in all pairwise comparisons of the income-quartile-specific estimates of
α (all p-values <0.014). An important feature revealed in the plots is that the “crossing point”
where overestimation turns to underestimation occurs at higher income values for higher income
respondents. These patterns are consistent with the predictions of ironing (2-I), and are broadly
inconsistent with the predictions of spotlighting (2-S).
      Perceived Slope of Tax Schedules (Schmeduling Predictions 3-5): Figures 2 and 3
suggest underestimation of the slope of the tax schedule. This is visually apparent in the “flattening”
of the estimated schedules in Figure 2, and in the negative slope of the bias functions in Figure
3. We now turn to a statistical assessment of this underestimation, and use our results to assess
Predictions 3-5.
      To formally test for underestimation of the slope of the tax schedule, we estimate fixed-effect
OLS regression models of the form T̃i,f = βTi,f + νi + i,f . The object of interest in this analysis
is β, which measures the scaling of the tax schedule implicit in the respondents’ forecasts. By
including respondent-specific fixed effects (νi ) we identify β from the effective slope of the tax
schedule reported within-subject. We test the null hypothesis of β = 1, the value that would be
estimated if respondents indicated a rate-of-increase of taxes consistent with the true tax schedule.
An estimated value over 1 would indicate an implicit steepening of the schedule, and an estimated
value under 1 would indicate an implicit flattening. Results of this analysis are presented in Table
 21
      Note that the estimation sample is restricted to cases with tax burdens in the range [0,55000).



                                                           16
1.
     In the first panel of Table 1, we restrict the estimation sample to the “local distribution,” consist-
ing only of the two locally sampled income draws and any of the randomly sampled income values
that happen to fall in the respondent’s own tax bracket. Beliefs in this region of the tax schedule
directly reveal whether taxpayers correctly perceive the marginal tax rates that they face, and thus
allow the assessment of Prediction 3. We find that our respondents underestimate the marginal
tax rates in their own tax-bracket (β = 0.81, clustered s.e.=0.043), consistent with the prediction
of ironing (3-I) and inconsistent with the prediction of spotlighting (3-S). The 2nd-5th columns of
the table provide estimates of this same parameter when the sample is restricted to respondents
in each of the four income quartiles. Across these estimates, we find that underestimation remains
statistically detectable for respondents in the top two income quartiles. For respondents in the
bottom two income quartiles the standard errors of these estimates are sufficiently large that we
can reject neither correct perception, nor substantial underestimation (or overestimation) of their
MTRs.
     The second panel of Table 1 presents estimates of β derived from the 10 random draws of the
mid-range sampling distributions. As in the local analysis, we find substantial and statistically
significant underestimation of the steepness of the tax schedule (β = 0.82, clustered s.e.=0.013).
In contrast to the local analysis, we find that this underestimation persists among all four income
quartiles, with the null hypothesis of β = 1 rejected at at least the 1% level for each estimate. The
degree of underestimation is most severe among the lowest-income respondents: estimates range
from 0.70 (clustered s.e.=0.029) for the lowest-income respondents to 0.94 (clustered s.e.=0.023)
for the highest-income respondents. These results provide an investigation of Predictions 4 and 5,
and again refute the predictions of the spotlighting model while supporting the predictions of the
ironing model.
     The third panel estimates β using data from the full sampling distribution. Results are congru-
ent with those generated from only the mid-range sampling distribution. Underestimation of the
slope of the tax schedule persists, and indeed is more severe (β = 0.62, clustered s.e.=0.010). As
in the second panel, we find that all four income quartiles underestimate the average slope of the
tax schedule, with the difference again increasing in the respondent’s own income.
     Summary: Assessing the five predictions articulated in section 2, we find no support for the
predictions of the spotlighting model and consistent support for the predictions of the ironing
model.

3.3.2    Disentangling Heuristic Use

While the reduced-form results support the presence of ironing and provide little evidence of spot-
lighting, these analyses do not address three questions of primary interest. First, how much of the
apparent under-appreciation of progressivity can be attributed to ironing? Second, even if they are


                                                    17
not prevalent, are there any spotlighters in the population? Third, are there features of average tax
perceptions that schmeduling fails to capture? We address these questions with a mixture-model
approach to estimating the propensity of each heuristic.
    Estimating Heuristic Propensity: To provide quantitative estimates of the propensity of
heuristic use, we estimate the structural model in equation (1). We present results from two
estimating equations:


                     T̃f,i = (1 − γI − γS )T (zf,i ) + γI T̃I (zf,i |zi∗ ) + γS T̃S (zf,i |zi∗ ) + f,i           (2)


            T̃f,i = (1 − γI − γS )(T (zf,i ) + r(T (zf,i ))) + γI T̃I (zf,i |zi∗ ) + γS T̃S (zf,i |zi∗ ) + f,i   (3)

In these equations, T̃f,i denotes the forecasts of the taxes due by the hypothetical taxpayer. In-
dividual respondents are indexed by i, and iterations of the hypothetical taxpayer question are
indexed by f . We model tax forecasts as a convex combination of three possible models of tax
perceptions. We include the ironing and spotlighting forecasts as defined in section 2.1. We gen-
                                                  T (zi∗ )
erate the ironing forecast (T̃I (zf,i |zi∗ ) =      zi∗      · zf,i ) by calculating the individual’s federal tax due
based on all reported information, dividing that by their reported income to generate an average
tax rate, and multiplying that average tax rate by the hypothetical income assigned to Fred (zf,i ).
We generate the spotlighting forecast (T̃S (zf,i |zi∗ ) = T (zi∗ ) + T 0 (zi∗ ) · (zf,i − zi∗ )) by calculating the
individual’s federal tax due based on all reported information, and then adding to that the product
of their statutory marginal tax rate and the difference between Fred’s income and their own. In
equation (2), we estimate a model in which aggregate tax forecasts are formed by a mixture of
these two heuristics and the true tax liability (T (zf,i )). In equation (3), this latter term is aug-
mented to T (zf,i ) + r(T (zf,i )), denoting the true tax due plus a residual misperception function. By
including this term and estimating it with a flexible functional form, we can separately identify our
candidate heuristics from general misperceptions of the tax schedule not attributed to the models
defined above. In the estimates we present below, we model the residual misperception function as
a fifth order polynomial.
    Table 2 presents non-linear least squares estimates of these models. Columns 1 and 3 present
estimates of equation 2. Columns 2 and 4 present estimates of equation 3, integrating the residual
misperception function into the analysis. Standard errors are clustered at the respondent level.
Column 4 is our preferred specification because it utilizes all randomly sampled data and includes
the residual misperception function.
    The first two columns, which estimate the model from the mid-range sampling distribution,
show a substantial weight on the ironing heuristic. In column 1, the point estimate implies 21%
weight on the ironing heuristic. However, the point estimate on the spotlighting forecast is negative
9%—outside the range of valid probability values, and marginally significantly so. We view the


                                                               18
estimation of invalid probabilities for heuristic propensity as evidence of model mispecification, and
a demonstration of the difficulty of inference in this setting when non-income-dependent mispercep-
tions are not accommodated.22 Illustrating that point, when the residual misperception function is
included in this estimation in column 2, weight on the spotlighting heuristics becomes statistically
indistinguishable from zero, while weight on the ironing heuristic increases to 29%. The contrast
of columns 1 and 2 demonstrates the importance of allowing for residual misperceptions when es-
timating the propensity of these heuristics: since these heuristics can change the level of aggregate
tax forecasts, their identification can be confounded with level effects when residual misperception
is not accommodated.
       In columns 3 and 4, we repeat the estimation exercise of columns 1 and 2 using the full sam-
pling distribution. In these specifications, we again find substantial weight on the ironing forecast
and effectively zero weight on the spotlighting forecast. In the fourth column, which includes a
residual misperception function and utilizes all randomly-sampled forecasts, we estimate an iron-
ing propensity of 43% (clustered s.e.=9.5%) and a spotlighting propensity indistinguishable from
zero (-2%, clustered s.e.=7.6%). This estimated ironing propensity is somewhat larger than, but
statistically indistinguishable from, the estimate of 29% derived from mid-range forecasts. In sum,
this analysis strongly supports the presence of a large subpopulation of ironers and provides no
evidence supporting the presence of spotlighters.23
       Interpreting Residual Misperceptions: The estimates of our mixture model suggest that
reliance on the ironing heuristic is common, but not universal. We now turn to characterizing the
residual misperceptions held by those who do not iron.
       Figure 4 plots the estimates of the residual misperception function generated in the regressions
of Table 2. The top panel presents the estimates generated from the mid-range sampling distri-
bution. Residual misperceptions over the mid-range sampling distribution are characterized by a
reasonably uniform overestimation of taxes due. The bottom panel presents the estimates incor-
porating the high-income sampling distribution. We again observe relatively stable overestimation
over comparatively low tax bills. However this eventually transitions to (statistically insignificant)
underestimation of higher tax burdens. Taken at face value, the initial upward slope of residual
misperceptions implies overestimation of the MTRs associated with comparatively small tax bills.
The gradual downward slope that follows implies modest underestimation of the MTRs associated
  22
      To rationalize this result and illustrate the confound introduced by excluding controls for residual mispercep-
tions, recall that we found systematic overestimation of the taxes due across the mid-range income distribution.
Quantitatively, this overestimation cannot be generated by ironing. But because the spotlighting heuristic generates
underestimation of taxes due outside of one’s own bracket, placing negative weight on this heuristic is a simple way
for the model to approximate our finding of systematic overestimation of tax levels.
   23
      Some readers may worry that our finding of near-zero spotlighting is driven by one extreme feature of a spot-
lighter’s forecasts: predictions of negative tax liability for comparatively very low incomes. As we demonstrate in
Appendix Table A3, this feature has little impact on our estimates. In that table, we recreate the analysis of Table
2, but replace spotlighters forecasts of negative tax liability with a forecast of zero tax liability. We find that this
different coding has a negligible impact on our point estimates.




                                                          19
with large tax bills.
   It is noteworthy that this simple representation of residual misperceptions arises despite its
specification as a fifth-order polynomial. Our estimation procedure is capable of detecting substan-
tial nonlinearity in residual misperceptions if they are present, but these analyses suggest that the
misperceptions that remain are comparatively simple in structure. Because the residual is so sim-
ple in structure, our estimated heuristic propensities are insensitive to the parameterization of the
residual misperception function. Reestimating equation 3 with the residual misperception function
specified as any polynomial of orders 1 through 10 results in estimated heuristic propensities within
two percentage points of the estimates reported in Table 2 (see Appendix Table A4). Estimates
change more meaningfully when misperceptions are not included or are assumed to be constant, but
these results suggest that a first-order polynomial is sufficient to remove the confounding influence
of residual factors.
   Care is needed in interpreting our estimates of residual misperceptions. When designing our
estimation strategy, this component was included to capture any apparent non-schmeduling mis-
perceptions, either real or spurious. As examples of the latter category, note that a spurious
appearance of misunderstanding of progressivity could arise under certain structures of nonclassi-
cal measurement error. Similarly, apparent forecasting bias may arise if respondents improperly
treat our survey questions as if they ask about a tax filer more complex than the one considered.
Similar bias would arise if respondents integrate tax burden from non-federal sources, such as state
or FICA taxes. It is a crucial feature of our approach that such confounds result in perturbations of
the form modeled by our residual misperception function, and thus are controlled for in a manner
that removes their influence from the estimates of the schmeduling heuristics’ propensity. However,
interpretation of residual misperception function must be conducted under the caveat that its shape
may be influenced by such non-externally-valid features. Consequently, out-of-sample predictive
power of this component of the mixture model may fail.
   Summary: When estimating our structural model of misperceptions, we find evidence of
widespread reliance on the ironing heuristic and no evidence of reliance on the spotlighting heuristic.
Our preferred specification implies 43% weight on ironing, no weight on spotlighting, and residual
over-estimation of tax burdens that stays fairly constant throughout the income distribution but
eventually turns to underestimation for very high incomes.

3.3.3   Ironing Explains Estimates of MTR Misperceptions

Our approach to estimating heuristic propensity relies on forecasts of taxes due over a wide range
of incomes. While such data is useful for identification, optimal response to tax policy is often
contingent only on “local” knowledge of the tax schedule, and specifically knowledge of one’s own
MTR. Because individuals have more reason to learn about taxes on incomes close to their own, a
reasonable reader may worry that models estimated using tax forecasts over a wide range of income


                                                  20
provide a misleading depiction of MTR misperceptions. In this subsection, we assess the degree to
which our estimated model accounts for these local perceptions, and evaluate goodness of fit when
the predictions are only based on our estimates of ironing propensity.
    To address these questions, we assess the ability of our estimated model to fit the model-free
estimate of own-bracket MTR underestimation reported in Table 1. We do this both by estimating
our model using the full sample of income draws, and also using only the income draws that only
lie outside of the respondent’s tax bracket.
    As repeated in the first column of Table 3, we found that perceptions of the slope of respondents’
own tax bracket was scaled by a factor of 0.81, indicating an average underestimation of MTRs.
In column 2, we reestimate this regression while replacing respondents’ actual forecasts with the
forecasts predicted by the preferred specification of our model. We find a resulting scaling parameter
of 0.86, quantitatively similar to (and statistically indistinguishable from) the model-free baseline.
    To what degree do the different components of the mixture model contribute to this fit? Moving
across columns 2 through 4, we progressively remove model components and reassess the fit to MTR
perceptions. In column 3, we replace our MTR forecasts with those based on the estimated ironing
propensity and residual misperception function, but setting the propensity for spotlighting equal to
zero. We find that this has no meaningful effect on the resulting scaling parameter, consistent with
the statistical insignificance of our estimate of spotlighting’s propensity. In column 4, we further
restrict the model to remove the influence of the residual misperception function: we forecast MTRs
based on a 43% propensity to use the ironing heuristic, with remaining weight placed on the true
tax forecast. In this analysis, we find that the resulting scaling of MTRs precisely matches that
in the model free baseline, with a statistically insignificant difference of less than one percentage
point. In summary, accounting for ironing alone allows a quantitatively precise forecast of MTR
perceptions.
    The comparisons conducted above help assess the fit of our estimated model. However, this test
of fit is explicitly within-sample: forecasts of taxes due in one’s own bracket are used both for the
estimation of the model and in the model-free validation. To provide a more stringent test of our
model’s ability to capture MTR perceptions, we construct an analogous out-of-sample test of fit.
We reestimate our model while excluding all data from respondents’ own tax brackets.24 We then
use the estimated model to forecast tax perceptions within respondents’ own brackets, and again
compare the scaling. As shown in columns 5-7, this analysis yields results nearly identical to those
in the within-sample exercise. Importantly, a simple model consisting of only ironers and correct
forecasters predicts the scaling of MTRs to within a percentage point.
    Summary: A simple mixture model of ironers and correct forecasters accurately predicts MTR
misperceptions.
  24
     Compared to column 4 of Table 2, this restriction results in extremely similar estimates of heuristic propensity.
We estimate an ironing propensity of 0.46 (clustered s.e.= 0.101) and a spotlighting propensity -0.04 (clustered s.e.
= 0.079), and thus see differences of no more than 0.03 from the values in our preferred specification.


                                                         21
3.3.4      Heterogeneity Analysis

The results of Table 2 suggest that aggregate tax misperceptions can be rationalized by placing
significant weight on the ironing forecast. This is perhaps most naturally interpreted through a
heterogeneous model in which some individuals have accurate beliefs (or accurate beliefs up to
the perturbation of the residual misperception function) and some individuals employ the ironing
heuristic. In such a model, our estimated coefficients may be interpreted as the propensity of use
for each of the candidate forecasting rules. However, in principle our results could alternatively be
rationalized by a homogeneous decision rule that places some weight on the truth and some weight
on the ironing heuristic. While we believe that such a model would be difficult to psychologically
motivate, we present individual-level estimates of our model to help rule out this possibility.
       To begin, we estimate equation 2 at the individual level for each of the 3,552 respondents facing
a non-zero tax rate.25 Figure 5 plots a kernel-density estimate of the distribution of estimated
individual classifications. In general, this distribution is quite diffuse. This is to be expected,
since estimating two parameters from only 14 tax forecasts would lead to a distribution of point-
estimates that is influenced by both the true parameters and individual estimation error. Notice,
however, that the resulting estimates yield a sharply bimodal distribution. As illustrated in the
figure, the peaks of this distribution correspond to the parameter values describing those relying
fully on the ironing forecast and those relying fully on the correct tax forecast. Consistent with
earlier analyses, no excess mass is seen at the parameter values corresponding to full reliance on the
spotlighting forecast. While this analysis cannot rule out the existence of some intermediate cases,
this distribution is consistent with a substantial population of pure ironers, in the sense intended
by Liebman and Zeckhauser’s (2004) presentation of the heuristic.26
       We can also perform the same estimation exercise while restricting individual-level parameter
estimates to valid probabilities. To do so, we evaluate equation 2 over a grid of probability values
and assign individuals to the grid point that minimizes the mean squared error of their forecasts.
We again see strong support for the existence of pure types: 33% of respondents are classified
as “true tax” forecasters, 33% are classified as pure ironing forecasters, 2% are classified as pure
spotlighters, and the remainder are estimated at intermediate values. Similar results are obtained
by repeating the analog of this exercise that applies the model and data restrictions of each column
  25
     Notice that for individuals facing zero tax, the ironing and spotlighting heuristics yield the same forecast, and
are thus not separately identified.
  26
     Similar figures can be generated estimating equation 3, and by restricting the estimation sample to only the
mid-range income distribution. In Appendix Figure A1, we reproduce Figure 5 while applying the restrictions for
each of the columns in Table 2. Since we cannot estimate residual misperceptions at the individual level, we use the
estimated residual misperception function from the analysis of Table 2. Across all specifications, we continue to find
a large mass at γI = 1, γS = 0, indicating that our inference about the existence of pure ironers is not confounded
by the residual misperception function. However, when residual misperceptions are included, the density around
γI = 0, γS = 0 is reduced by approximately half. This can be rationalized by interpreting the residual misperception
function not as a literal forecasting rule by a pure “type,” but as an approximation to heterogeneous remaining
misperceptions beyond the heuristics we study.




                                                         22
of Table 2 (all such analyses are reported in Appendix Tables A5-A8).
       The individual classifications produced by this procedure help in determining which groups’
tax perceptions respond to average tax rates. In Figure 6, we plot approximations of the average
perceived tax schedule (analogous to Figure 2) separately for those who are “close” to being classified
as ironers (specifically, γˆI ∈ [0.6, 1.4] and γˆS ∈ [−0.4, 0.4]) and those who are not.27 Within each
group, we separately plot the perceived tax schedule for those above and below median income.
Among those not classified as ironers, the average perceived tax schedules for the comparatively
high and low income are nearly identical. In contrast, among those classified as ironers, perceptions
are notably different across income groups. The perceived schedules are approximately linear, and
come quite close to intersecting the true tax schedule evaluated at the average income for the group.
In short, those labeled as ironers by our classification procedure have perceptions that satisfy the
model’s core predictions.

3.3.5      Summary of Robustness Analyses

In Appendix B we conduct extensive robustness checks on the sensitivity of our estimates to a variety
of sample restrictions. Our empirical results persist when analyzing taxpayers with comparatively
high incentives for accurate tax knowledge such as the employed, those who complete their returns
without outside assistance, and those of comparatively high income. Our results persist among
respondents who might be suspected to be debiased, such as those who complete our survey after
tax day, those of comparatively high age (and thus comparatively high experience with the tax
system), or those of comparatively high confidence in their answers.
       Our results are also robust to several possibilities for misunderstanding of the survey prompt.
Allowing for the possibility that respondents’ forecasts reflected their beliefs about not just federal
income taxes but the sum of federal and state and/or payroll taxes does not change our estimates
of ironing propensity. This is because such misunderstandings take a structural form accounted for
with the residual misperception function. Our results are also robust to restrictions of the sample
to those whose tax returns are and are not “simple” like those of the hypothetical taxpayer Fred.
       Finally, our results are also robust to alternative treatments of inattentive respondents and
Winsorization schemes.
       Across the restrictions we consider, the estimated subgroup propensity to iron ranges from
24% to 58%; indicating widespread and cross-group prevalence. Across these robustness checks we
continue to find no evidence of spotlighting.
  27
    Figure 6 presents results for married filing jointly filers, the most common filing status in our data. Analysis of
single filers, with very similar results, is available in Appendix Figure A2.




                                                          23
4     Study 2: Inferring Ironing From Choice Data
A key feature of Study 1 is that it examines perceptions of the actual U.S. income tax schedule.
However, an important limitation is that we cannot directly verify that individuals indeed act on
the beliefs that they state. To partially address this limitation, we conducted a complementary
online experiment in which participants’ perceptions of the marginal tax rates can be directly
revealed by their behavior. Beyond utilizing choice data, the online experiment has several other
desirable features. First, the experiment uses a different source of identifying variation. Rather
than utilizing naturally occurring variation in participants’ tax rates, the experiment induced truly
exogenous variation in average and marginal tax rates by varying the tax schedules that participants
faced. Second, the experiment allows us to examine the extent to which schmeduling might be
endogenous to the complexity of the tax schedule. Third, the experiment focuses participants on
decisions about incremental changes to their taxable income, rather than focusing them on total
tax paid—a framing manipulation that could in principle induce more attention to marginal tax
rates. Fourth, the experiment also changes the frame by focusing individuals on after-tax income
rather than on the taxes themselves.
    Our experiment was preregistered on aspredicted.com. We report how we determined sample
size, all data exclusions, all manipulations, and all measures below. The full experimental protocol
is available in the survey appendix.


4.1      Experimental Design

We designed the experiment to mimic a marginal earnings decision made shortly after receiving
feedback on tax payment. Concretely, imagine a worker who has recently examined a paystub or
entered their earnings information into tax preparation software such as TurboTax. As in this
example, our experiment presents subjects with salient and clear information about the total tax
and average taxes paid. After viewing this information, the subject makes a decision of whether to
allocate a bonus to a taxable or non-taxable account. As we explain below, this decision allows us
to infer individuals’ perceived MTR from their choices. When making this decision, information
about the full tax code is available costlessly, but there are no reminders to consider marginal tax
rates.
    Summary of experimental protocol: The experiment began with a standard elicitation
of informed consent and a CAPTCHA task. After this introduction, participants were presented
with a summary of the task they would face and an initial presentation of the tax schedule. The
schedule is randomly generated according to criteria we describe in detail later in this section.
Figure 7 presents this screen.
    After this explanation, participants were asked a basic comprehension question that tested
their understanding of which accounts were taxable. Participants were not able to proceed with



                                                 24
the experiment if they failed either this comprehension test or the CAPTCHA.
   Participants were then told that, as a baseline, they are given 40 cents in account A and 60
cents in account B. For each account, we presented the total tax on the earnings and the effective
(average) tax rate on the earnings. In the example provided in Figure 7, this prompt would have
indicated 20 cents of tax and a 50% effective tax rate on account A. The tax amount and rate for
account B were always 0 and 0%, respectively. We used the language “effective tax rate” in lieu
of “average tax rate” to be consistent with the language used by tax preparation software such
as Turbotax. The presentation of both the absolute tax and the average tax rate also mimics the
summary screen of such tax preparation software.
   Immediately after the summary, we included a button that, if clicked, would display the tax
table again on the screen for use while participants make their decisions. This provides an additional
measure of the number of participants who thought that additional information beyond the ATR
was necessary. Because some participants could have clicked the button without an intention to
actually study the tax table, we think that it is best to regard the propensity to click on the button
as an upper bound on how many participants felt it was necessary to consult the tax table to make
their decision.
   On that same screen, participants were asked to make 12 decisions about additional money to be
placed in the taxable and nontaxable accounts. These decisions were made in a multiple-price-list
(MPL) format. In each decision, one option was adding 20 cents pre-tax to account A. The other
option was a non-constant amount of earnings in account B, with the payment (in cents) taking
the values {0, 1, 3, 5, 7, 9, 11, 13, 15, 17, 19, 21}.
   Following this decision, participants faced a common attention check and a battery of demo-
graphics questions. After these questions, one of the twelve MPL decisions was randomly selected
and final compensation was determined based on that decision and reported to the subject.
   Variation in tax schedules: We generated exogenous variation in the ATR and MTR, as
well as in schedule complexity, by randomly assigning participants to one of fifty four tax schedules.
Half of these schedules were simple: they consisted of two brackets for income ranges [0, 40] and
[40, 100]. Half of the schedules were complex: they consisted of five brackets for income ranges [0,
20], [20, 40], [40, 60], [60, 80], and [80, 100].
   For each MTR/ATR pair, there was a unique simple schedule and a unique complex schedule
constructed to feature those rates. For simple schedules, the rate in the first bracket determines
the ATR and the rate in the second bracket determines the MTR. For complex schedules, we set
the rate in the first two brackets to ATR-0.05 and ATR+0.05, respectively, averaging to the ATR.
The rate in the third bracket, which governs the marginal incentives for the relevant decision in
the study, is set to the desired MTR. The fourth and fifth brackets have rates of MTR+0.05 and
MTR+0.10, respectively.
   Our (ATR, MTR) combinations were generated by sampling sets of three schedules. Each set of


                                                    25
three schedules had the form {(AT R0 , M T R0 ), (AT R0 + 0.3, M T R0 ), (AT R0 + 0.3, M T R0 + 0.3)}.
Within each set, there are large and exogenous differences in both the ATR and the MTR, which
facilitates high-powered estimation of reliance on average versus marginal tax rates. To make sure
that our results were not tied to any particular set, we generated nine such sets by drawing a
value of AT R0 and M T R0 from the set {0.2, 0.3, 0.4}, uniformly and with replacement. Because
we sampled with replacement, 26% of the two-bracket schedules had the same tax rate in both
brackets, and 15% of the five-bracket schedules had the same tax rate in the second and third
bracket.
       Quantifying revealed-perceived MTRs: We generate our measure of “revealed-perceived
MTRs” using decisions in the MPL. If the participant chooses the option that he thinks has the
highest financial payoff, answers in the MPL set-identify the perceived MTR. For example, if the
participant perceived that the MTR was 0.2, he would expect to earn 16 cents post-tax if 20 cents
are placed in account A. He should thus prefer to receive the bonus in account B if the amount
offered is 17, 19, or 21 cents, and would take the bonus in account A otherwise. This pattern of
decisions would imply that (1 − M^ T R) ∗ 20 ≥ 15 and (1 − M
                                                           ^ T R) ∗ 20 ≤ 17 , allowing us to infer that
M
^ T R ∈ [0.15, 0.25]. This measure of perceived MTR is our object of interest in this experiment. In
principle, one could use approaches such as interval regression to analyze this dependent variable,
as we do in Appendix C. However, the identified intervals are sufficiently narrow that assigning
responses to their midpoint (e.g., to 0.2 in the example) and relying on OLS regressions yields
essentially identical results. In the body of the paper, we report OLS regressions with midpoint
coding of the dependent variable.28
       This method of identifying revealed-perceived MTRs was previously applied in the experimental
work of de Bartolome (1995). In that experiment, participants were presented with a single tax
schedule and a comparatively coarse MPL, and the analysis revealed that a relatively large number
of respondents had perceived MTRs in the bin that contained the ATR. This analysis is suggestive
of ironing. However, participants who simply underestimate the MTR without relying on the
ironing heuristic could similarly fall in that bin, as could participants who are inattentive to the
tax schedule and either choose randomly or rely on some other rule of thumb. Variation in the
ATR and MTR, as in our experiment, is crucial for separately identifying ironing from possibilities
such as these.


4.2      Sample for Analysis and Dataset Preparation

Our study ran on Amazon Mechanical Turk in December of 2018 and January of 2019. During
this time, we collected 4,582 complete responses. We preregistered three exclusion criteria for our
sample. First, we exclude any subjects who failed the attention check included at the end of the
  28
     For participants who preferred 1 cent in the untaxed account over 20 cents in the taxable account, we code the
revealed perceived MTR interval to be [0.95,1], and the midpoint to be 0.975. For participants who preferred 20 cents
in the taxable account over 19 cents the untaxed account, we code the interval as [0, 0.05] and the midpoint as 0.025.


                                                         26
study. This requirement screens 714 responses (15.58% of the initial sample). Second we exclude any
subjects with MPL responses inconsistent with monotone preferences (i.e., not exhibiting a single
switching point). This requirement screens an additional 179 responses (4.63% of the remaining
sample). Finally, we included “trick” options at both ends of the MPL: one offering zero cents
in the tax free account (which should not be preferred unless one expects a 100%+ tax rate) and
one offering twenty one cents in the tax free account (which should always be chosen unless one
expects negative tax rates). We exclude subjects who do not take the dominant option for each,
screening an additional 559 responses (15.15% of the remaining sample). These exclusions yield a
final sample of 3,130 responses, closely in line with our preregistered target of 3,000. Our primary
sample is comprised of 53% women, has a median age of 35, and has a median income in the range
of $40,000-$49,999.
   We chose to preregister these stringent inclusion criteria because we are most interested in
analyzing the responses of attentive subjects who show clear understanding of the task at hand.
Of course, analyzing even those who fail to meet that bar can be of interest, although we note that
inattention or lack of comprehension to our experiment need not be an externally valid indication of
problems with understanding real tax systems. Appendix C reproduces our results with inattentive
responses re-included.


4.3   Results

Our core, pre-registered analysis estimates the regression M
                                                           ^ T Ri = α + β1 M T Ri + β2 AT Ri + i .
Viewed through the lens of our empirical model, β2 identifies the fraction ironing and β1 identifies
the fraction responding to MTRs. As discussed in section 2.2, spotlighting and correct forecasting
are not separately identifiable when examining only local forecasts, and thus β1 estimates the
pooled propensity of either behavior. The constant term captures the average revealed-perceived
MTR of those not responding to the true MTR or ATR, scaled by (1 − β1 − β2 ). The behavior
of these remaining filers may be thought of as a rule-of-thumb that is relied on without reference
to the schedule, consistent with inattention to taxes as in Chetty et al. (2009) and Taubinsky and
Rees-Jones (2018).
   Column 1 of Table 4 presents the results of this regression. Our estimate of the coefficient on
ATR is consistent with 35% of our sample applying the ironing heuristic (s.e.=2 p.p.). In contrast,
our estimate of the coefficient on MTR is consistent with only 9% of the sample responding to this
feature of the schedule (s.e.=2 p.p.). Among the 44% of respondents who respond to one of the
randomly varied features of the schedule, 79% respond to the ATR. Consistent with the survey
study, these results suggests a remarkably high reliance on the ironing heuristic.
   A strong prediction of our empirical model, consistent with the mixture model interpretation,
is that the revealed-perceived marginal tax rates should increase linearly with the ATR and MTR.
Consistent with this prediction, we find no evidence of nonlinear relationships. Comparing the fit


                                                27
of our preferred model to one with a dummy variable for each discrete level of ATR and MTR, we
find no meaningful improvement (see Appendix Table 10). A likelihood ratio test fails to reject the
null of the linear model (p = 0.417), providing support for the functional form assumptions of our
estimating equation.29
    Across the remaining columns of Table 4, we examine the sensitivity of the estimates to several
different subsample restrictions. First, we provide separate estimates for “simple” (column 2) and
“complex” schedules (column 3). Point estimates do not differ substantially across these samples;
column 4 presents the estimated differences and standard errors from the fully interacted model
and finds no significant differences. Furthermore, a likelihood ratio test fails to reject the null of
the non-interacted model (p = 0.164). These results show no support for tax schedule complexity
affecting the propensity to iron.
    Next, we split our results by whether participants re-examined the tax table when given the
opportunity. Interestingly, only 46% of of participants chose to do so. And we continue to find
substantial prevalence of ironing even among those reexamining the tax table; indeed, these subjects
are marginally statistically significantly more likely to iron. But consistent with some participants
choosing to inattentively rely on rules of thumb instead of examining the tax schedules, we do
see that those who clicked have a statistically significantly smaller constant term.30 Overall, these
results show that many participants rely on the ironing heuristic without taking the time to look
up the tax table to make an optimal decision, even when doing so is nearly costless. This is despite
the fact that in our experiment, examining the tax table to compute the tax on the incremental
20 cents is not more computationally costly than multiplying one’s average tax rate by 20. This
suggests that either ironing is an automatic and habitual way of representing the world, or that
individuals are confident that the ironing representation is a good one.
    Finally, and in analogue to our analysis in the survey study, we ask to what extent ironing
provides a complete explanation of the individuals’ misperceptions. To do so, we first estimate a
benchmark of “maximum explainable variation” (Kleinberg et al., 2017). The explainable variation
that is due to systematic behavioral responses to the differences in our tax schedules is simply the
R2 of the regression of perceived perceived MTRs on the 54 dummies for our tax tables. Given
our large sample size, we have on average approximately 60 participants per tax table, and we
are thus able to estimate this statistic with a reasonable degree of precision. The sampling error
resulting from a finite number of participants allocated to any given tax table leads to (in our
case, small) overfitting problem which makes the R2 estimate to be a slight upper bound on the
  29
     Appendix Figure A3 plots the residualized relationship between average perceived tax rates and each of ATR
(controlling for MTR) and MTR (controlling for ATR). The relationship appears remarkably linear when visually
assessed.
  30
     The fact that the coefficients on the ATR and MTR still do not sum to one even for the subsample that clicked
on the tax schedule is consistent with some participants arbitrarily clicking on the tax table without an intention to
engage with it. It is similarly consistent with some respondents clicking on the tax table, deciding it is too complex
to parse, and then choosing to rely on some rule of thumb instead.



                                                         28
maximum explainable variation. We estimate that the maximum explainable variation corresponds
to R2 = 0.1055.
         We contrast this with the R2 of the regression model in column 1 of Table 4, which we find to be
0.0924. This implies that the simple linear model explains over 87% of the explainable variation in
the data. The economic content of this result is that relaxing the assumptions of linearity, additive
separability, and invariance to the complexity of the tax schedule does not meaningfully increase
explanatory power. Consistent with this, we find that a likelihood ratio test fails to reject the null
of our simple linear model (p =0.69).31
         We provide a number of robustness checks of these results in Appendix C. In particular, we
conduct analyses relaxing our inclusion criteria, we consider alternative definitions of “simple” and
“complex” that correspond to exactly 1 or 4 kinks, respectively, and we examine interactions with
demographic covariates. Across these tests, we find little deviation from the results of the primary
specification reported here.
         Summary: Consistent with with the results of Study 1, we find prevalent ironing and little
evidence of other misperceptions.


5         Welfare Implications of Ironing
In this section, we explore the quantitative importance of ironing for welfare calculations in stan-
dard models of intensive-margin earnings decisions and distortionary taxation. Our model has the
general features of the canonical frameworks of Mirrlees (1971) and Saez (2001), modified to allow
for misperceptions as in Farhi and Gabaix (2018).32 To keep exposition concise, we briefly pro-
vide intuition for the important theoretical consequences and we focus attention on quantitative
estimates corresponding to our preferred model specification. In Appendix D, we provide formal
analysis that corresponds to the theoretical claims summarized here.


5.1         Model and Assumptions

Economic Setting: Individuals have a utility function U (c, l), where c is consumption and l is
labor. Individuals produce z = wl units of income for every l units of labor, where the wage w
is drawn from an atomless distribution F . The government cannot observe earnings potential w,
and is thus restricted to setting taxes T (z) as a function of earnings z. More generally, and as in
Feldstein (1995; 1999), this model serves as a model of taxable income choice. This encompasses,
    31
         Appendix Table A10 examines how relaxing each of the three assumptions of our linear model improves model
fit.
    32
    These standard models are partial equilibrium models in the sense that they assume wages are fixed. Note that
in a general equilibrium model, the presence of ironing could affect wages themselves, as well as the labor supply
elasticity with respect to those wages.




                                                          29
for example, decisions over tax-preferred activities such as charitable contributions.33
       Optimizing individuals choose z ∗ ∈ argmax{U (z−T (z), z/w)}. Ironers choose z ∗ ∈ argmax{U (z−
A(z ∗ )z, z/w)}, where A(z ∗ ) = T (z ∗ )/z ∗ is the average tax rate. Notice that for ironers, z ∗ is a
fixed point of a decision process in which misperceptions are possibly shaped by z ∗ , while at the
same time z ∗ is a perceived optimum given those misperceptions.34 In Appendix D.1 we provide
existence and uniqueness results as well as basic comparative statics for this solution concept.
       The social welfare function is given by
                        ˆ                                                         ˆ
                                ∗              ∗           ∗
                            U (z (w, 1γ ) − T (z (w, 1γ )), z (w, 1γ )/w)dH + λ       T (z ∗ (w, 1γ ))dH,           (4)
                   ´
subject to             T (z ∗ (w, 1γ ))dH ≥ 0, where 1γ ∈ {0, 1} is an indicator for ironing, H is the joint
distribution over wage and ironing types, and λ is the marginal value of public funds. Denote the
social marginal welfare weight at the current tax system by g(w, 1γ ) = Uc0 /λ.

Assumptions for Numerical Results: We parameterize individual utility according to the
                                                       (z/w)1+k
functional form U (z) = log(z − T (z) −                   1+k ),    a commonly used specification in optimal tax
studies (e.g., Atkinson 1990; Diamond 1998; Saez 2001). We parameterize the tax function T (z)
according to the U.S. tax code in 2014—the tax code relevant for forecasts in Study 1. In this
model, assuming correct tax perceptions, the structural labor supply elasticity is determined by
1
k.     When tax rates are misperceived, the elasticity with respect to wages must be scaled by the
         1−T̃ 0
term     1−T 0 ,   which takes an average value of 1.02 in our data—thus, while the formal calculation of
elasticity is not identical, quantitatively the difference is negligible. In simulations, we will vary
the parameter k across values from 2 to 5, capturing elasticities ranging from approximately 0.2
to 0.5. In a recent meta-analysis of labor-supply elasticity estimates, Chetty et al. (2011) report a
preferred estimate of the intensive-margin Hicksian elasticity of 0.33, approximately corresponding
to k = 3.
       Contingent on these parameters, we calculate the wage parameter that rationalizes reported
earnings for each individual in the dataset. An individual’s wage parameter can be calculated
                                                   k   1
according to the equation w = ( 1−z T̃ 0 ) 1+k . Since this calculation depends on the individual’s
perceived marginal tax rate T̃ , we calculate this value both under the assumption of ironing and
under the assumption of correct forecasting.
  33
      See Chetty (2009) for some exceptions to this generalization, and Slemrod and Kopczuk (2002) for discussion of
its impact on the interpretation of labor-supply elasticity.
   34
      Farhi and Gabaix (2018) and Liebman and Zeckhauser (2004) implicitly use this solution concept in their study of
optimal income taxation. In Appendix D we formalize the solution concept and characterize existence or uniqueness
for the types of misperceptions that we estimate. The solution concept may be reformulated as a special-case of
Berk-Nash equilibrium (Esponda and Pouzo, 2016) and, as such, can be microfounded as a steady state of a dynamic
process in which individuals follow a myopic best-response strategy while learning through a misspecified model. To
formally embed our model in the Berk-Nash framework, we must re-interpret T̃ (z|z ∗ ) as the mean of the individual’s
belief, while allowing the individual to have a sufficiently diffuse prior so that no outcomes are “surprises.” See also
Gabaix (2014) for a general approach to modeling boundedly rational misperceptions of incentive schemes.



                                                               30
       When considering the consequences of a policy reform, we forecast the aggregate consequences
of the individual reactions implied by the specified utility model and individual utility parameters.
We forecast each individual’s predicted response contingent on being an ironer or a correct fore-
caster, applying the relevant estimated wage parameter in each case. We aggregate these individual
responses by assuming that behavior is determined by the ironing model with probability γ = 0.43,
and otherwise determined by the correct forecasting model. This estimate is drawn from our pre-
ferred specification in Study 1.35 We generate analogs to 95% confidence intervals by alternatively
assuming that γ = 0.25 or γ = 0.62—the boundaries of the 95% confidence interval on ironing
propensity in our preferred regression model.


5.2      Results

Implication 1: Government revenue increases due to ironing, and this revenue is raised
progressively. Thus, ironing increases social welfare. When the tax schedule is progressive,
marginal tax rates will be higher than average tax rates, and thus ironing will lead to underestima-
tion of marginal tax rates. As established in de Bartolome (1995) for a linear income tax, and in
Liebman and Zeckhauser (2004) and Appendix D more generally, this implies that labor earnings
and thus government revenue will increase in the presence of ironers. Numerically, we find that
under the U.S. tax schedule, our estimated ironing propensity leads to a 1.6-3.7% increase in gov-
ernment revenue (reported in column 2 of Table 5), depending on the labor supply elasticity. For
our preferred elasticity of 13 , the revenue gain is 2.2% (95% CI: 1.5%-3.7%).
       While ironing raises revenue, it also generates individual misoptimization and therefore im-
poses costs on the affected individuals. Which individuals bear those costs significantly influences
social welfare. In general, the cost of the mistake of ironing is proportional to a financial loss of
T 0 (z) − A(z), the difference between the marginal and average tax rates. To the extent that the
difference between the marginal and average tax rate will increase with earned income, the financial
burden of misoptimization will fall on the higher income individuals. For example, while the lowest
income individuals will not misoptimize at all, the wedge will be substantial for the highest income
individuals of our sample.
       Figure 8 illustrates the estimated burden of misoptimization across different income levels,
taking as given the structure of the U.S. income tax code and our estimates of ironing propensity.
For each individual, we first calculate the compensating variation of ironing: that is, the amount
of money that the individual would have to receive to be as well off ironing as he would be if
he optimized with correct forecasts. We then plot the average compensating variation for each
level of earnings, normalized by the population wide average of revenue generated by ironing on
the right y-axis. This figure illustrates that the individual cost of misoptimization induced by
  35
   While our primary estimate from Study 2 is quantitatively similar, we believe our Study 1 estimates are most
appropriate for this exercise due to their focus specifically on perceptions of the U.S. tax code.



                                                      31
ironing is increasing in income, and is generally well below the average revenue generated by its
presence, suggesting the potential to exploit this bias and redistribute the extra government revenue
it provides in a welfare-enhancing manner. In short, the burden of ironing is starkly progressive.
    The first two observations—that ironing counteracts the distortionary effects of taxation by
raising earnings, and that it increases government revenue in a progressive fashion—lead to the
implication that ironing leads to progressive revenue collection, which will typically be welfare-
improving.
    To quantify the impact of our estimated propensity of ironing on welfare, columns 3-5 of Table
5 present estimates of the fraction of current government revenue the social planner would pay to
avoid reducing the rate of ironing to zero. Calculating social welfare requires specifying the value
of public funds, λ. In our preferred specification, we adopt the standard assumption that λ is equal
to the average marginal utility of consumption in the population.36 To illustrate the sensitivity
of results to that assumption, we additionally present results for a “low λ” regime (in which we
set λ to be equal to the 50th percentile of marginal utilities in our population) and a “high λ”
regime (in which we set λ to be equal to the 90th percentile of marginal utilities in our population).
Across different assumed elasticities and values of public funds, we find that the improvement to
social welfare realized from the presence of ironing is valued equivalently to an unfunded increase
in government spending ranging from 1.4% to 3.6%, with 2.3% (95% CI: 1.4%-3.4%) corresponding
to our preferred specification. As compared to the raw increase in government revenue presented
in column 2, this indicates that the welfare costs of individual misoptimization have a minimal
offsetting effect to the additional spending funded by ironing.

Implication 2: Ironing increases the welfare benefits of progressive taxation. As we
have already shown, ironing results in progressive revenue generation when the income tax schedule
is itself progressive. Note, however, that the presence of ironing becomes irrelevant under linear,
“flat” taxes, since such systems equate marginal and average tax rates. In effect, then, a tax
simplification scheme that bring the tax schedule closer to a flat tax will reduce the socially beneficial
influence of this bias. In other words, tax simplification, in addition to changing material incentives,
can indirectly generate a type of debiasing.
    To illustrate this numerically for the U.S. income tax system, we consider the welfare effects of
moving to a flat tax. We constrain the marginal tax rate of the flat tax to be such that the amount
of revenue raised would be identical in the absence of substitution to or from leisure: 11.06%.37
As shown in columns 2 and 3 of Table 6, perfect tax forecasters on average increase their labor in
response to this tax reform, leading to a 1.9-5.3% increase in tax revenue. However, because this
  36
     When calculating this average, we assume an income floor of $6,000 to approximate the provision of social
insurance that is outside of our current model.
  37
     Similar results obtain if we instead constrain the flat tax rate to raise the same amount of revenue after accounting
for substitution effects (see Appendix E).



                                                           32
reform leads to a less progressive tax system, and because we have assumed a social welfare function
valuing redistribution, the reform leads to a substantial reduction in welfare. Quantitatively, this
welfare loss is equivalent to a loss of 9.9-12.9% of government revenue under the pre-reform tax
system.
       Turning to the estimates accounting for ironing in columns 4 and 5, we see that the revenue
benefits of the flat tax are dampened by the less elastic response of ironers. This lower revenue,
combined with the fact that ironing amplifies the decrease in progressivity generated by the flat
tax, results in a more severe welfare loss than would be obtained under the assumption of perfect
tax perceptions. The welfare losses range from 12.3-13.8% of pre-reform government revenue. In
our preferred specification, the welfare loss associated with moving to a flat tax is 13.2% of pre-
reform government revenue (95% CI: 12.5%-13.9%). Compared to the estimates that assume correct
forecasting, this indicates that the welfare costs of this reform are 14% higher (95% CI: 8%-20%)
when the effects of ironing are incorporated.
       Another simple way to analyze the impact of ironing on the benefits of progressivity is to analyze
the optimal top marginal tax rate. Saez (2002) shows that the top marginal tax rate τ̄ satisfies
 τ̄        1−ḡ
1−τ̄   =    aε̄   where ḡ is the average social marginal welfare weight on the top income earners, ε̄ is the
structural elasticity, and a is the Pareto parameter of the income distribution.38 In Appendix D.3,
                                                            τ̄             1−ḡ
we show that the top marginal tax rate satisfies           1−τ̄   =   [(1−γ̄I )a+γ̄I ]ε̄ ,   where γ̄I is the propensity to
iron among high income earners. Since the Pareto parameter a > 1, the optimal top marginal tax
rate is higher in the presence of ironing. For a Pareto parameter a = 2 estimated by Saez (2002),
                                                                τ̄
for example, the presence of 43% ironers increases             1−τ̄   by 27%.
       Our analysis of tax schedule design highlights the importance of establishing the mechanisms
underlying misperceptions of marginal tax rates. Based on our estimated model, we are able to
forecast the changes to misperceptions (and the behaviors they dictate) after reforms to the tax
schedule—a task for which reduced-form estimates of MTR perceptions are insufficient.


5.3        Interpretation and Caveats

Across these two classes of analyses—examining the welfare impact of introducing ironing under
our current tax system, and examining the impact of ironing on a flat-tax reform—we find evidence
that this bias serves a useful role for the social planner.39 Ironing leads to additional progressive
revenue collection compared to a baseline of perfect optimization, and this is consequential for
welfare analysis of redistributive tax policy.
       By focusing on the canonical income taxation framework, the welfare analysis here omits the
  38
   For simplicity we consider the case where there are no income effects on labor supply.
  39
   This closely relates to the finding of Sobel (1984), who shows that social welfare costs of a monopoly are mitigated
when consumers respond to average rather than marginal price. For other examples in which behavioral biases
improve social welfare see Handel (2013); Handel and Kolstad (2015); Spinnewijn (2017); Handel et al. (forthcoming);
Mullainathan et al. (2012).



                                                          33
cost of mistakes not related to choices about earnings and taxable income; for example, improper
budgeting. Moreover, the standard model of earnings choice that we have adopted abstracts en-
tirely from political economy issues, which would be critically important in assessing some costs of
tax systems that generate misperceptions. We believe that there are meaningful, and potentially
dramatic, costs associated with a populace coming to believe that a tax system is actively designed
to mislead, and we note that these costs are absent from our model.
         As a second note of caution, we emphasize that our finding that heuristic use improves social
welfare is specific to domain that we study: misperceptions of the tax rates of the federal income
tax schedule for earned income. We have abstracted from misunderstanding regarding various other
components of the schedule. For the wealthy, optimal decision making might additionally rely on
knowledge of the alternative minimum tax or the estate tax.40 For the comparatively low income,
misunderstanding of the interaction of the tax schedule with assistance programs may generate
additional misperceptions (Romich, 2006), and failure to optimize along these dimensions may be
especially costly (Currie, 2006).41


5.4        Summary of Additional Results

In Appendix D, we support the implications of our simulation results in a formal theoretical frame-
work. We first provide an instructive step-by-step analysis of a two-bracket model in Appendix D.2,
which elucidates the mathematical intuition behind our primary claims. We then generalize this in
Appendix D.3, which provides formulas for the behavioral and welfare effects of raising tax rates
on earners with incomes above a threshold. In Appendix D.3.3, we use that formula to calculate
the top marginal tax rate, and in Appendix D.3.4 we use the formula to calculate the optimal
income tax in a heterogeneous population of ironers. Our formula subsumes that of Liebman and
Zeckhauser (2004) for the case of a population of only ironers, and complements the Farhi and
Gabaix (2018) formula for the case of homogeneous partial ironers.
         In Appendix E, we provide a series of robustness checks on our simulation results. We demon-
strate that our highlighted implications still hold under weaker assumptions on the social planner’s
preference for redistribution, under different derivations of the flat-tax rate, and under different
corrections for the absence of extremely high-income filers in our sample.


6         Discussion
A large and growing literature in behavioral economics shows that people rely on heuristics when
facing complex incentives. We contribute to this literature by studying misperceptions of income
    40
    See Kuziemko et al. (2015) for documentation of misunderstanding of the estate tax.
    41
    A substantial literature documents misunderstanding specifically of the Earned Income Tax Credit (see, e.g.,
Liebman, 1998; Romich and Weisner, 2000; Chetty et al., 2013).




                                                      34
taxes—a notoriously complex set of incentives with active public debate promoting simplifica-
tion. We show that much of the systematic misperception of the income tax can be explained
by widespread reliance on a single, simple heuristic: ironing. The ability to account for misper-
ceptions with a single parsimonious model allows rigorous analysis of questions about tax reform.
We provide such an illustrative analysis, in which the welfare effects of ironing are positive and
economically significant.
    Moving beyond applications specific to the design of optimal tax policy, we highlight that our
empirical estimates are relevant for broader classes of tax incentives. When considering the adoption
of tax-preferred behaviors, the investment in human capital in the hopes of raising future wages,
or the pursuit of financial investments that will only accrue at a future date, our results provides
a unique view into the tax perceptions that could shape such decisions.
    Of course, we urge both caution and further research before relying on our experimental es-
timates to predict responses to actual tax reforms. As with many other heuristics, we suspect
that ironing might be most prevalent for “quick” decisions; e.g., whether to work an extra shift or
to make a tax-deductible charitable contribution. To the extent that heuristic use is a deliberate
means of reducing cognitive costs, it may be less frequent in high stakes labor-supply decisions
than it is in our studies. At the same time, a countervailing force is that in practice, the large
labor-supply decisions that rely on correct forecasts of tax rates involve many other dimensions
that all require careful consideration; this additional complexity may leave little mental bandwidth
for tax forecasting. For example, an individual choosing between two different jobs may, rightly or
wrongly, be less concerned with correctly considering after-tax salaries than with workplace culture
or livability of the different cities.
    While further study of the elasticity of ironing propensity with respect to stakes is needed, some
insights may be gleaned from analogous research on other heuristics. For example, while mental
accounting, narrow bracketing, and the representativeness heuristic were originally documented in
unincentivized survey studies, they have since been shown to play an important role in important
field behaviors—e.g., in the marginal propensity to consume out of the supplemental nutrition
assistance program in the U.S. (Hastings and Shapiro, 2018), take up of long-term care insurance
(Gottlieb and Mitchell, 2015), and the link between analysts’ earnings-growth forecasts and stock
returns (Bordalo et al., forthcoming). Camerer and Hogarth (1999) provide a systematic analysis
of whether incentives affect heuristic use in experiments, and find no evidence that it does. While
some reservation is needed when assuming that field behavior will be governed by the heuristics
that we document, this existing literature strongly supports the possibility.
    We additionally caution readers that the population used in our studies is likely non-representative.
Despite Study 1 matching the U.S. population on several key observable demographics, unobserved
characteristics could influence selection into our online survey platform. While we have shown that
the results from both studies are robust to a variety of sample restrictions, further work is merited


                                                  35
to validate our results in further populations of interest. However, were heuristics and biases besides
ironing present in the general population, they would be found in subsamples such as ours as well;
as such, we do not view these issues as a hindrance to a demonstration of ironing’s comparative
importance.
    We are less reserved about our qualitative findings than we are about our point estimates. In
particular, we do not see a theoretical reason to expect residual misperceptions beyond ironing
to become more important when stakes are increased. This suggests that our finding that ironing
provides a parsimonious account of MTR underestimation is less sensitive to concerns about external
validity.
    These results build towards a reasonably comprehensive account of income-tax-schedule mis-
understanding that is much needed in the behavioral public finance literature. As illustrated in
Section 5, our results are easily integrated into frameworks such as those of Farhi and Gabaix
(2018), and in combination with their theoretical advances may broadly inform tax policy design.
We believe that this line of inquiry has thus far received too little attention from behavioral scien-
tists, perhaps because of its intrinsically tight connection to core economic questions rather than
to core psychological questions. Beyond applications to tax policy, this line of inquiry can inform
broader questions about mechanism design and misperceptions of complex incentives.
    While ironing appears to be economically important, its psychological foundations remain ill
understood. However, the experimental framework we have developed in Study 2 may be readily
adapted for deeper study of this topic. For example, the extent to which ironing propensity depends
on stakes or on the presence of attention-demanding stimuli can shed light on whether ironing is
more of a deliberately chosen heuristic or if it’s more of a strongly held belief about the typical
nature of incentives schemes in the real world. Variation in cues that stimulate attention to marginal
tax rates, or to the number of brackets in the tax code, can similarly shed light on the degree to
which ironing is automatic or deliberate. Altering the salience of average and marginal tax rates
in experimental materials can be informative about the extent to which ironing is enhanced by the
way information is conveyed in paystubs or tax forms. And more generally, studying the impact of
information and feedback can provide insights into the robustness and generality of our results.
    Finally, we note that the experimental framework we have developed can be readily modified
to test for the schmeduling heuristics in complex incentive schemes other than tax codes. Further
study of the prevalence of heuristic use across contexts and across subpopulations will provide
more clarity on their welfare implications and economic importance. Exploring these and related
questions is an important step toward a more psychologically-grounded mechanism design. We
view our studies as developing some foundations for this promising line of research.




                                                  36
References
Aghion, Philippe, Ufuk Akcigit, Matthieu Lequien, and Stefanie Stantcheva, “Tax Simplicity and
 Heterogeneous Learning,” Working Paper 24049, National Bureau of Economic Research November 2017.

Alesina, Alberto, Stefanie Stantcheva, and Edoardo Teso, “Intergenerational Mobility and Prefer-
  ences for Redistribution,” American Economic Review, 2018, 108 (2), 521–554.

Altomonte, Carlo, Alessandro Barattieri, and Susan Basu, “Average-Cost Pricing: Some Evidence
  and Implications,” European Economic Review, 2015, 79, 281–296.

Atkinson, Anthony Barnes, “Public Economics and the Economic Public,” European Economic Review,
  1990, 34 (2-3), 225–248.

Ballard, Charles L. and Sanjay Gupta, “Perceptions and Realities of Average Tax Rates in the Federal
 Income Tax: Evidence from Michigan,” National Tax Journal, 2018, 71 (2), 263–294.

Benjamin, Daniel J., Ori Heffetz, Miles S. Kimball, and Nichole Szembrot, “Beyond Happiness
  and Satisfaction: Toward Well-Being Indices Based on Stated Preference,” American Economic Review,
  2014, 104 (9), 2698–2735.

Benzarti, Youssef, “How Taxing Is Tax Filing? Using Revealed Preferences to Estimate Compliance
  Costs.,” Working Paper 23903, National Bureau of Economic Research October 2017.

Bernheim, B. Douglas and Dmitry Taubinsky, “Behavioral Public Economics,” in B. Douglas Bern-
  heim, Stefano DellaVigna, and David Laibson, eds., Handbook of Behavioral Economics - Foundations and
  Applications 1, North Holland, 2018, pp. 381–516.

Bhargava, Saurabh, George Loewenstein, and Justin Sydnor, “Choose to Lose: Health Plan Choices
 from a Menu with Dominated Options,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2017, 132 (3), 1319–1372.

Blaufus, Kay, Jonathan Bob, Jochen Hundsdoerfer, Christian Sielaff, Dirk Kiesewetter, and
  Joachim Weimann, “Perception of Income Tax Rates: Evidence from Germany,” European Journal of
  Law and Economics, 2015, 40 (3), 457–478.

Blomquist, Soren and Luca Micheletto, “Optimal Redistributive Taxation when Government’s and
  Agents’ Preferences Differ,” Journal of Public Economics, 2006, 90 (6-7), 1215–1233.

Bordalo, Pedro, Nicola Gennaioli, Rafael La Porta, and Andrei Shleifer, “Diagnostic Expectations
 and Stock Returns,” Journal of Finance, forthcoming.

Brown, C. V., “Misconceptions About Income Tax and Incentives,” Scottish Journal of Political Economy,
  1969, 16 (2), 1–21.

Camerer, Colin F. and Robin M. Hogarth, “The Effects of Financial Incentives in Experiments: A
 Review and Capital-Labor-Production Framework,” Journal of Risk and Uncertainty, 1999, 18, 7–42.

Carter, David W. and J. Walter Milon, “Price Knowledge in Household Demand for Utility Services,”
 Land Economics, 2005, 81 (2), 265–283.

Chetty, Raj, “Is the Taxable Income Elasticity Sufficient to Calculate Deadweight Loss? The Implications
 of Evasion and Avoidance,” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 2009, 1 (2), 31–52.

  , Adam Guren, Day Manoli, and Andrea Weber, “Are Micro and Macro Labor Supply Elasticities
  Consistent? A Review of Evidence on the Intensive and Extensive Margins,” American Economic Review,
  May 2011, 101 (3), 471–475.

  , Adam Looney, and Kory Kroft, “Salience and Taxation: Theory and Evidence,” American Economic
  Review, 2009, 99 (4), 1145–1177.

                                                  37
   and Emmanuel Saez, “Teaching the Tax Code: Earnings Responses to an Experiment with EITC
  Recipients,” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 2013, 5 (1), 1–31.

  , John N Friedman, and Emmanuel Saez, “Using Differences in Knowledge across Neighborhoods to
  Uncover the Impacts of the EITC on Earnings,” American Economic Review, 2013, 103 (7), 2683–2721.

Congdon, William J., Jeffrey R. Kling, and Sendhil Mullainathan, “Behavioral Economics and Tax
 Policy,” National Tax Journal, 2009, 62 (3), 375–386.

Congressional Budget Office, “Refundable Tax Credits,” 2013.

Cruces, Guillermo, Ricardo Perez-Truglia, and Martin Tetaz, “Biased Perceptions of Income Dis-
  tribution and Preferences for Redistribution: Evidence from a Survey Experiment,” Journal of Public
  Economics, 2013, 98, 100 – 112.

Currie, Janet, “The Take-Up of Social Benefits,” in Alan J. Auerbach, David Card, and John M. Quigley,
 eds., Public Policy and the Income Distribution, Russell Sage Foundation, 2006, pp. 80–148.

de Bartolome, Charles A. M., “Which Tax Rate Do People Use: Average or Marginal?,” Journal of
  Public Economics, 1995, 56 (1), 79–96.

Diamond, Peter A, “Optimal Income Taxation: An Example with a U-shaped Pattern of Optimal Marginal
  Tax rates,” American Economic Review, 1998, 88 (1), 83–95.

Enrick, Nobert Lloyd, “A Pilot Study of Income Tax Consciousness,” National Tax Journal, 1963, 16 (2),
  169–173.

  , “A Further Study of Income Tax Consciousness,” National Tax Journal, 1964, 17 (3), 319–321.

Esponda, Ignacio and Demian Pouzo, “Berk-Nash Equilibrium: A Framework for Modeling Agents
  with Misspecified Agents„” Econometrica, 2016, 84 (3), 1093–1130.

Farhi, Emmanuel and Xavier Gabaix, “Optimal Taxation with Behavioral Agents,” Working Paper
  21524, National Bureau of Economic Research September 2018.

Feldman, Naomi E., Peter Katuscak, and Laura Kawano, “Taxpayer Confusion: Evidence from the
  Child Tax Credit,” American Economic Review, 2016, 106 (3), 807–835.

Feldstein, Martin, “The Effect of Marginal Tax Rates on Taxable Income: A Panel Study of the 1986 Tax
  Reform Act,” Journal of Political Economy, 1995, 103 (3).

  , “Tax Avoidance and the Deadweight Loss of the Income Tax,” Review of Economics and Statistics, 1999,
  81 (4), 674–680.

Fiedler, Klaus and Peter Juslin, “Taking the Interface Between Mind and Environment Seriously,”
  Information Sampling and Adaptive Cognition, 2006, pp. 3–29.

Finkelstein, Amy, “E-ZTAX: Tax Salience and Tax Rates,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2009,
  124 (3), 969–1010.

Fujii, Edwin T and Clifford Hawley, “On the Accuracy of Tax Perceptions,” The Review of Economics
  and Statistics, 1988, 70 (2), 344–347.

Gabaix, Xavier, “A Sparsity Based Model of Bounded Rationality,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2014,
 129, 1661–1710.

Gennaioli, Nicola, Yueran Ma, and Andrei Shleifer, “Expectations and Investment,” NBER Macroe-
 conomics Annual, 2016.



                                                  38
Gensemer, Bruce, Jane Lean, and William Neenan, “Awareness of Marginal Income Tax Rates Among
 High-Income Taxpayers,” National Tax Journal, 1965, 18 (3), 258–267.

Gerritsen, Aart, “Optimal Taxation When People Do Not Maximize Well-Being,” Journal of Public Eco-
 nomics, 2016, pp. –.

Gideon, Michael, “Do Individuals Perceive Income Tax Rates Correctly?,” Public Finance Review, 2017,
  45 (1), 97–117.

Gottlieb, Daniel and Olivia Mitchell, “Narrow Framing and Long-Term Care Insurance,” Working
 Paper, 2015.

Grubb, Michael D. and Matthew Osborne, “Cellular Service Demand: Biased Beliefs, Learning, and
 Bill Shock,” American Economic Review, 2015, 105 (1), 234–71.

Handel, Ben, Jon Kolstad, and Johannes Spinnewijn, “Information Frictions and Adverse Selection:
 Policy Interventions in Health Insurance Markets,” Review of Economics and Statistics, forthcoming.

Handel, Benjamin and Joshua Schwartzstein, “Frictions or Mental Gaps: What’s Behind the In-
 formation We (Don’t) Use and When Do We Care?,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 2018, 32 (1),
 155–178.

Handel, Benjamin R, “Adverse Selection and Inertia in Health Insurance Markets: When Nudging Hurts,”
 The American Economic Review, 2013, 103 (7), 2643–2682.

   and Jonathan T Kolstad, “Health Insurance for “Humans”: Information Frictions, Plan Choice, and
  Consumer Welfare,” American Economic Review, 2015, 105 (8), 2449–2500.

Hastings, Justine and Jesse Shapiro, “How Are SNAP Benefits Spent? Evidence from a Retail Panel,”
 American Economic Review, 2018, 108 (12), 3493–3540.

Ito, Koichiro, “Do Consumers Respond to Marginal or Average Price? Evidence from Nonlinear Electricity
  Pricing,” American Economic Review, 2014, 104 (2), 537–563.

Juslin, Peter, Anders Winman, and Patrik Hansson, “The Naïve Intuitive Statistician: A Naïve
  Sampling Model of Intuitive Confidence Intervals.,” Psychological Review, 2007, 114 (3), 678.

Kanbur, Ravi, Jukka Perttila, and Matti Tuomala, “Non-Welfarist Optimal Taxation Behavioural
 Public Economics,” Journal of Economic Surveys, 2006, 20 (5), 849–868.

  , Jukka Pirttila, and Matti Tuomala, “Moral Hazard, Income Taxation, and Prospect Theory,”
  Scandinavian Journal of Economics, 2008, 110 (2), 321–337.

Kleinberg, Jon, Annie Liang, and Sendhil Mullainathan, “The Theory is Predictive, but is it Com-
  plete? An Application to Human Perception of Randomness,” Working Paper, 2017.

Kuziemko, Ilyana, Michael I Norton, Emmanuel Saez, and Stefanie Stantcheva, “How Elastic are
 Preferences for Redistribution? Evidence from Randomized Survey Experiments,” American Economic
 Review, 2015, 105 (4), 1478–1508.

Levy, Matthew and Joshua Tasoff, “Exponential Growth Bias and Lifecycle Consumption,” Journal of
  the European Economic Association, 2016, 14 (3), 545–583.

Lewis, Alan, “Perceptions of Tax Rates,” British Tax Review, 1978, pp. 358–366.

Liebman, Jeffrey B., “The Impact of the Earned Income Tax Credit on Incentives and Income Distri-
  bution,” in “Tax Policy and the Economy, Volume 12” NBER Chapters, National Bureau of Economic
  Research, Inc, June 1998, pp. 83–120.


                                                  39
   and Richard Zeckhauser, “Schmeduling,” Working Paper, 2004.

Lusardi, Annamaria and Olivia S. Mitchell, “The Economic Importance of Financial Literacy: Theory
  and Evidence,” Journal of Economic Literature, 2014, 52 (1), 5–44.

Manski, Charles F., “Measuring Expectations,” Econometrica, 2004, 72 (5), 1329–1376.

Miller, Benjamin and Kevin Mumford, “The Salience of Complex Tax Changes: Evidence From the
 Child and Dependent Care Credit Expansion,” National Tax Journal, 2015, 68 (3), 477–510.

Mirrlees, James A, “An Exploration in the Theory of Optimum Income Taxation,” The Review of Eco-
 nomic Studies, 1971, pp. 175–208.

Mullainathan, Sendhil, Joshua Schwartzstein, and William J Congdon, “A Reduced-Form Ap-
 proach to Behavioral Public Finance,” Annual Review of Economics, 2012, 4, 1–30.

Rees-Jones, Alex and Dmitry Taubinsky, “Taxing Humans: Pitfalls of the Mechanism Design Approach
 and Potential Resolutions,” in Robert A. Moffitt, ed., Tax Policy and the Economy, Volume 32, University
 of Chicago Press, 2018.

Romich, Jennifer L., “Difficult Calculations: Low-Income Workers and Marginal Tax Rates,” Social
 Service Review, 2006, 80 (1), 27–66.

   and Thomas Weisner, “How Families View and Use the EITC: Advance Payment versus Lump Sum
  Delivery,” National Tax Journal, 2000, 53 (4), 1245–1266.

Saez, Emmanuel, “Using Elasticities to Derive Optimal Income Tax Rates,” The Review of Economic
  Studies, 2001, 68 (1), 205–229.

  , “Optimal Income Transfer Programs: Intensive versus Extensive Labor Supply Responses,” The Quar-
  terly Journal of Economics, 2002, 117 (3), 1039–1073.

Slemrod, Joel and Wojciech Kopczuk, “The Optimal Elasticity of Taxable Income,” Journal of Public
  Economics, 2002, 84 (1), 91–112.

Sobel, Joel, “Non-linear prices and price-taking behavior,” Journal of Economic Behavior Organization,
  1984, 5 (3), 387 – 396.

Spencer, J, “Estimating Averages,” Ergonomics, 1961, 4 (4), 317–328.

  , “A Further Study of Estimating Averages,” Ergonomics, 1963, 6 (3), 255–265.

Spinnewijn, Johannes, “Heterogeneity, Demand for Insurance and Adverse Selection,” American Eco-
  nomic Journal: Economic Policy, 2017, 9 (1), 308–343.

Stango, Victor and Jonathan Zinman, “Exponential Growth Bias and Household Finance,” The Journal
  of Finance, 2009, 64 (6), 2807–2849.

Taubinsky, Dmitry and Alex Rees-Jones, “Attention Variation and Welfare: Theory and Evidence
  from a Tax Salience Experiment,” Review of Economic Studies, 2018, 85 (4), 2462–2496.

Wagstaff, Joseph Van, “Income Tax Consciousness under Withholding,” Southern Economic Journal,
 1965, 32 (1), 73–80.

Weinzierl, Matthew C, “The Promise of Positive Optimal Taxation,” Journal of Public Economics, 2014,
 118, 128–142.

Weinzierl, Matthew C., “Popular Acceptance of Inequality Due to Innate Brute Luck and Support for
 Classical Benefit-based Taxation,” Journal of Public Economics, 2017, 155, 54–63.


                                                   40
                          Figure 1: Ironing and Spotlighting Heuristics




Notes: This figure presents an illustration of the ironing and spotlighting heuristics applied to a
convex tax schedule. Taxpayers applying these heuristics approximate the schedule with linear
forecasts that depend on their own position. We present two example positions, one with high
income (the black dot) and one with comparatively low income (the white dot). Under the ironing
heuristic, the taxpayer forecasts by applying his average tax rate at all points, resulting in the
observed secant lines. Under the spotlighting heuristic, the taxpayer forecasts by applying his
marginal tax rate to the change in income that would occur, resulting in the observed tangent
lines.




                                                41
            Figure 2: Local-Polynomial Approximations of the Perceived Tax Schedule




Notes: This figure presents local-polynomial approximations of the perceived relationship between
the income earned and taxes owed. Results are plotted separately for single and married-filing-
jointly tax filers, as incomes considered in the forecasting task were drawn from filing-status-specific
distributions. The first row of figures presents estimates derived from only mid-range forecasts,
while the second row presents estimates derived from the full sampling distribution. The shaded
regions illustrate the 95% confidence intervals of the local-polynomial estimates. Bandwidth:
10,000. Degree of polynomial: 2. Kernel: Epanechnikov.




                                                  42
               Figure 3: Bias in Tax Perceptions, by Respondents’ Income Quartile




Notes: This figure plots the average bias in tax forecasts as a function of the true tax owed
by the hypothetical tax payer. To explore how misperceptions of the tax schedule vary
depending on the forecasters’ own income, we plot this relationship separately by the in-
come quartile of the respondent. Presented are the estimated coefficients from the regression
(T̃ − T )i,f = b,q αb,q ∗ I(incomef ∈ binb ) ∗ I(incomei ∈ quartileq ) + i,f , predicting average bias
              P

conditional on income quartile and the true tax owed, rounded into $5,000 bins.




                                                  43
                        Figure 4: Estimates of Residual Tax Misperception




Notes: This figure plots the residual misperception functions estimated in columns 2 and 4 of
Table 2. Dashed lines indicate the boundaries of 95% confidence intervals. These estimates
indicate systematic overestimation of the taxes due when true taxes are comparatively small. For
sufficiently large tax liabilities, this bias reverses into systematic underestimation of the taxes due.




                                                  44
                  Figure 5: Individual-Specific Estimates of Heuristic Propensity




Notes: This figure presents a kernel-density estimate of the joint distribution of individual-specific
ironing and spotlighting parameters, as estimated in the exercise described in section 3.3.2. Note
that individual-level NLLS regressions failed to converge for 7 respondents. Bandwidth: .2.
Kernel: Gaussian.




                                                 45
            Figure 6: Examining Perceived Tax Schedules by Individual Classification




Notes: This figure presents approximations of the perceived relationship between the income
earned and taxes owed, as previously shown in Figure 2, plotted by classification of “ironers” and
“non-ironers” from Figure 5. Results shown are for married-filing-jointly tax filers. “Ironers” are
classified as individuals with an ironing parameter within 0.4 of 1 and spotlighting parameter
within 0.4 of 0. For each panel, we separately plot the perceived tax schedule for above and below
median filers (conditional on having non-zero tax), with the vertical lines indicating the average
income within each group. Dashed lines indicate the local polynomial fits with 95% confidence
intervals (Bandwidth: 10,000. Degree of polynomial: 2. Kernel: Epanechnikov), and solid lines
indicate fitted linear models.




                                                46
                        Figure 7: Screenshot of Tax Schedules in Study 2




Notes: Screenshot of the presentation of tax schedules in Study 2.




                                               47
                 Figure 8: Consequences of Debiasing Across Income Distribution




Notes: This figure presents local polynomial estimates that summarize the consequences of ironing
for progressivity. For each taxpayer, we calculate the compensating variation in income that would
lead an ironing taxpayer to have the same utility level as achieved by a correct forecaster. The
y-axis reports this value as a fraction of the per-capita loss of government revenue that arises from
correcting ironing. Bandwidth: 25000. Kernel: Epanechnikov.




                                                 48
                       Table 1: Testing for “Flattening” of the Tax Schedule

                                    All Incomes            Income Quartiles
                                      Pooled         1         2         3              4
                                  Estimation Sample: Local Draws
            Scale of slope (β)        0.81***    1.01*** 1.07*** 0.83***            0.78***
                                      (0.043)    (0.205) (0.113) (0.058)            (0.054)
            P-value of H0 : β = 1      0.000       0.975    0.552     0.003          0.000
            Respondents                 4197       1050      1062      1040           1045
            Forecasts                  17937       3143      4074      5293           5427
                       Estimation Sample: Mid-Range Sampling Distribution
            Scale of slope (β)        0.82***    0.70*** 0.78*** 0.80***            0.94***
                                      (0.013)    (0.029) (0.030) (0.026)            (0.023)
            P-value of H0 : β = 1      0.000       0.000    0.000     0.000          0.005
            Respondents                 4197       1050      1062      1040           1045
            Forecasts                  41970      10500     10620     10400          10450
                           Estimation Sample: Full Sampling Distribution
            Scale of slope (β)        0.62***    0.53*** 0.56*** 0.61***            0.76***
                                      (0.010)    (0.020) (0.021) (0.019)            (0.017)
            P-value of H0 : β = 1      0.000       0.000    0.000     0.000          0.000
            Respondents                 4197       1050      1062      1040           1045
            Forecasts                  58758      14700     14868     14560          14630

Notes: Standard errors, clustered by respondent, in parentheses. Presented are coefficients from
OLS fixed-effect regressions of the form T̃i,f = β ∗Ti,f +νi +i,f . The coefficient β can be interpreted
as a scaling of the slope induced by the true tax schedule, where estimated values less than 1 indicate
a “flattening” of the tax schedule. Two-sided Wald-test p-values, testing the hypothesis that β = 1,
are presented below each regression. * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.




                                                   49
                  Table 2: Parameter Estimates of Heuristic-Perception Model

                                                      (1)       (2)       (3)       (4)
        γI : weight on ironing forecast             0.21***   0.29***   0.47***   0.43***
                                                    (0.037)   (0.052)   (0.048)   (0.095)

        γS : weight on spotlighting forecast         -0.09*    -0.02     -0.03     -0.02
                                                    (0.050)   (0.057)   (0.062)   (0.076)
        Residual misperception function included       No       Yes        No       Yes
        Income sampling distribution                  Mid       Mid       Full      Full
        Respondents                                   4197      4197      4197     4197
        Forecasts                                    41970     41970     58758     58758

Notes: Standard errors, clustered by respondent, in parentheses. Presented are non-linear least
squares estimates of ironing and spotlighting propensity. The estimated residual misperception
function from columns 2 and 4 is plotted in Figure 4. * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.




                                               50
                       Table 3: Assessing Models’ Fit Of MTR Perceptions

                               (1)            (2)       (3)       (4)       (5)      (6)     (7)
                            Model-Free        Preferred Specification        Out-of-Sample Ests.
 Ironing                                       X         X         X         X        X       X
 Resid. misperceptions                         X         X                   X        X
 Spotlighting                                  X                             X
 Scale of slope (β)            0.81          0.86      0.86       0.81     0.87      0.86    0.80
                             (0.044)        (0.020) (0.024) (0.040)      (0.019) (0.025) (0.042)
 Diff from model-free β                      0.056     0.055     0.008    0.062     0.057   0.006
 P-value of H0 : diff = 0                    0.149     0.189     0.901    0.124     0.187   0.928

Notes: This table compares the the degree of MTR underestimation found empirically to that which
would arise from our preferred specification of our empirical model. As a model-free baseline for
comparison, column 1 reports the scaling parameter estimated in the top panel of Table 1. Columns
2-4 present estimates of the scaling parameter predicted to arise under our estimated mixture
model, progressively eliminating components of the model across columns. Columns 5-7 conduct
an analogous exercise, but exclude local draws from the data used to estimate the forecasting
model, and tests the ability of non-local forecasts to inform predictions of local tax understanding.
Bootstrapped standard errors, resampled by subject with 1000 iterations, in parentheses.




                                                 51
                                Table 4: Ironing Propensity in Study 2

                        (1)           (2)       (3)       (4)        (5)       (6)       (7)
                                          By Complexity              Re-examined Tax   Table
                    Full Sample     Simple Complex Diff.             Yes       No       Diff.
     ATR              0.35***       0.34*** 0.36***      -0.02     0.40*** 0.31***      0.09*
     Coefficients      (0.02)        (0.03)   (0.03)    (0.05)      (0.03)   (0.03)    (0.05)

     MTR              0.09***       0.07**    0.12***     -0.05     0.09**   0.10***    -0.01
     Coefficients      (0.02)       (0.03)     (0.03)    (0.05)     (0.03)    (0.03)   (0.05)

     Constant         0.28***       0.30***   0.26***     0.04     0.25***   0.31***   -0.06**
                       (0.01)        (0.02)    (0.02)    (0.03)     (0.02)    (0.02)    (0.03)
     p: LR Test                                          0.164                          0.007
     Fraction         0.79***       0.83***   0.75***              0.82***   0.76***
     Ironing           (0.05)        (0.07)    (0.06)               (0.06)    (0.07)

     Fraction         0.21***       0.17**    0.25***              0.18***   0.24***
     using MTR         (0.05)       (0.07)     (0.06)               (0.06)    (0.07)
     N                 3,130        1,571      1,559                1,431     1,699

Notes: Standard errors in parentheses. Presented are OLS estimates of impact of random variation
in ATR and MTR on perceived marginal tax rates. Column 1 presents our primary estimates.
Columns 2 and 3 present estimates when the data are restricted to simple or complex schedules,
with column 4 presenting the estimated differences in a fully interacted model. Columns 5 and 6
present estimates when the data are restricted to subjects who did or did not re-examine the tax
table when given the opportunity, with column 7 presenting the estimated differences in a fully
interacted model. Likelihood ratio tests of the fully interacted models, compared against the non-
interacted models, are presented below the estimates. In the lower panel, we classify the fraction
of “responsive” subjects (defined as those reacting to either the MTR or the ATR) who appear to
be ironing versus using the MTR. Fractions are calculating by dividing the relevant coefficient by
the sum of the two coefficients, with standard errors calculated with the delta method. * p < 0.10,
** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.




                                                  52
                         Table 5: Revenue and Welfare Effects of Ironing

                     Structural   Increase in      Net Welfare Increase (%)
                     Elasticity    Tax Rev.       Low λ        —       High λ
                        ( k1 )        (%)        λ = U500   λ = Ū 0   λ = U900

                        1/2           3.7          3.2        3.4        3.6
                                   [2.1, 5.3]   [1.8, 4.6] [2.0, 4.9] [2.1, 5.1]

                        1/3           2.5          2.2          2.3          2.5
                                   [1.5, 3.7]   [1.3, 3.2]   [1.4, 3.4]   [1.4, 3.6]

                        1/4           1.9          1.7          1.8          1.9
                                   [1.1, 2.8]   [1.0, 2.4]   [1.0, 2.6]   [1.1, 2.7]

                        1/5           1.6          1.4          1.4          1.5
                                   [0.9, 2.3]   [0.8, 2.0]   [0.8, 2.1]   [0.9, 2.2]

Notes: The numbers presented contrast the revenue collected or welfare attained when comparing a
population with perfect tax perceptions against one in which some portion of filers apply the ironing
heuristic. The primary numbers presented are generated assuming that 43% of the population irons,
as in our preferred specification. The bracketed numbers underneath present the calculation derived
under the assumption that ironing propensity is either 25% or 62%—the boundaries of the 95%
confidence interval of our preferred propensity estimate. The first column presents the structural
                                                                        1+k
elasticity in our assumed utility model: U (z) = log(z − T (z) − (z/w)1+k ). The second column
presents the additional government revenue collected when the ironers are present. The final three
columns present estimates of the increase in social welfare attained due to the presence of ironers,
under alternative assumptions on the cost of public funds. Welfare effects are expressed as the
percentage of total tax revenues that a social planner would pay to avoid converting all ironers to
correct forecasters.




                                                 53
                  Table 6: Revenue and Welfare Effects Changing to Flat Tax

               Structural    All correct forecasters          With ironers
               Elasticity   ∆ Tax Rev. ∆ Welfare       ∆ Tax Rev.      ∆ Welfare
                  ( k1 )       (%)            (%)          (%)            (%)
                  1/2           5.2           -9.9         2.9           -12.3
                                                        [3.9, 2.0]   [-11.3, -13.4]

                  1/3           3.3         -11.6          1.9            -13.2
                                                        [2.5, 1.2]    [-12.5, -13.9]

                  1/4           2.5         -12.4          1.4            -13.6
                                                        [1.8, 0.9]    [-13.1, -14.1]

                  1/5           1.9         -12.9          1.1            -13.8
                                                        [1.4, 0.7]    [-13.5, -14.3]

Notes: This table summarizes the revenue collected or welfare attained as a result replacing the
progressive tax schedule with a linear schedule that would be revenue-neutral assuming no change
in behavior. The first column presents the structural elasticity in our assumed utility model:
                             1+k
U (z) = log(z − T (z) − (z/w)
                           1+k ). The second and third columns present the additional government
revenue and welfare, respectively, resulting from the tax-rate change under the assumption of
perfect tax perceptions. The fourth and fifth columns provide analogous calculations under the
assumption that 43% of the population irons, as in our preferred specification. The bracketed
numbers underneath present the calculation derived under the assumption that ironing propensity
is either 25% or 62%, respectively—the boundaries of the 95% confidence interval of our preferred
propensity estimate. Welfare effects are expressed as the percentage of total tax revenues that a
social planner would pay to avoid going to the flat tax.




                                               54
