                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                 HEALTH, HUMAN CAPITAL AND DOMESTIC VIOLENCE

                                     Nicholas W. Papageorge
                                        Gwyn C. Pauley
                                         Mardge Cohen
                                        Tracey E. Wilson
                                       Barton H. Hamilton
                                        Robert A. Pollak

                                       Working Paper 22887
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w22887


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                           December 2016, Revised July 2019




We gratefully acknowledge helpful comments from: Anna Aizer, Elizabeth Ananat, David
Bishai, Christopher Carpenter, John Cawley, Ying Chen, Stefanie Deluca, Kathryn Edin,
Emmanuel Garcia, Seth Gershenson, Ali Khan, Gizem Kosar, Giulia La Mattina, Robert Moffitt,
Daniel Rees, Victor Ronda, Wayne Roy-Gayle, Todd Stinebrickner, Erdal Tekin and Matthew
Wiswall along with participants at the IZA's 6th Annual Meeting on the Economics of Risky
Behaviors, Royal Holloway, the 2014 North American Summer Meetings of the Econometric
Society, the 2015 ASSA meetings, and the 2015 Southern Economics Association meetings. The
usual caveats apply. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w22887.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2016 by Nicholas W. Papageorge, Gwyn C. Pauley, Mardge Cohen, Tracey E. Wilson, Barton
H. Hamilton, and Robert A. Pollak. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
Health, Human Capital and Domestic Violence
Nicholas W. Papageorge, Gwyn C. Pauley, Mardge Cohen, Tracey E. Wilson, Barton H. Hamilton,
and Robert A. Pollak
NBER Working Paper No. 22887
December 2016, Revised July 2019
JEL No. I12,J24

                                          ABSTRACT

We study the impact of a medical breakthrough (HAART) on domestic violence and illicit drug use
among low-income women infected with HIV. To identify causal effects, we assume that variation
in women's immune system health when HAART was introduced affected how strongly their
experience of domestic violence or drug use responded to the breakthrough. Immune system health
is objectively measured using white blood cell (CD4) counts. Because the women in our sample
were informed of their CD4 count, it is reasonable to assume they react to it. Using this
identification strategy, we find that HAART introduction reduced domestic violence and illicit drug
use. To explain our estimates, we treat health as a form of human capital and argue that women
with more human capital face stronger incentives to make costly investments with future payoffs,
such as avoiding abusive partners or reducing illicit drug use.


Nicholas W. Papageorge                                  Tracey E. Wilson
Department of Economics                                 SUNY Downstate Medical Center
Johns Hopkins University                                School of Public Health
3400 N. Charles Street                                  450 Clarkson Avenue, Box 43
Baltimore, MD 21218                                     Brooklyn, NY 11203
and IZA                                                 Tracey.Wilson@downstate.edu
and also NBER
papageorge@jhu.edu                                      Barton H. Hamilton
                                                        Olin Business School
Gwyn C. Pauley                                          Washington University in St. Louis
Schaeffer Center for Health Policy & Economics          Campus Box 1133
University of Southern California                       One Brookings Dr.
635 Downey Way                                          St. Louis, MO 63130
VPD 2nd Floor                                           hamiltonb@wustl.edu
Los Angeles, CA 90089
gwyn.pauley@gmail.com                                   Robert A. Pollak
                                                        Washington University in St. Louis
Mardge Cohen                                            Arts and Sciences
Department of Medicine                                  and the Olin Business School
Rush University and Stroger Hospital                    Campus Box 1133
1653 W. Congress Parkway                                1 Brookings Drive
Chicago, IL 60612                                       St. Louis, MO 63130-4899
mardge.cohen@gmail.com                                  and IZA
                                                        and also NBER
                                                        pollak@wustl.edu
1         Introduction

Domestic violence is tragic, rampant, and costly. In the U.S., there are about 4.5 million
instances of domestic violence each year, and about 22% of women will be physically assaulted
by an intimate partner at least once in their lives (Tjaden and Thoennes, 2000). The annual
cost of domestic violence — including direct medical expenditures and losses to productivity
— is estimated at $5.8 billion.1

        Counting productivity losses as well as direct healthcare expenditures highlights two im-
portant relationships. The first is the well-established relationship between domestic violence
and poor labor market outcomes. This relationship reflects how factors such as low educa-
tion or drug abuse can increase the likelihood of violence and simultaneously discourage
successful employment. Previous literature has shown that it also reflects causality in both
directions. Abuse can deter human capital accumulation or undermine a woman’s success
at work, and women with few resources, poor labor market prospects or low earnings have
fewer options outside violent partnerships (Browne et al., 1999; Swanberg and Macke, 2006;
Aizer, 2010).

        Less understood is the relationship between health and domestic violence. Poor health
and chronic illness have been shown to be associated with abuse, once again reflecting how
underlying factors (e.g., lack of education and drug abuse) contribute to both (Black et al.,
2011). Mechanically, this relationship is also causal, at least in one direction: violence, by
its nature, potentially damages health. However, scant attention has been paid to the causal
effect of health on a woman’s likelihood of suffering abuse.

        This paper studies the impact of the introduction of a breakthrough medical innovation,
Highly Active Anti-Retroviral Therapy (HAART), on domestic violence among a sample of
    1
    Further costs accrue through spillover effects in classrooms (Carrell and Hoekstra, 2010), intergener-
ational persistence (Pollak, 2004), emotional duress and compromised quality of life. The above estimate
also does not include costs to the justice system or social services and so $5.8 billion is probably a gross
under-estimation of the true economic costs of domestic violence.




                                                     1
women who are infected with HIV (HIV-positive, henceforth HIV+).2 A threshold question
is why we might expect HAART to reduce violence. As we explain below, our analysis
focuses on women who were HIV+, but not yet symptomatic. For these women, HAART
lengthened expected lifespans, which incentivized them to make costly upfront investments
with future payoffs. In our analysis, we treat the avoidance of domestic violence, including
exiting an abusive relationship, as such an investment. While the benefits are obvious,
the immediate costs of avoiding domestic violence may include temporary homelessness or
escalated threats of physical harm when a woman attempts to leave an abusive partner.3
More broadly, we view health as a form of human capital that not only increases longevity,
but also improves the quality of life and increases labor market productivity (Grossman,
1972; Becker, 2007). Viewed in this way, HAART enhanced women’s expected future well-
being and economic resources, such as income, further improving options outside of violent
partnerships. Following similar logic, we assess the effect of HAART on another investment
with upfront costs and future payoffs: reducing use of illicit drugs. Upfront costs include
withdrawal symptoms and depression, while benefits include better future health and fewer
barriers to employment. Consistent with the view that a medical innovation can incentivize
these types of investments, we find that HAART led to decreases in both domestic violence
and illicit drug use among HIV+ women.

       Our study uses data from a longitudinal study, the Women’s Intra-Agency HIV Study
(henceforth, WIHS ), which provides rich information on health, sociodemographic charac-
teristics, domestic violence and illicit drug use. Women in the sample are predominantly
black and report lower income and educational attainment than average U.S. women. This
is an appropriate sample for our study since U.S. women with these characteristics are dis-
   2
      HIV stands for Human Immunodeficiency Virus. Without treatment, a newly infected HIV+ individual
lives an average of 11 years. There is no vaccine or cure for HIV, but HAART is the current standard
treatment. In general, 1996 is marked as the year when two crucial clinical guidelines that comprise HAART
came to be commonly acknowledged. First, protease inhibitors (made widely available towards the end of
1995) would be an effective HIV treatment. Second, several anti-retroviral drugs taken simultaneously would
vastly increases survival rates of HIV+ individuals. HAART transformed HIV infection from a lethal to a
chronic condition (Yeni, 2006).
    3
      Zorza (1991) provides evidence that fleeing domestic abuse is a key cause of homelessness among women.


                                                     2
proportionately affected by HIV (Pellowski et al., 2013).4 Moreover, three key features of
HIV make it an appropriate setting for our study. First, the severity of HIV infection coupled
with the effectiveness of HAART resulted in effect sizes large enough to detect the nuanced
causal effects of a medical innovation on domestic violence and drug use. Untreated HIV
leads to immune system deterioration (known as AIDS) after which fairly routine infections
cause grave symptoms, illness and death.5 HAART effectively transformed HIV infection
from a virtual death sentence into a manageable, chronic condition, reducing mortality rates
by over 80% within two years of its introduction (Bhaskaran et al., 2008).6 Second, the
introduction of HAART was unanticipated, providing a quasi-experiment that allows us to
identify causal effects of a positive shock to health. Third, we observe an objective, time-
varying, continuous measure of immune system health — the CD4 count, defined as the
number of white blood cells per cubic millimeter of blood. Crucially, women participating
in the study are informed of their CD4 count and can therefore respond to it. We exploit
this to develop our identification strategy.

       To identify causal effects of HAART on domestic violence and illicit drug use, we could
simply compare HIV+ women before and after the introduction of HAART. However, this
approach could confound the causal impact of HAART with other secular trends unre-
lated to the introduction of HAART. Instead, we estimate causal effects using differences-
in-differences, comparing women with similar physical symptoms, but differences in their
pre-HAART CD4 counts.7 Our treatment and control groups allow us to test our hypothe-
sis that longer expected survival incentivizes costly upfront investments. This implies that
   4
     In 2014, there were almost one million individuals with HIV in the United States, and about 230,000
were women (CDC, 2015).
   5
     AIDS stands for Acquired Immunodeficiency Syndrome.
   6
     Because of the effectiveness of HAART and the severity of HIV, the take-up of HAART was quite fast.
For our sample of HIV+ women, over 55% had taken HAART within two years of the introduction and over
70% had within three years.
   7
     An alternative approach would be to focus solely on women who actually use HAART, though medication
choice is endogenous. In results available from the corresponding author, we show that HAART usage reduces
violence if we use HAART introduction as an instrumental variable for HAART usage. One benefit of our
approach is that we do not focus exclusively on users, so we can capture how introduction of HAART affected
non-users through changes in expectations of future health induced by HAART introduction.



                                                    3
HAART should lead to relatively large shifts in such investments among women with lower
pre-HAART CD4 counts. Following this logic, our treatment group consists of HIV+ women
who, prior to HAART introduction, exhibited CD4 counts low enough that medical guide-
lines suggest they commence treatment. Our control group consists of women with higher
CD4 counts, whose immune systems had not yet begun to decline; these women faced longer
pre-HAART expected survival and thus smaller HAART-induced increases in their expected
survival.8 A concern is that differences in CD4 counts between these two groups are endoge-
nous. To address this concern, we omit women from our treatment group with CD4 counts
that are so low that they might have already experienced the symptoms of compromised im-
mune systems (AIDS). Omitting these women helps to ensure that women in the treatment
group and control group are comparable: they are distinguished by a CD4 count cutoff, but
are similar on other dimensions, including a lack of physical symptoms.

      Both our identification strategy and the conceptual framework we develop to explain
why HAART affected violence and drug use rely on the assumption that HAART affected
behavior by shifting incentives to make costly investments with future payoffs. However,
there is an important distinction between the two. Our identification strategy relies on the
assumption that HAART affected the incentives and, hence, the behavior of sicker HIV+
women relatively more than healthier HIV+ women. This assumption motivates our focus on
two groups of relatively similar women distinguished by a CD4 count cutoff. Our conceptual
framework suggests that all HIV+ women potentially respond to HAART, including the
healthier HIV+ women who comprise our control group, although they are predicted to
respond less than the less healthy HIV+ women who comprise our treatment group.9 A
drawback of our identification strategy is therefore that we potentially miss some portion of
the true causal impact of HAART by including high-CD4 count women who were potentially
  8
     Given how we construct them, an alternative description of the treatment and control groups might
be the “Sooner Potential Benefit Group” and the “Later Potential Benefit Group,” respectively. To avoid
unnecessarily introducing new terminology, we use the terms “treatment” and “control” groups.
   9
     Indeed, women who were not infected with HIV, but who faced a high risk of infection, could have
responded to HAART if it improved expected health and survival conditional on becoming HIV+.



                                                  4
“treated” by HAART in our control group. This implies that our estimates of the impact of
HAART on domestic violence and drug use are likely to be biased downward, so we interpret
them as lower bounds of true causal effects.

    Using the identification strategy described above, we show that HAART led to reductions
in domestic violence of roughly 15% for the treatment group relative to the control group.
We also assess the effect of HAART on the use of illicit drug use, in particular, cocaine and
heroin.10 We show that the medical breakthrough we study led to decreases in illicit drug use
of about 15-20%. Our results are robust when considering domestic violence and the use of
heroin. Our cocaine results are weaker and sensitive to the specification and therefore must be
interpreted with caution. More broadly, and because we focus on women without symptoms,
our findings provide support for the following claim: health innovations can affect people
not only by making them feel better (e.g., by reducing their physical symptoms), but also by
improving their expected future health, which incentivizes them to make costly investments.
On this point, our work relates to Oster et al. (2013), who provide another example of how
individuals’ investments in their own human capital respond to new information about their
future health even in the absence of discernible change in their immediate health.

    After providing evidence that HAART introduction substantially reduced violence and
illicit drug use, we turn to exploring mechanisms. First, we investigate whether HAART
affected violence and drug use independently or affected one of these solely through its effect
on the other. Though it is difficult to say definitively with the data we have, we provide
some evidence that HAART affected both outcomes even after we control for the correlation
between domestic violence and drug use via joint estimation.

    Second, we examine whether our results are explained by contemporaneous changes in
mental health (measured as depressive symptoms) or physical symptoms (measured as phys-
  10
     We focus on these two drugs since they are frequently used by women in our sample. Cocaine includes
both powdered and “crack” cocaine and belongs to a broader class of drugs known as stimulants. Another
set of stimulants is methamphetamines, but less than 1% of women in our sample use it. Heroin is an opioid,
a class that includes other drugs, such as oxycontin and illicit methadone, also used by few women in our
sample. Our results are robust to including larger sets stimulants or opioids in our analysis.


                                                    5
ical ailments, such as fever, night sweats and weightloss, associated with AIDS). While
treatment group women exhibited relatively large increases in CD4 count, they did not ex-
perience relatively large improvements in their mental and physical health due to HAART.
These findings show that the impacts of HAART we estimate on domestic violence and drug
use are not attributable to immediate improvements in mental or physical health, but to
better expected health and longer expected lifespans.11

       Third, we explore whether the effect of HAART on violence and drug use can be explained
by changes in labor market outcomes. We show evidence of increases in employment among
women in the treatment group relative to the control group after the introduction of HAART.
Improvements in labor market outcomes are consistent with the view that HAART led to
an upward shift in expected health, which in turn improved women’s outcomes on a variety
of dimensions, including violence, drug use and employment.

       This study is the first to establish that actual or expected health improvements due to
a medical innovation can reduce domestic violence. We find that interventions that improve
women’s health or otherwise augment their human capital can reduce both domestic violence
and illicit drug use. The potential policy relevance of our findings is amplified by the fact
that it is not always clear which policies most effectively reduce these behaviors. In the case
of domestic violence, for example, there have been large declines over time, which are not yet
fully understood (Black et al., 2011). Earlier work has suggested that increases in women’s
earnings relative to men’s have contributed to this decline, which implies a role for women’s
labor market human capital (Aizer, 2010).12 We are cautious about extrapolating our results
to other types of health shocks since HIV is a specific chronic condition and the introduction
of HAART was an unusually large and abrupt pharmaceutical innovation. However, the
  11
     Findings are also in line with the logic behind our identification strategy that compares women with a
similar lack of symptoms, but different underlying CD4 counts, which would suggest that HAART should
have relatively larger effects on CD4 counts but not on symptoms.
  12
     Other recent work, however, has shown evidence that increased compulsory education actually increased
psychological violence in Turkey (Erten and Keskin, 2018). While puzzling, this result is consistent with
Anderberg and Rainer (2013), who provide theory and evidence of a non-monotonic relationship between
the wage gap and intra-partnership violence if an abusive man attempts to sabotage his partner’s efforts to
achieve labor market success when market conditions improve for women.

                                                    6
introduction of HAART provides a unique opportunity to test whether a particular type of
exogenous increase in health human capital could also play a role in reducing violence and
illicit drug use.

       The remainder of this paper is organized as follows: Section 2 introduces the data set
used in this project and presents a preliminary data analysis. Section 3 discusses how we
link health to domestic violence and illicit drug use, first conceptually and then empirically.
Section 4 presents our main econometric results concerning the effect of HAART on violence
and drug use. Section 5 examines some possible mechanisms explaining why better health
reduces violence and drug use. These mechanisms include reductions in physical symptoms
and depression and increases in employment. Section 6 speculates on the broader implica-
tions of our results and concludes.



2        Data

In this section, we introduce the data set we use in our analysis and discuss construction of
our analytic sample.



2.1        Data: The Women’s Inter-Agency HIV Study

We employ a unique data set from the Women’s Interagency HIV Study (WIHS). The study
was initiated to investigate the impact of HIV on women in the United States, and the sam-
ple was selected to include both HIV+ and uninfected or HIV-negative (henceforth: HIV−)
women.13 Women in the WIHS study are predominately black and low-income and exhibit
low levels of education. This reflects efforts to create a sample of women who are represen-
tative of women with HIV. Participants were recruited from a variety of venues, including:
HIV primary care clinics, hospital-based programs, research programs, community outreach
sites, women’s support groups, drug rehabilitation programs, HIV testing sites and referrals
  13
       Though not included in most of our analyses, HIV− women are examined for a test of validity.


                                                      7
from enrolled participants (Barkan et al., 1998). The study began in 1994, and a second
cohort was added to the sample in 2001-2002. Each woman in the sample was enrolled in
one of six clinical consortia, located in: Bronx/Manhattan, New York; Washington, DC; San
Francisco/Bay Area; Los Angeles/Southern California/Hawaii; Chicago, IL; and Brooklyn,
New York. Semi-annual interviews are ongoing. Women were compensated for participation
with monetary remuneration, gift packs, bathing and laundry facilities, meals, transporta-
tion and access to dental care at some sites. In addition, services such as HIV counseling,
health assessments, health education and referral to clinical trials, primary care and social
services were provided. For more information on the WIHS, see Barkan et al. (1998).14

       The WIHS data set is well-suited for use in assessing the causal effect of medical innova-
tion on domestic violence and illicit drug use. First, because the WIHS started interviewing
women in October 1994, before HAART became widely available in late 1996, we observe
women before and after the unanticipated medical innovation and can compare women based
upon their pre-treatment characteristics. For women in our main analysis, there were about
four visits before the introduction of HAART. Second, there was an additional cohort added
in 2001-2002, after the introduction of HAART. Although not included in our main sample,
we use this additional cohort in a series of robustness checks to assess the potential effects
  14
     Data in this manuscript were collected by the Women’s Interagency HIV Study (WIHS). The contents
of this publication are solely the responsibility of the authors and do not represent the official views of
the National Institutes of Health (NIH). WIHS (Principal Investigators): UAB-MS WIHS (Michael Saag,
Mirjam-Colette Kempf, and Deborah Konkle-Parker), U01-AI-103401; Atlanta WIHS (Ighovwerha Ofotokun
and Gina Wingood), U01-AI-103408; Bronx WIHS (Kathryn Anastos), U01-AI-035004; Brooklyn WIHS
(Howard Minkoff and Deborah Gustafson), U01-AI-031834; Chicago WIHS (Mardge Cohen), U01-AI-034993;
Metropolitan Washington WIHS (Mary Young), U01-AI-034994; Miami WIHS (Margaret Fischl and Lisa
Metsch), U01-AI-103397; UNC WIHS (Adaora Adimora), U01-AI-103390; Connie Wofsy Women’s HIV
Study, Northern California (Ruth Greenblatt, Bradley Aouizerat, and Phyllis Tien), U01-AI-034989; WIHS
Data Management and Analysis Center (Stephen Gange and Elizabeth Golub), U01-AI-042590; Southern
California WIHS (Alexandra Levine and Marek Nowicki), U01-HD-032632 (WIHS I - WIHS IV). The WIHS
is funded primarily by the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases (NIAID), with additional
co-funding from the Eunice Kennedy Shriver National Institute of Child Health and Human Development
(NICHD), the National Cancer Institute (NCI), the National Institute on Drug Abuse (NIDA), and the
National Institute on Mental Health (NIMH). Targeted supplemental funding for specific projects is also
provided by the National Institute of Dental and Craniofacial Research (NIDCR), the National Institute
on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism (NIAAA), the National Institute on Deafness and other Communication
Disorders (NIDCD), and the NIH Office of Research on Women’s Health. WIHS data collection is also
supported by UL1-TR000004 (UCSF CTSA) and UL1-TR000454 (Atlanta CTSA).



                                                    8
of participation in the study. Simply participating in WIHS can be beneficial to the partic-
ipants, and we use the additional cohort to separate the effect of being a WIHS participant
from the effect of medical innovation.15 Third, the data includes a rich set of behavioral,
socio-demographic and health variables. Information is elicited on employment, income,
housing, relationship and marital status, sexual behaviors, illicit drug use, and medication
use.16

       To quantify health, we use a standard measure of immune system functionality, CD4
count, defined as the number of white blood cells per mm3 of blood. CD4 count is measured
using plasma samples, which are collected by medical professionals. Thus, the health measure
that we use is objective rather than self-reported. Importantly, after each measure was
taken, study participants were informed of their CD4 count. For healthy HIV− individuals,
average CD4 counts range between 500 and 1,500. For HIV+ individuals, lower counts
indicate that immune system deterioration has commenced, with counts below 200 signaling
high susceptibility to common illnesses (a condition known as AIDS). Guidelines recommend
starting HAART as CD4 counts decrease, generally once the CD4 count reaches 350 (Mocroft
and Lundgren, 2004; AIDSinfo, 2014). Monitoring CD4 cells allows individuals to track
their immune system health, with lower CD4 reflecting a weaker immune system, sometimes
known as immunosuppression. For example, a woman with a CD4 count of 400 is extremely
unlikely to experience symptoms of immunosuppression, but because she has been told her
CD4 count, she is likely to be aware that her immune system health has begun to decline
and that her chances of long-run survival are therefore lower than those women whose CD4
count is still within the 500-1500 range typical among HIV− women.

       Our measure of domestic violence indicates whether women reported experiencing any
of three forms of violence in the six months prior to their interview: physical abuse, sexual
abuse, or coercion by an intimate partner or spouse. These data are thus uniquely rich
  15
    Results of this robustness check are discussed further in Section 4.3.
  16
    Although we observe whether the participants are in a relationship, we do not observe the length of the
relationship.



                                                    9
in including several forms of violence and not just one or two. We classify the woman as
having experienced coercion if a partner threatened to hurt or kill her or prevented her from
leaving or entering her home, seeing friends, making telephone calls, getting or keeping a
job, continuing her education, or seeking medical attention. Moreover, we do not require
that women report being in a relationship in order to report domestic violence. Indeed,
many women report not being in a relationship at visits t and t + 1 and also report violence
between the same two visits. This might occur if a woman has a short-term intimate partner
who abuses her. Because we do not condition experiencing domestic violence on being in
a relationship, we bypass problems that arise if HAART affected selection into a long-term
partnership such as marriage or cohabitation.



2.2     Construction of the Analytic Sample

The main analytic sample includes all women from the first WIHS cohort who were HIV+
and answered questions about outcomes including domestic violence, illicit drug use and
employment, as well as all of the controls that we include.17 The first cohort of the WIHS
data set includes 2,071 HIV+ women who participated in the study for up to 33 visits,
between October of 1994 and April of 2010. This amounts to 47,149 person-visits. Starting
in the 10th visit, however, questions about domestic violence were only asked every other
visit. Once we account for the change in timing of domestic violence questions, we are left
with 2,065 individuals and 30,135 person-visits.18 Second, we drop from our analytic sample
53 women who were in the study for just one visit before their death. Additionally, for women
who died during the study period, the last “visit” is a record of their death; when we drop
these “visits,” we are left with 2,012 individuals and 29,492 person-visits. Third, we trim
observations that are missing basic information such as date of visit, CD4 count before the
  17
    See Section 4 for a list of controls.
  18
    For outcomes that were asked every visit, we follow the same steps for trimming our data, but also
include the odd numbered visits greater than ten.




                                                 10
introduction of HAART, or age, leaving us with 23,215 observations from 1,995 individuals.19
Last, we trim observations that are missing information about domestic violence, drug use,
employment, income or relationship status, leaving us with 13,948 person observations from
1,055 individuals.20 Although we use an unbalanced panel, 73% of our sample stayed in the
study for all 33 visits.21

       A legitimate concern is the large number of missing observations. Reassuringly, we do
not find evidence that observations are missing differentially for treatment versus control
groups. To evaluate whether individuals are non-randomly missing from our sample, we
perform two main tests. First, we show that demographics, being in the treatment group,
and experiencing violence pre-HAART are not related to the likelihood of leaving the sample
or the number of visits that one stays in the sample. We construct an indicator variable
for ever leaving the sample and estimate logit regressions where the outcome is leaving the
sample for any reason and explanatory variables are being in the treatment group, race, age,
site of visit, and experiencing violence pre-HAART. No controls are significantly correlated
with leaving the study. As a complementary test, we also regress the number of visits that
the woman stayed in the study and find no evidence that any control variable is correlated
with this outcome. Results from these estimates can be found in Appendix Table A1.

       In our second test, we also regress an indicator variable for missing each outcome (domes-
tic violence, cocaine use, heroin use, or employment) on race indicators, age, age squared, site
indicators, logged CD4 count, and an interaction between the treatment group and logged
CD4 count.22 The coefficient of the interaction term between the treatment group and logged
  19
      This large drop happens mainly because the date of the visit is missing. Date of visit is necessary because
it indicates if HAART was available.
   20
      When we impute missing variables, our results change very little. Thus, we choose to simply drop
observations that are missing information.
   21
      We include in our sample all women who are not missing information, including those who die during the
study. In a conservative robustness check, discussed further in Section 4.3, we re-run our analyses excluding
all women who die early in the study and find that our results do not change for most specifications. Given
these results, we do not believe that survival bias is driving our main empirical results. Excluding women
who die is effectively non-randomly removing individuals from our sample, i.e., we may be removing women
who are more likely to suffer domestic violence.
   22
      To keep our sample size consistent, when CD4 count is missing, we impute the missing value and include



                                                       11
CD4 count will tell us if women from the treatment group exhibit patterns of “missingness”
that differ from the other women in the study. Women are included in this regression if
they made the first three trims of the data as described above. We focus on this subsample
because they are the women for whom we have information about basic sociodemographics.
While we do find that women who are less healthy in terms of a lower CD4 count are more
likely to be missing observations, as shown in Appendix Table A2, the actual changes in
the probability of missing data for these outcomes are quite small. A 10% increase in CD4
count decreases the probability of nonresponse by roughly 0.2 percentage points. Further,
and more importantly, there is no difference between the treatment and control groups in
terms of how CD4 count affects the probability of having a missing outcome. Thus, we find
that, while health may affect the probability of an individual having a missing outcome, it
does not do so differentially across our treatment and control groups.



3     Conceptual Framework and Identification

Both our conceptual framework and our identification strategy rely on the assumption that
HAART shifted incentives to make investments with long-run payoffs. Still, it is important to
distinguish between the two. Our conceptual framework implies that HAART shifted incen-
tives for all HIV+ women, including women with high pre-HAART CD4 counts who comprise
our control group. Our identification strategy leverages the assumption that HAART shifted
the incentives of women with low pre-HAART CD4 counts more than it shifted the incentives
of those with high pre-HAART CD4 counts. Hence, pre-HAART CD4 counts did not govern
whether women responded to HAART, but rather how much they responded. Section 3.1
discusses our conceptual framework and Section 3.2 our identification strategy. Section 3.3
presents summary statistics for our analytic sample, comparing the treatment to the control
group, and discusses external validity. Finally, Section 3.4 provides evidence of the validity
an indicator in the regressions for imputation.



                                                  12
of our identification strategy.



3.1       Conceptual Framework

We begin with the premise that health is a form of human capital that not only extends
life, but also improves well-being and increases productivity (Grossman, 1972). Women with
different levels of health therefore face different incentives to avoid violence or drug use.
Consider a woman in an abusive partnership or addicted to drugs. She could take a costly
step, such as leaving her abusive partner or getting off drugs, reaping the benefits in the
future. Since the costs of these actions are incurred in the present and the benefits accrue
in the future, we treat these actions as investments. Longer expected lifespans mean women
have a longer time to enjoy the benefits of these investments. Better health can also improve
productivity, which might also mean that women are further incentivized to leave abusive
partners or to stop using drugs so that they can return to work. In the context of HIV,
HAART extended the life and improved the health of HIV+ women who were using the
treatment. We thus hypothesize that HAART, by improving expected health and longevity,
would lead to lower levels of illicit drug use and domestic violence among HIV+ women.

       A potential problem with this conceptual framework is that it presumes that women have
some ability to control both violence and drug use. In the case of illicit drug use, addiction
may mean that women are unable to change their behavior even in the face of a strong shift
in incentives, such as a large positive health shock. Rooted in rational addiction (Becker
and Murphy, 1988), we assume that women make rational choices regarding their drug use,
weighing the benefits of continued use against the costs. This assumption is supported
by clinical evidence showing that illicit drug use is responsive to shifts in incentives (Hart
et al., 2000).23 Robins (1993), who documented the rapid recovery from heroin addiction
  23
    For example, Hart et al. (2000) report that regular cocaine users asked, in an experimental setting, to
choose between cocaine and payments to be made several weeks later (and who have no other access to the
drug until the following day) regularly opt for the delayed payment, especially when the amount of cocaine
they forgo is fairly small.



                                                    13
among Vietnam veterans upon their return home, provides earlier evidence in favor of control
or agency in the context of addiction. One interpretation of her findings consistent with
our conceptual framework is that these veterans faced stronger incentives to avoid heroin
following a positive shock to their lifespan. Our assumption is also consistent with the idea
of desisting, discussed in sociological literature, which describes reductions in (or avoidance
of) risky behaviors after important life events, such as having children (Laub and Sampson,
2001). We hypothesize that HAART incentivized desisting from illicit drug use by endowing
women with longer and healthier lives, thus making illicit drug use a relatively more costly
option.

   The application of our conceptual framework to domestic violence is more delicate. The
assumption that women can “choose” to end abuse perpetrated by a violent partner can
erroneously be perceived as “blaming the victim” for her own abuse. When relating domestic
violence to human capital, we draw upon the resource theory of domestic violence. Often
attributed to Gelles (1976), the claim is that women with more resources have better options
outside of abusive partnerships and are therefore more likely to leave violent partners, which
could incentivize the partner to be less violent. For example, if a woman’s outside option
is safe and comfortable, she is more likely to leave a violent partner. The resource theory
of domestic violence helps to explain why women with higher education or income are more
likely to avoid violence. The resource theory has been used to motivate bargaining theories
of domestic violence. In bargaining models, women with better outside options have higher
threat points. Because of this, they can credibly threaten to leave partners and therefore
experience less violence. Resource and bargaining theories of domestic violence have been
used to explain why no-fault divorce has reduced domestic violence (Stevenson and Wolfers,
2006), why cash transfers to poor women can reduce abuse (Bobonis et al., 2013; Angelucci,
2008; Pronyk et al., 2006), and why abuse is associated with poor labor market outcomes
(Bowlus and Seitz, 2006; Anderberg and Rainer, 2013) and a larger gender wage gap (Aizer,




                                              14
2010).24 We take no position on intra-partnership bargaining. Rather, we argue simply that
HAART improved health, increasing women’s survival and human capital, and thus their
incentives to leave, to threaten to leave or to avoid violent partners altogether.

       Our conceptual framework makes no assumption about the relationship between violence
and drug use even though they may be causally linked.25 One possibility is that better health
induces lower illicit drug use, which in turn reduces violence. This is plausible if drug use
encourages violence, a possibility which has some support in medical literature, especially in
the case of stimulants, such as cocaine (Phil and Peterson, 1993; Volavka, 2008). It is also
plausible if women who reduce their drug use return to the labor market, which increases
options outside of violent partnerships. Alternatively, less violence can lead to lower drug
use, for example, if women who no longer suffer abuse are less prone to drug use as a coping
mechanism (El-Bassel et al., 2005). It is also possible that health independently drives
reductions in both drug use and violence. Though it is difficult to empirically disentangle
all of these possibilities, we revisit them in Section 5, which provides a discussion of possible
mechanisms underlying our key empirical findings. We now turn to a discussion of how we
test the hypothesis that better health reduces domestic violence and illicit drug use.



3.2       Identifying the Impact of Health on Violence and Drug Use

Our aim is to identify how a marginal change in health affects an outcome of interest, such
as domestic violence or illicit drug use. To illustrate, denote the propensity of the outcome
  24
     Results reported in Alvira-Hammond et al. (2014) suggest that the relationship between labor market
prospects and lower domestic violence extends to adolescents. Also related, but in a different medical context,
Johnson and Pieters (2016) examine violence among women diagnosed with cancer. In our framework, a
cancer diagnosis could be seen as a negative health shock, which could increase the likelihood that women
experience violence. The authors focus on a different relationship, arguing that violence can affect health of
women with cancer diagnoses by influencing how they seek treatment.
  25
     Though they do not take a position on causality, Cohen et al. (2000) use the same data set we use to
show that poorer women who use drugs are more likely to be abused. They describe this correlation as a
“continuum of risk”.




                                                      15
of interest by O and health as H. We aim to estimate:

                                                   dO
                                                      .                                                (1)
                                                   dH

To estimate this relationship, one possibility is to regress the outcome of interest onto a
measure of health, such as CD4 count. Doing so, we face possible selection problems since
health is potentially endogenous. Women in our sample who are in relatively poor health
are likely to exhibit a number of other characteristics and behaviors, many of which are
unobserved by the econometrician, and which are likely to affect domestic violence or illicit
drug use. In fact, when we look at simple correlations using regression analysis, we find that
the relationship between health and violence is complex and ambiguous. Table 1 shows a
naive reduced form model for the full sample of HIV+ women.26 Some relationships accord
with our priors. For example, HIV+ women with higher CD4 counts are less likely to use
cocaine and are more likely to be employed. But, other relationships are not in accordance
with our priors. For example, there is a no significant correlation between CD4 counts and
domestic violence in the full sample. Further, there may be non-linearities in the relationship
between health and violence, which complicate estimation of causal effects.

       To explore this relationship further, we focus on women whose CD4 counts were observed
to be below 200. A CD4 count this low suggests immunosuppression that characterizes AIDS.
We compare these women before and after the first time they are observed with AIDS-level
CD4 counts. We see that they are less likely to report almost every type of abuse when
their CD4 counts are actually below 200, as shown in Table 2. In particular, 12% of women
reported experiencing domestic violence on their last visit pre-AIDS diagnosis, compared
to 9.5% post-AIDS diagnosis. This could mean that their illness has become so acute that
they are not as likely to experience domestic violence. Further, women are also less likely to
engage in illicit drug use after they exhibit AIDS-level CD4 counts. Heroin use falls from 20
  26
    We also show that better health is associated with higher rates of employment, which is consistent with
health as a form of human capital. We explore this point further in Section 5.



                                                    16
to 15% while cocaine use falls from 9.5 to 6.6%. Given these non-monotonic patterns, all of
which threaten the validity of comparing low-CD4 count women to healthier women, we do
not include low-CD4 women in our treatment group.

     A second possibility is to leverage an exogenous shift in health, such as an unanticipated
medical innovation. One approach is to examine HIV+ women before and after HAART. A
problem with this approach is that we cannot separate secular time trends or other contem-
poraneous shifts from the impact of HAART. For example, between 1993 and 2010, domestic
violence was trending downward (Catalano, 2012).

     To achieve identification, our approach exploits variation in health status at the time
of HAART introduction along with the fact that HAART was an unanticipated innovation.
The passage of time from the pre- to the post-HAART era affects our outcomes (domestic
violence and illicit drug use) through the impact of HAART availability on health (H) both
directly and indirectly. For violence, this can be written as follows:

                                     ∂V g         ∂V g
                                                    
                               g        g      g
                           ∆V = ∆H ×       + ∆X ×                                           (2)
                                     ∂H           ∂X

where ∆ is the change in a variable from the pre-HAART to the post-HAART eras and g
indexes groups distinguished by pre-HAART health status (treatment and control groups,
for example). The first term on the right-hand-side of equation (2) is the effect of HAART
introduction on health (the health shock) multiplied by the effect of health on violence. The
second term captures other avenues through which the passage of time between the pre- and
post-HAART eras affected violence, including secular trends and omitted factors (together
denoted X). For example the secular downward trend in domestic violence is captured in
X.

     To estimate the causal effect of HAART, we compute the difference-in-differences, relying
on differences in how women respond to exogenous shifts in medical technology depending
on their health status at the time of the innovation. We base our choice of control group on


                                               17
the assumption that women who have higher CD4 counts were affected by the introduction
of HAART less than women who have lower CD4 counts because HAART was more urgently
needed by those with lower CD4 counts.27 Our treatment group consists of women who were
beginning to exhibit HIV-induced immune system deterioration, which typically precedes
full-blown AIDS, but who had not yet exhibited AIDS-level CD4 counts. These are women
whose minimum CD4 count prior to HAART was between 300 and 399. As discussed above,
the most basic current guidelines recommend beginning HAART when the CD4 count reaches
350, and our treatment group encompasses this number. However, since women in the
treatment group have yet to reach CD4 counts where they would experience physical illness
due to AIDS, they are more comparable to healthier women, whom we use as controls. The
control group consists of women in relatively good health: HIV+ women with high CD4
counts that never dipped below 400 prior to HAART introduction. Of those eligible to be
included in our analysis, 166 women, with a total of 2,477 person-visits, are in the treatment
group, and 269 women, with a total of 4,192 person-visits, are in the control group.

       Relatively healthy HIV+ women are a natural control group since, by virtue of a CD4-
count cutoff, they were not in imminent danger of becoming gravely ill at the time of HAART
introduction. Our strategy identifies the effect of HAART by comparing the differential
responses to HAART of women above and below the CD4 cutoff. However, because healthier
women were likely to experience CD4 declines soon, they were also potential beneficiaries
from HAART and may have also changed their behavior in response to the innovation. To
the extent that healthier HIV+ women also reacted to the introduction of HAART, using
them as a control group leads us to under-estimate the effect of HAART.

       Our identification strategy assumes that sicker women respond more strongly to HAART
than healthier women. We explain this assumption in the case of domestic violence, but
the explanation for illicit drug use is analogous. We envision women facing a dynamic
tradeoff when deciding whether or not to avoid abuse. Avoiding abuse entails immediate
  27
    If we repeat the analysis from Table 1 using the treatment group, we do find negative relationships
between health and violence.

                                                  18
upfront costs (e.g., leaving an abusive partner and potentially facing homelessness (Zorza,
1991)), but also confers benefits in the form of lower abuse in the future. In this sense,
avoiding abuse is similar to an investment with upfront costs and future benefits. Women
with lower survival probabilities face a shorter expected lifespan and thus a shorter period
during which to enjoy the returns from their investment. As a result, large increases in
survival probability incentivize large shifts in costly behaviors with long-run payoffs.28 In
response to HAART, women in the treatment group should experience large increases in
survival probability relative to women in the control group for two reasons. First, medical
guidelines regarding commencement of HAART mean that women in the control group are
less likely to use it compared to women in the treatment group. Second, women in the
treatment group are likely to experience increases in their survival probabilities sooner than
those in the control group. HAART does not raise the survival probabilities of women in
the treatment group above those of women in the control group, but simply raises them
to the same level. Starting from a lower level and ending at the same level, the women in
the treatment group experience a larger change in survival probabilities. This implies that
women in the treatment group face larger HAART-induced shifts in incentives to make costly
investments in their human capital compared to women in the control group and, hence, the
effects would be larger for women in the treatment group.



3.3     Descriptive Statistics

Before assessing the validity of our approach, we present summary statistics for the treatment
and control groups. We also discuss how the women in our sample compare to other women
in the U.S., including HIV+ women, a comparison that is important when assessing the
external validity of our results. Table 3 provides summary statistics for our treatment group
and control group in Columns 1 and 2. In Column 3, we test that the means are equal across
  28
    A key result of human capital theory is that higher life expectancy incentivize further investments in
labor market human capital (see e.g., Ben-Porath (1967)). This theory has broad empirical support (Black
et al., 2007; Jayachandran and Lleras-Muney, 2009; Oster et al., 2013; Yi et al., 2015).


                                                   19
the treatment and control groups.


3.3.1   Treatment vs Control Group

According to Table 3, treatment and control groups are quite similar in terms of demograph-
ics, including race and education, and pre-HAART characteristics such as risky behaviors,
symptoms, and experience with violence. About 67% of the treatment group is black, 20% is
Hispanic, and 12% is non-Hispanic white (henceforth simply white). This is roughly equiva-
lent to the control group, where these percents are 64, 22, and 12 respectively. Our samples
are also similar in terms of education: 30% of each group graduated high school, 22-23% at-
tended some college, and 10% of the treatment group and 7% of the control group graduated
college. Pre-HAART incomes are also comparable across groups. While the high CD4 count
women were somewhat more likely to have been employed (43% vs 38%) and less likely to
have been married prior to the introduction of HAART (32% vs 25%) we cannot reject the
null hypothesis that the means are equal.

   Overall rates of violence pre-HAART are similar across the treatment and control groups.
In particular, 27% of the treatment group experienced domestic violence before the intro-
duction of HAART compared to 34% of the women in the control group. Women in the
control group were more likely to suffer sexual abuse, physical abuse, and coercion than
our treatment subsample, but the only significantly different form of abuse is sexual abuse.
Turning to illicit drug use, we find that, prior to the introduction of HAART, 28% of the
treatment group had used cocaine, compared to 31% of women in the control group. Heroin
use prior to HAART was very similar between the two groups: 18% for the treatment group
and 16% for the control group. Mean differences in outcomes between the groups do not
threaten the validity of using difference-in-differences approach to estimating causal effects
as long as the trends in domestic violence and other outcomes are similar. We discuss the
parallel trends of our main outcomes in the following subsection.




                                             20
3.3.2      External Validity

Our sample is quite similar to the statistics that the CDC reports about the HIV+ population
of women living in the United States and, hence, is an appropriate starting point for studying
links between health, domestic violence and illicit drug use. The majority of women in our
sample are low-income, under-employed, and non-white — socio-demographic groups most
likely to experience domestic violence and use illicit drugs.29 For example, it is estimated
that of the total number of women living with diagnosed HIV, 61% are black (CDC, 2015),
compared to about 65% for our sample. Additionally, in a sample of individuals living
in high poverty areas, the CDC found that the likelihood of being HIV+ was negatively
associated with completed education and income (Denning and DiNenno, 2010), which we
also observe in our sample. Drug statistics for our sample are also more similar to those
exhibited by HIV+ women than to U.S. women in general. The National Survey on Drug
Use and Health found that about 16% of individuals who had been diagnosed with HIV
reported using an intravenous drug in their lifetime, which is extremely close to the 17%
reported by our sample.

       Finally, in our main analyses, we present results separately for black women. The black
women in our sample have, on average, less education than the white women. They also
come from less well-off households: 49% had maximal pre-HAART incomes below $12,000
compared to 25% of white women. Black women are more likely than white women to
report domestic violence. Lifetime prevalences of rape, physical violence, and/or stalking
are estimated to be 43.7% for black women and 34.6% for white women (Black et al., 2011).
Black women also suffer domestic violence at higher rates than the white women in our
sample: 30% of black women reported experiencing domestic violence between one year
prior to the start of the survey and the introduction of HAART, compared to 23% of white
women. Patterns of drug use by black women in our sample compared to other women
  29
    For example, high school completion rates are about 80% for females in the United States (Heckman
and LaFontaine, 2010), compared to about 60% for our full sample.



                                                 21
are more nuanced. For example, 28% of black women reported having used cocaine (either
crack or powdered) prior to the introduction of HAART, compared to 23% of white women.
However, 12% of the black women in the sample reported having used heroin during this
time period, compared to 17% of the white women.



3.4       Research Design and Internal Validity

In this section, we discuss our empirical approach to estimating causal effects. Identification
using the difference-in-differences approach requires that the path of the outcome variables
for the treatment group and the control group would not be systematically different in the
absence of HAART introduction. Specifically, this means that the introduction of HAART
should be the only factor that drove the treatment group to experience a change in an
outcome variable, such as domestic violence, relative to the control group. To confirm this,
we study pre-HAART trends in our outcome variables and show that they are not different
for our treatment group and our control group.

       The validity of our research design relies on HAART being an unanticipated innovation.
For evidence of this within our sample, we turn to questions used to compute the CES-D
scale, which is used to asses whether women are likely to be depressed.30 One question asks
whether respondents were hopeful about the future in the week leading up to their interview.
We consider the probability that women in the sample answered “most or all of the time” to
this question, and plot this before and after the introduction of HAART in Figure 1. There
are two reasons why this figure suggests that HAART was not anticipated. First, before the
introduction of HAART, the percentage of HIV+ women who reported being hopeful was
relatively flat. They experienced a jump in hopefulness right at the introduction of HAART.
If they had anticipated HAART, they might have reported more hopefulness earlier. Second,
HIV− women did not experience such a jump. If some other factor drove the increase in
  30
    CES-D is a depression screening test and stands for the Center for Epidemiological Studies Depression
scale. See Ostrow et al. (1989) or Detels et al. (2001) for use of the CES-D scale score data in the context
of an HIV study.


                                                    22
hopefulness, then this would be reflected by a jump in the hopefulness of HIV− women.

   Next, we discuss pre-HAART trends among our treatment and control group. In Figure
2, we plot the pre-HAART trends in domestic violence (Panel 2a), cocaine use (Panel 2b),
and heroin use (Panel 2c) for the treatment group and the control group. The plots show
that trends for the treatment group and the control group were comparable prior to the
introduction of HAART, which suggests that HAART is the driving force in the difference in
outcomes. We also exploit the fact that we have multiple periods prior to the introduction
of HAART to conduct a formal test of whether there are differences in trends between the
treatment and control groups. For each outcome, we estimate the following models:

                                              t=28
                                              X
            Oit+1 = T reatmenti δ + Dt αt +          T reatmenti × Dt γt + Xit β + it ,    (3)
                                              t=−3


where Oit+1 is the outcome of interest (domestic violence, cocaine use, or heroin use) and
Dt is an indicator for the date of visit bin such that D0 is the last period before HAART
was introduced. Each bin is a six month period, and HAART is not available in the bins
-3 through 0. Xit is a vector of controls, including age at visit, age squared, indicators
for race, and indicators for site of visit. For each model, we test for pairwise parallel pre-
HAART trends. Specifically, we test the null hypothesis that coefficients γ−3 through γ0 are
equal. This essentially tests that the trends in outcomes prior to HAART are parallel. In
Table 4, we show that we cannot reject the null hypothesis that the coefficients are equal
for both domestic violence and heroin use, suggesting that there is no difference in pre-
HAART trends for these outcomes. For cocaine use, we estimate a p-value of 0.091, which
is a borderline significant value. This suggests possible mean reversion, which could lead
to an over-estimation of causal effects, so we must interpret our estimates with caution.
Additionally, we test whether the pre-treatment trends in domestic violence, cocaine use,
and heroin use are not jointly significant, and fail to reject the null hypothesis that there is
no difference in trends (p=0.148). As we explain below, the p-value is 0.19 when we account



                                               23
for differences in observables using inverse probability weighting.

   In a related exercise, we plot the residuals from a probit model that regresses domestic
violence on age, age squared, age cubed, race dummies, and site dummies. As shown in
Figure 3, there is a clear break between the treatment group and the control group after the
introduction of HAART, indicating that the introduction of HAART affected the two groups
differently.

   We also conduct an event study to investigate whether pre-HAART trends are driving
our results. Figure A1 in Appendix A shows the coefficient of the interaction for the periods
before and after the introduction of HAART. Because there are so many more periods after
HAART was introduced than before (16 versus 4 for domestic violence), we combine the
post-HAART periods in this exercise. Periods prior to HAART introduction are one year in
length, and periods after HAART was introduced are five years. For each outcome, we expect
that coefficients on dummies for periods -2 and -1 (the periods prior to HAART) should not
be significant and negative, because if this were the case, then declines in violence or drug
use for the treatment group would have begun prior to the introduction of HAART. For
domestic violence and heroin use, we find no difference in pre-HAART trends between the
treatment group and the control group. For cocaine use, we find that the treatment group
did exhibit a rising trend (relative to the control group) prior to HAART. This rise, however,
is opposite to the direction we observe after HAART, which is reassuring because it suggests
that post-HAART changes are not driven by trends beginning prior to HAART.

   Finally, we discuss two additional concerns that might threaten the validity of our research
design. First, one might be worried that another shift (e.g., a government program or policy
change) had an impact on the treatment group, but not on the control group (or vice-versa).
An obvious candidate is the Personal Responsibility and Work Opportunity Reconciliation
Act (PRWORA), which reformed welfare and was signed into law in August of 1996, just as
HAART was introduced. However, given that the treatment and control groups have similar
socio-demographic characteristics, including income and education, it is unlikely that welfare


                                              24
reform affected the control group differently than the treatment group.31 A second concern
might be that domestic violence is drastically under-reported. By some measures, 50% of
violent episodes go unreported (Greenfeld et al., 1998). However, this would affect our results
only if there were a shift in under-reporting that differentially affected the treatment group
and the control group and, moreover, if this shift coincided with the introduction of HAART.
Though we cannot rule out this possibility, we believe that it is unlikely.



4      Main Results

In this section, we present our main results. We show that the treatment group experienced
reductions in domestic violence and illicit drug use that the control group did not. We also
perform several robustness checks, showing that our results are not driven by survival bias
and are robust to estimation using propensity score matching.



4.1     Health and Domestic Violence

To test if the treatment group experienced a reduction in domestic violence after the intro-
duction of HAART, we use a difference-in-differences approach. We estimate probit models
where the dependent variable is an indicator of whether a woman experienced domestic
violence since her last visit using the following specification:


         Vit+1 = HAARTt α + T reatmenti δ + HAARTt × T reatmenti γ + Xit β + it                     (4)


where Vit+1 indicates if the woman reported violence at t + 1, which she experienced between
periods t and t + 1. HAARTt is an indicator variable for HAART being available at time
t.32 T reatmenti is a dummy variable indicating if the woman is in the treatment group and
  31
     Unfortunately, we cannot test this assumption more directly since our data only contain information
about welfare participation after the introduction of HAART.
  32
     We use lagged HAART availability to account for the fact that domestic violence and other outcomes
are measured since the last visit. For example, consider visits that occurred in September of 1996, right


                                                   25
Xit is a vector of individual i’s characteristics at time t and includes basic controls: age, age
squared, and age cubed at time t, as well as indicator variables for race and site of study.33
The coefficient of interest is γ, which indicates if the treatment group responded differently
to the introduction of HAART than the control group. To control for serial correlation, all
specifications are clustered at the individual level (Bertrand et al., 2004).

    We report findings in two tables. Table 5 shows the estimated coefficients from the
probit models, while Table 6 presents the marginal effects of the interaction term, which is
the parameter of interest. We follow Puhani (2012) in calculating marginal effects of the
interaction term.34 In each table, findings for domestic violence are shown in the first two
columns. We show two specifications for both our main sample and the sample consisting
of only black women. Column 1 (and all odd columns) includes the interaction but no other
controls, and Column 2 (even columns) includes the basic controls described above.

    The first row of Table 5 shows that HAART availability is associated with a decline in
domestic violence. This is consistent with secular declines in domestic violence during this
time period (Catalano, 2012). Turning to difference-in-differences estimates, we find that the
treatment group experienced a decrease in domestic violence that otherwise similar women
in the control group did not. According to Table 6, which reports marginal effects, the
relative decline was between 1.5-1.7 percentage points, depending on the specification. To
put this number into context, if we divide it by the pre-HAART treatment group mean of
13% (shown in the table), it implies a 14-16% decline.35
around the time when HAART was introduced. At this visit, women were asked about violence that they
had experienced in the last six months, roughly the time since their previous visit. However, HAART was
not available to them during this time period and therefore they would not have experienced any benefits of
this medical innovation.
   33
      We could also control for other demographic characteristics and reported behaviors, such as relationship
status, income, and drug use. However, these variables may measure mechanisms through which HAART
affects our outcomes of interest, so we omit them from our specifications. In results available from the
corresponding author, we show that main results are robust to the inclusion of these additional variables.
   34
      Following Puhani (2012), Karaca-Mandic et al. (2012) also show how to calculate standard errors in the
same manner.
   35
      To further contextualize the magnitude of estimated marginal effects, 27% of women in the treatment
group report experiencing domestic violence at least once prior to HAART. A 1.5 percentage point decline
is roughly 6% of this number. We could also compare estimated marginal effects to the full sample mean of



                                                     26
    When we restrict the sample to black women, we find similar results. Black women in
the treatment group experienced a decline in domestic violence between 2.1-2.4 percentage
points as compared to black women in the control group. This implies a decrease in violence
of between 16 and 18%.36

    In assessing the magnitude of these declines, it is difficult to find research that links
medical innovation and domestic violence. Research on policy interventions have yielded
mixed results. For example, Heaton (2012) finds that Sunday liquor laws have no effect on
domestic violence, while Iyengar (2009) reports that mandatory domestic violence arrest laws
actually lead to an increase in intimate partner homicides. More closely related to our study
are changes to women’s earnings, both absolutely and relative to men’s. For example, Aizer
(2010), shows that reductions in violence of about 9% are explained by a 20-year decline in
the male-to-female wage gap. In a recent paper, Cesur and Sabia (2016) show that combat
veterans are between three and six percentage points more likely to be violent than veterans
who were not assigned to combat zones.37
the outcome variable (also presented in results tables). In the case of domestic violence the full sample mean
is smaller than the pre-HAART treatment group mean, so that estimated marginal effects would imply a
larger percent change. When presenting our remaining results using differences-in-differences, we continue to
divide estimated marginal effects by pre-HAART treatment group means. For guidance on this, Mayer et al.
(2014) also estimate differences-in-differences probit models and contextualize the magnitude of estimated
marginal effects by comparing them to pre-treatment treatment-group means.
   36
      As discussed in Section 2, black women suffered domestic violence at higher rates than other women in
the sample. For ease of exposition, we run separate regressions for black women in our sample. However, in
a separate analysis, we consider heterogeneous effects and re-estimate equation (4) including an interaction
between black, HAART availability, and an indicator for being in the treatment group. Although the
coefficient on the triple interaction is negative, it is not statistically significant, as shown in Appendix Table
A3. Thus, we cannot rule out that declines for non-black women in our sample were of the same magnitude
as declines for black women. We only show probit coefficients because of the difficulty interpreting marginal
effects of a triple interaction.
   37
      Alternatively, one can look at the effect of conditional cash transfer programs, such as Progresa or
Oportunidades. Among poor Mexican women, Angelucci (2008) shows relatively modest declines in domestic
violence, some of which can be explained by lower alcohol usage among transfer recipients. On the high
end in terms of the magnitude of causal effects, Bobonis et al. (2013) report that recipiency of a conditional
cash transfer targeting women is associated with a decrease in domestic violence of about 40%. The authors
consider data from Oportunidades, a Mexican program, which offers substantial cash transfers to families
whose children are in school that amount to about 10% of their average monthly expenditures. We should
note that our results are somewhat difficult to compare since they also find an increase in intimidation and
threats, which may be evidence of substitution among different forms of abuse. In contrast, we find evidence
that all forms of abuse, including coercion, decreased. These results are available upon request from the
corresponding author.



                                                       27
4.2    Drug Use

Next, we analyze how the introduction of HAART affected use of cocaine and heroin. As
with domestic violence, we estimate models of the following form:


   Bit+1 = HAARTt αB + T reatmenti δ B + HAARTt × T reatmenti γ B + Xit β B + B
                                                                               it ,        (5)


where Bit+1 refers to individual i’s behavior (i.e., use of cocaine or heroin) reported at time
t + 1. Again, HAARTt is an indicator for HAART availability at time t and T reatmenti
indicates if individual i is in the treatment group. Xit includes the basic controls discussed
above: age, age squared, age cubed, race and site indicators.

   We find limited evidence that the treatment group decreased their use of cocaine com-
pared to the control group. In Table 5 (Columns 3 and 4), we show probit coefficients and in
Table 6, we show marginal effects from the interaction term γ B from equation (5). We find
that the interaction term is statistically significant only under the most basic specification.
In this specification, we find a decrease in cocaine use of 2.9 percentage points, or about
16% starting from the pre-HAART treatment group mean of 17.8% Although γ B is always
negative when we restrict the sample to black women, we cannot rule out the possibility that
there is no effect.

   We find that the treatment group also decreased their use of heroin compared to the high
CD4 count HIV+ women. The results, shown in Table 6 (Columns 5 and 6), are robust
and the average effects are always significant at least at the 5% level. We find that heroin
use decreased by 1.9-2.2 percentage points, or 22-25% when compared to the pre-HAART
treatment group mean of 8.7%. However, when we restrict the sample to only include black
women, we find that the decrease is only significant in the most basic specification.

   Contextualizing our results is again challenging, in part because of the lack of findings on
how policy affects drug use. The WIHS is very unusual in that it asks about illicit drug use
over time. One related study, Corman et al. (2013), examines the effect of welfare reform

                                              28
on the drug use of women who are at risk of being on welfare. They find that self-reported
illicit drug use in the past year (excluding marijuana) fell by about 18% after welfare reform,
which changed work incentives for women.



4.3       Robustness Checks

In this section, we discuss two robustness checks. First, we test whether survival bias is
driving our results. To do this, we restrict our sample to women who were in the study for
at least 15 visits, which is about 7.5 years, and then repeat our main analyses using equations
(4) and (5). Results are reported in Appendix Table A4, which shows marginal effects of our
main findings with the restricted sample. We find that restricting the sample in this manner
does not affect our results. If anything, our findings on drug use are stronger.38

       The second robustness check that we perform uses propensity score matching. Following
Imbens (2015), we construct normalized differences of our covariates in order to investigate
the overlap between our treatment and control groups. To test whether baseline character-
istics are similar between groups, Imbens (2015) suggests a rule of thumb that normalized
differences be below 0.25. The majority of our coefficients are below 0.1, as shown in Ap-
pendix Table A5, which provides some evidence that the treatment and control group are
comparable. Appendix Figure A2 shows that the propensity scores for the treatment group
and the control group have substantial overlap.39 Looking at the figure, the average of the
estimated propensity score is lower for the treatment group, which indicates that the two
groups are not comparable, except after appropriate reweighing of the observations. We thus
repeat our main analyses using inverse probability weights. Similar to our main specification
checks, we jointly test that the pre-HAART trends in domestic violence, cocaine use, and
  38
     Even when we exclude women who died or left the study early, our main findings remain. About 95% of
our sample stayed in the study for at least this period of time. In another test, we show that our results are
not driven by simply participating in the WIHS study. We accomplish this by comparing violence and drug
use trajectories for women in our analytic sample versus women in the second cohort who entered the sample
after HAART was introduced. Results from these analyses are available from the corresponding author.
  39
     We do not present figures from other outcomes, as they are very similar. However, these are available
upon request from the corresponding author.


                                                     29
heroin use are different and fail to reject the null hypothesis when using the inverse proba-
bility weights (p = 0.19). Thus, even when considering weighting by the inverse probability
of being in the treatment group, there is little evidence that pre-HAART trends differed
between the treatment and control groups. Turning to the main analysis, we find that there
are no differences between the treatment group and the control group pre-HAART, as shown
in Appendix Table A6. However, after the introduction of HAART, violence and heroin use
fell for the treatment group compared to the control group. These findings are similar to
those from our main difference-in-differences specifications.



5     Mechanisms

In this section, we further explore possible mechanisms explaining why health improvements
lowered domestic violence and illicit drug use. Section 5.1 considers the roles of both physical
and mental health improvements. Section 5.2 examines the relationship between illicit drug
use and violence. Section 5.3 studies potential HAART-induced improvements in labor
market outcomes and whether they play a role in explaining our main estimates.



5.1    Physical and Mental Health Improvements

We now consider physical health and mental health, which are two alternative mechanisms
which could help to explain our findings. Starting with physical health, we begin by doc-
umenting that women in the treatment group experienced large increases in their immune
system health (CD4 count) compared to our control group. In particular, in Table 7, we
return to our difference-in-differences framework to show relative increases in CD4 count
among women in the treatment group after HAART. This improvement in underlying health
may have translated to improvements in how women felt after HAART, which might lead
to declines in domestic violence or illicit drug use. In Table 8 (Columns 3 and 4), we as-
sess whether women in the treatment group exhibit shifts relative to the control group in

                                              30
the probability of experiencing at least one symptom, where the symptoms we consider are:
fever, memory problems, numbness, weight loss, mental confusion, and night sweats. We
again return to the original difference-in-differences framework.40 We find little evidence
of post-HAART relative declines in reporting at least one of these symptoms for women in
the treatment group after HAART.41 This absence of changes in symptoms is not surprising
since the women we study are unlikely to have experienced symptoms attributable to HIV
prior to HAART introduction.42

       That is, women simply feeling better, measured by a lack of physical symptoms, does
not appear to be an important mechanism generating our main results.43 Instead, HAART
is an example of a medical innovation that affected behavior without affecting physical
symptoms. Recall, women in the treatment group, despite lower CD4 counts at the time
of HAART introduction, had yet to experience the symptoms of AIDS. Hence, HAART-
induced reductions in domestic violence and illicit drug use do not appear to be driven
by contemporaneous improvements in how they feel as measured by physical symptoms.
Instead, our findings on symptoms suggest that much of the role of HAART in affecting
violence and drug use operated through its effect on expectations of future physical health
and survival.

       Another possible mechanism is mental health. It might be the case that a positive shock
in expected health due to the arrival of a new medical technology leads to better mental
health. If so, women may perceive better options outside of violent partnerships and refrain
from illicit drug use.44 In Table 8 (Columns 1 and 2), we use the same difference-in-differences
  40
     For consistency with the CES-D Score, we use OLS specifications. However, in results available upon
request, we also tried the probit specifications and found no difference.
  41
     We also tested individual symptoms along with the total the number of symptoms using a Poisson count
and found no difference between the treatment and control group.
  42
     Even if they had, HAART side effects may have simply replaced symptoms, leaving women feeling no
better than before HAART In related work, Papageorge (2016) shows that HAART side effects among HIV+
men replaced some of the symptoms of HIV, though this occurred among sicker patients that are not the
focus of this study.
  43
     However, it is worth reiterating that these results bolster the argument that women in the treatment
group are comparable to those in the control group in that, despite having lower CD4 counts, they do not
exhibit physical symptoms of AIDS prior to the introduction to HAART.
  44
     A correlation between depressive symptoms and exposure to violence is reported in Johnson et al. (2014),

                                                     31
framework as in our main analysis to study depression as the outcome variable. To measure
depression, we use the CES-D Score and find little evidence that mental health can explain
the links between HAART introduction and domestic violence or illicit drug use.45 Again,
our results suggest that contemporaneous changes to physical or mental health after HAART
do not explain the impact of HAART on violence and drug use.



5.2     Relating Drug Use and Violence

Our finding that HAART reduced both violence and drug use is consistent with several
possible mechanisms. One possibility is that HAART affected both independently. Another
is that HAART only affected violence through its impact on drug use. One hypothesis is
that by lowering drug use, violence mechanically declined. Alternatively, HAART may have
reduced violence, leading women to avoid drugs, perhaps experiencing less need for drugs to
cope with violence. Although it is difficult to distinguish between these possibilities given
available data, we believe that we can make some progress on the question.

    First, we allow violence and drug use to be jointly determined. In effect, doing so controls
for the correlation between violence and drug use. We show that our basic results are
qualitatively similar even when we control for this correlation.46 Even when we control for
the correlation between the two outcomes, HAART appears to have independent effects on
domestic violence and illicit drug use. In other words, neither one is simply a by-product of
the other.47

    Second, we exploit the fact that heroin and cocaine appear to have different relationships
albeit among adolescents. A related view is that lower illicit drug use can improve mental health, which
previous research has shown can lead to declines in violence (Devries et al., 2013).
  45
     In results available upon request from the corresponding author, we show that controlling for mental
health does not change our main results. We also show that our main findings are not driven by increased
interaction with the medical community after HAART was introduced.
  46
     Results are shown in Appendix Tables A7 (cocaine use) and A8 (heroin use).
  47
     It is worth mentioning that results on joint estimation are not robustness tests of main results. Rather,
they serve to examine whether HAART had effects on two different outcomes once we have controlled for
correlation among the two outcomes (versus, for example, having a direct effect on one outcome that affects
the other).



                                                     32
with abuse. In Table 9, we present results from a regression of violence on drug use, income,
employment, and our usual set of controls. We instrument heroin and cocaine use with pre-
vious period drug use in order to avoid capturing drug use as a response to domestic violence
(e.g., using drugs as a coping mechanism). Importantly, we distinguish between heroin use
and cocaine use. We find that, whereas use of cocaine is associated with more violence, use
of heroin is associated with less violence. This result is consistent with the medical literature
that studies the impact of drug use on violence and finds that heroin has a pacifying or
sedating effect on users.48 The negative coefficient on heroin use strengthens the argument
that HAART had independent effects on both violence and drug use. The reasoning is as
follows. Suppose HAART only affected heroin use and had no impact on violence except
through its correlation with heroin use. Then, we might expect violence to rise if heroin
use went down. Instead, both decline. Though this evidence is somewhat speculative, these
empirical patterns are consistent with the claim that HAART had independent effects on
violence and illicit drug use.



5.3     Employment and Income

Thus far, we have shown that HAART reduced both domestic violence and illicit drug use.
Moreover, though intuitively appealing, the idea that direct physical and mental health
improvements (measured by physical symptoms and the CES-D measure of depression) led
to declines in domestic violence and illicit drug use is not borne out by our data. In this
section, we consider changes to labor market outcomes induced by HAART. Our hypothesis
is that improved labor market prospects might help to explain why women perceive better
options outside of violent partnerships or face stronger incentives to desist from drug use.
Further, our conceptual framework envisions health as a form of human capital and that
  48
    See Boles and Miotto (2003) or Volavka (2008) on pharmacologically-induced violence. For the effects of
heroin, see, in particular, Jaffe and Jaffe (1999). An underlying and important assumption in relating illicit
drug use to domestic violence is that intimate partners are likely to use the same drugs. This assumption
has broad empirical support from a variety of fields. See, for example, Anglin et al. (1987). Vanyukov et al.
(1996) provide a review of this literature.


                                                     33
implies that women with more human capital are less likely to experience abuse or to use
illicit drugs. Evidence of HAART-induced improvements in labor market outcomes supports
the treatment of health as a form of human capital.

       To assess HAART-induced differences in labor market outcomes, we return to our difference-
in-differences framework. We treat employment at the time of visit as the labor market out-
come of interest. The marginal effects are presented in Table 10. Estimates show that the
treatment group became relatively more likely to be employed after HAART. Black women
in the treatment group became much more likely to be employed relative to black women in
the control group for all of our specifications. This amounts to an increase in the probability
of employment for the treatment group of about 4.8-5.5 percentage points, or about 19-22%,
for the full sample and 7.7-8.1 percentage points, or about 35%, for the black women sub-
sample. Pre-HAART treatment group means are 25.3% for the full sample and 22.3% for
the black sample.

       Our findings on employment are broadly consistent with those in Goldman and Bao
(2004), who also study HAART and employment. They show that HAART use increased
the probability that HIV+ individuals kept working by 37%. Our results are smaller for
at least two reasons. First, we do not condition on HAART use as they do but instead
rely on HAART introduction (similar to an intent-to-treat analysis). Second, their finding
conditions on working at the time of HAART introduction while ours does not. Indeed,
individuals in our sample are not highly educated and do not exhibit strong ties to the
labor market before the introduction of HAART. Perhaps more comparable to our setting,
Goldman and Bao (2004) find no effect of HAART on the likelihood of returning to work,
conditional on not working prior to HAART introduction. Compared to their estimates for
non-workers, our findings on employment are relatively large.49
  49
    Our results on employment are broadly consistent with literature considering how HAART affected
labor market outcomes in developing countries in Africa. For example, Thirumurthy et al. (2008) find
that antiretroviral therapy is associated with an increased attachment to the labor force, in terms of both
participation and hours, for patients in western Kenya. Habyarimana et al. (2010) document patterns of
absenteeism in Botswana and provide evidence that an increase in CD4 count decreases illness-related absence



                                                    34
   Though our results on labor market outcomes provide evidence that HAART increased
women’s labor market human capital, the precise mechanism is difficult to identify. We find
that women with better labor market prospects are more likely to avoid abusive partnerships.
Using individual fixed effects, we find that income and employment are associated with lower
rates of violence. We show this using a linear probability model in which we regress domestic
violence on employment in the same period, income, various sets of sociodemographic vari-
ables, and individual fixed effects. In the final specification with the largest set of controls,
including health, socio-demographic characteristics and risky behaviors, we find (see Table
11) that being employed lowers the likelihood of being abused by 0.8 percentage points.

   We also find that drug use and violence are negatively correlated with employment among
women in our sample.50 However, there are several mechanisms that could explain why
HAART would lower drug use and violence and also have an effect on employment and
income. For example, reductions in violence and drug use would presumably make working
easier. Alternatively, improvements to expected health could lead women to expect better
labor market prospects, giving them stronger incentives to leave or avoid abusive partners
and causing them to view drug use as more costly. Even further, if HAART improves labor
market prospects, it could incentivize further investments in human capital. In the case of
poor women with HIV, avoiding drug use could therefore be seen as an investment in future
earnings (Becker and Murphy, 1988). Given the data we have, we are unable to distinguish
among these mechanisms; indeed, it is possible that each of them plays a role. However,
our findings on labor market outcomes support the conceptual framework we have proposed.
HAART improved women’s lives on a number of dimensions, reducing domestic violence and
illicit drug use and improving their labor market prospects.
from work.
   50
      These results are shown in Appendix A, Tables A9 and A10.




                                                  35
6     Conclusion

We have presented evidence that HAART lowered domestic violence by about 15% and re-
duced illicit drug use by 15-20% among a group of low-income, predominantly black, HIV+
women. The fact that HAART marked a massive improvement over previous HIV treat-
ments, together with the seriousness of HIV, enables us to detect subtle effects of this phar-
maceutical innovation on domestic violence and illicit drug use. The underlying mechanism
is that this new medical technology constituted a positive health shock, improving women’s
health trajectories and, hence, increasing their human capital.

    How far our results generalize to other groups, to negative health shocks, to other chronic
illnesses and to behaviors other than domestic violence and drug use are, of course, open
questions. We have studied a particular population and a particular medical condition that
is accompanied by stigma, depression and physical deterioration in ways that other chronic
illnesses are not.

    Nevertheless, we cannot resist speculating on the broader implications of our findings.
Our results illustrate how the benefits of medical innovation are not limited to direct effects
on health or survival, but can also work through changes in behavior. Our results also
suggest that policies that provide better access to health care and enhance human capital
can alleviate persistent and intractable social problems. Policies surrounding both domestic
violence and illicit drug use often utilize criminal sanctions and attempt to change attitudes;
policies directed specifically at women also attempt to provide support for those who have
been abused. Our findings suggest a complementary approach focused on interventions that
increase women’s human capital.



References

AIDSinfo, “Guidelines for the Use of Antiretroviral Agents in HIV-1-Infected Adults and



                                              36
  Adolescents,” http://aidsinfo.nih.gov/guidelines 2014.

Aizer, Anna, “The Gender Wage Gap and Domestic Violence,” American Economic Re-
  view, 2010, 100 (4), 1847–1859.

Alvira-Hammond, Marta, Monica A Longmore, Wendy D Manning, and Peggy C
  Giordano, “Gainful Activity and Intimate Partner Aggression in Emerging Adulthood,”
  Emerging Adulthood, 2014, 2 (2), 116–127.

Anderberg, Dan and Helmut Rainer, “Economic Abuse: A Theory of Intrahousehold
  Sabotage,” Journal of Public Economics, 2013, 97, 282–295.

Angelucci, Manuela, “Love on the Rocks: Domestic Violence and Alcohol Abuse in Rural
  Mexico,” The BE Journal of Economic Analysis & Policy, 2008, 8 (1), 1935–1682.

Anglin, M Douglas, Chih-Fen Kao, Lisa L Harlow, Katharine Peters, and
  Mary W Booth, “Similarity of Behavior within Addict Couples. Part I. Methodology
  and Narcotics Patterns,” International Journal of the Addictions, 1987, 22 (6), 497–520.

Barkan, Susan E, Sandra L Melnick, Susan Preston-Martin, Kathleen Weber,
  Leslie A Kalish, Paolo Miotti, Mary Young, Ruth Greenblatt, Henry Sacks,
  and Joseph Feldman, “The Women’s Interagency HIV Study,” Epidemiology, 1998, 9
  (2), 117–125.

Becker, Gary S, “Health as Human Capital: Synthesis and Extensions,” Oxford Economic
  Papers, 2007, 59 (3), 379–410.

  and Kevin M Murphy, “A Theory of Rational Addiction,” Journal of Political Econ-
  omy, 1988, 96 (4), 675–700.

Ben-Porath, Yoram, “The Production of Human Capital and The Life Cycle of Earnings,”
  Journal of Political Economy, 1967, 75 (4), 352–365.



                                              37
Bertrand, Marianne, Esther Duflo, and Sendhil Mullainathan, “How Much Should
  We Trust Differences-in-Differences Estimates?,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2004,
  119 (1), 249–275.

Bhaskaran, K, O Hamouda, M Sannes, and et al., “Changes in the Risk of Death
  after HIV Seroconversion Compared with Mortality in the General Population,” Journal
  of the American Medical Association, 2008, 300 (1), 51–59.

Black, Michele C, Kathleen C Basile, Matthew J Breiding, Sharon G Smith,
  Mikel L Walters, Melissa T Merrick, Jieru Chen, and Mark R Stevens, “The
  National Intimate Partner and Sexual Violence Survey: 2010 Summary Report,” Technical
  Report, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention 2011.

Black, Sandra, Paul Devereux, and Kjell G Salvanes, “From the Cradle to the Labor
  Market? The Effect of Birth Weight on Adult Outcomes,” Quarterly Journal of Eco-
  nomics, 2007, 122 (1), 409–439.

Bobonis, Gustavo J, Melissa González-Brenes, and Roberto Castro, “Public Trans-
  fers and Domestic Violence: The Roles of Private Information and Spousal Control,”
  American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 2013, 5 (1), 179–205.

Boles, Sharon M and Karen Miotto, “Substance Abuse and Violence: A Review of the
  Literature,” Aggression and Violent Behavior, 2003, 8 (2), 155–174.

Bowlus, Audra J and Shannon Seitz, “Domestic Violence, Employment, and Divorce,”
  International Economic Review, 2006, 47 (4), 1113–1149.

Browne, Angela, Amy Salomon, and Shari S Bassuk, “The Impact of Recent Partner
  Violence on Poor Women’s Capacity to Maintain Work,” Violence Against Women, 1999,
  5 (4), 393–426.




                                           38
Carrell, Scott E and Mark L Hoekstra, “Externalities in the Classroom: How Children
  Exposed to Domestic Violence Affect Everyone’s Kids,” American Economic Journal:
  Applied Economics, 2010, 2 (1), 211–228.

Catalano, Shannan M, Intimate Partner Violence, 1993-2010, US Department of Justice,
  Office of Justice Programs, Bureau of Justice Statistics, 2012.

CDC, “HIV Surveillance Report,” Technical Report 2015.

Cesur, Resul and Joseph J Sabia, “When War Comes Home: The Effect of Combat
  Service on Domestic Violence,” Review of Economics and Statistics, 2016, 98 (2), 209–225.

Cohen, Mardge, Catherine Deamant, Susan Barkan, Jean Richardson, Mary
  Young, Susan Holman, Kathryn Anastos, Judith Cohen, and Sandra Melnick,
  “Domestic Violence and Childhood Sexual Abuse in HIV-Infected Women and Women at
  Risk for HIV,” The American Journal of Public Health, 2000, 90 (4), 560–565.

Corman, Hope, Dhaval M Dave, Dhiman Das, and Nancy E Reichman, “Effects
  of Welfare Reform on Illicit Drug Use of Adult Women,” Economic Inquiry, 2013, 51 (1),
  653–674.

Denning, Paul and Elizabeth DiNenno, “Communities in Crisis: Is There A Generalized
  HIV Epidemic in Impoverished Urban Areas of the United States,” in “XVIII international
  AIDS conference” 2010.

Detels, R, P Tarwater, JP Phair, J Margolick, SA Riddler, and A Muñoz, “Effec-
  tiveness of Potent Antiretroviral Therapies on the Incidence of Opportunistic Infections
  Before and after AIDS Diagnosis,” AIDS, 2001, 15 (3), 347–355.

Devries, Karen M, Joelle Y Mak, Loraine J Bacchus, Jennifer C Child, Gail
  Falder, Max Petzold, Jill Astbury, and Charlotte H Watts, “Intimate Partner




                                             39
  Violence and Incident Depressive Symptoms and Suicide Attempts: A Systematic Review
  of Longitudinal Studies,” PLOS Medicine, 2013, 10 (5).

El-Bassel, Nabila, Louisa Gilbert, Elwin Wu, Hyun Go, and Jennifer Hill, “Re-
  lationship Between Drug Abuse and Intimate Partner Violence: a Longitudinal Study
  Among Women Receiving Methadone,” American Journal of Public Health, 2005, 95 (3),
  465–470.

Erten, Bilge and Pinar Keskin, “For Better or for Worse?: Education and the Prevalence
  of Domestic Violence in Turkey,” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 2018,
  10 (1), 64–105.

Gelles, Richard J, “Abused Wives: Why Do They Stay?,” Journal of Marriage and the
  Family, 1976, 38 (4), 659–668.

Goldman, Dana P and Yuhua Bao, “Effective HIV Treatment and The Employment of
  HIV+ Adults,” Health Services Research, 2004, 39 (6p1), 1691–1712.

Greenfeld, Lawrence A, Michael R Rand, Diane Craven, Patsy A Klaus, Craig A
  Perkins, Cheryl Ringel, Greg Warchol, Cathy Maston, and James Alan Fox,
  “Violence by Intimates: Analysis of Data on Crimes by Current or Former Spouses,
  Boyfriends, and Girlfriends,” Technical Report, US Department of Justice Washington,
  DC 1998.

Grossman, Michael, “On the Concept of Health Capital and the Demand for Health,”
  Journal of Political Economy, 1972, 80 (2), 223–255.

Habyarimana, James, Bekezela Mbakile, and Cristian Pop-Eleches, “The Impact of
  HIV/AIDS and ARV Treatment on Worker Absenteeism Implications for African Firms,”
  Journal of Human Resources, 2010, 45 (4), 809–839.




                                           40
Hart, Carl L, M Haney, RW Foltin, and MW Fischman, “Alternative Reinforcers Dif-
  ferentially Modify Cocaine Self-Administration by Humans,” Behavioural Pharmacology,
  2000, 11 (1), 87–91.

Heaton, Paul, “Sunday Liquor Laws and Crime,” Journal of Public Economics, 2012, 96
  (1), 42–52.

Heckman, James J and Paul A LaFontaine, “The American High School Graduation
  Rate: Trends and Levels,” The Review of Economics and Statistics, 2010, 92 (2), 244–262.

Imbens, Guido W, “Matching Methods in Practice: Three Examples,” Journal of Human
  Resources, 2015, 50 (2), 373–419.

Iyengar, Radha, “Does the Certainty of Arrest Reduce Domestic Violence? Evidence from
  Mandatory and Recommended Arrest Laws,” Journal of Public Economics, 2009, 93 (1),
  85–98.

Jaffe, JH and AB Jaffe, “Neurobiology of Opiates and Opioids,” in M. Galanter and
  H.D. Kleber, eds., Textbook of Substance Abuse Treatment, American Psychiatric Press
  Washington, DC 1999, pp. 11–19.

Jayachandran, Seema and Adriana Lleras-Muney, “Life Expectancy and Human Cap-
  ital Investments: Evidence from Maternal Mortality Declines,” Quarterly Journal of Eco-
  nomics, 2009, 124 (1), 349–397.

Johnson, Wendi L, Peggy C Giordano, Monica A Longmore, and Wendy D
  Manning, “Intimate Partner Violence and Depressive Symptoms During Adolescence
  and Young Adulthood,” Journal of Health and Social Behavior, 2014, 55 (1), 39–55.

Johnson, Wendy A and Huibrie C Pieters, “Intimate Partner Violence among Women
  Diagnosed with Cancer,” Cancer Nursing, 2016, 39 (2), 87–96.




                                           41
Karaca-Mandic, Pinar, Edward C Norton, and Bryan Dowd, “Interaction Terms in
  Nonlinear Models,” Health Services Research, 2012, 47 (1pt1), 255–274.

Laub, John H and Robert J Sampson, “Understanding Desistance from Crime,” Crime
  and Justice, 2001, 28, 1–69.

Mayer, Christopher, Edward Morrison, Tomasz Piskorski, and Arpit Gupta,
  “Mortgage Modification and Strategic Behavior: Evidence from a Legal Settlement with
  Countrywide,” American Economic Review, 2014, 104 (9), 2830–57.

Mocroft, Amanda and Jens D Lundgren, “Starting Highly Active Antiretroviral Ther-
  apy: Why, When and Response to HAART,” Journal of Antimicrobial Chemotherapy,
  2004, 54 (1), 10–13.

Oster, Emily, Ira Shoulson, and E Dorsey, “Limited Life Expectancy, Human Capital
  and Health Investments,” American Economic Review, 2013, 103 (5), 1977–2002.

Ostrow, DG, A. Monjan, J. Joseph, M. VanRaden, R. Fox, L. Kingsley, J. Dud-
  ley, and J. Phair, “HIV-Related Symptoms and Psychological Functioning in a Cohort
  of Homosexual Men,” American Journal of Psychiatry, 1989, 146 (6), 737.

Papageorge, Nicholas W, “Why Medical Innovation is Valuable: Health, Human Capital,
  and the Labor Market,” Quantitative Economics, 2016, 7 (3), 671–725.

Pellowski, Jennifer A, Seth C Kalichman, Karen A Matthews, and Nancy Adler,
  “A Pandemic of the Poor: Social Disadvantage and the US HIV Epidemic,” American
  Psychologist, 2013, 68 (4), 197.

Phil, R. and J Peterson, “Alcohol/Drug Use and Aggressive Behavior,” in S. Hodgins,
  ed., Mental Disorder and Crime, Crime and Mental Disorder Advanced Study Institute
  Sage 1993, pp. 263–283.




                                           42
Pollak, Robert A, “An Intergenerational Model of Domestic Violence,” Journal of Popu-
  lation Economics, 2004, 17 (2), 311–329.

Pronyk, Paul M, James R Hargreaves, Julia C Kim, Linda A Morison, God-
  frey Phetla, Charlotte Watts, Joanna Busza, and John DH Porter, “Effect of a
  Structural Intervention for the Prevention of Intimate-Partner Violence and HIV in Rural
  South Africa: A Cluster Randomised Trial,” The Lancet, 2006, 368 (9551), 1973–1983.

Puhani, Patrick A, “The Treatment Effect, The Cross Difference, and the Interaction
  Term in Nonlinear “Difference-in-Differences” Models,” Economics Letters, 2012, 115 (1),
  85–87.

Robins, Lee N, “Vietnam Veterans’ Rapid Recovery from Heroin Addiction: A Fluke or
  Normal Expectation?,” Addiction, 1993, 88 (8), 1041–1054.

Stevenson, Betsey and Justin Wolfers, “Bargaining in the Shadow of the Law: Divorce
  Laws and Family Distress,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2006, 121 (1), 267–288.

Swanberg, Jennifer E and Caroline Macke, “Intimate Partner Violence and the Work-
  place Consequences and Disclosure,” Journal of Women and Social Work, 2006, 21 (4),
  391–406.

Thirumurthy, Harsha, Joshua Graff Zivin, and Markus Goldstein, “The Economic
  Impact of AIDS Treatment Labor Supply in Western Kenya,” Journal of Human Re-
  sources, 2008, 43 (3), 511–552.

Tjaden, Patricia and Nancy Thoennes, “Full Report of the Prevalence, Incidence, and
  Consequences of Violence Against Women,” Technical Report, U.S. Department of Justice
  2000.

Vanyukov, MM, MC Neale, HB Moss, and RE Tarter, “Mating Assortment and the
  Liability to Substance Abuse,” Drug and Alcohol Dependence, 1996, 42 (1), 1–10.


                                             43
Volavka, Jan, Neurobiology of Violence, 2 ed., American Psychiatric Publishing, 2008.

Yeni, Patrick, “Update on HAART in HIV,” Journal of Hepatology, 2006, 44, S100–S103.

Yi, Junjian, James J Heckman, Junsen Zhang, and Gabriella Conti, “Early Health
  Shocks, Intra-household Resource Allocation and Child Outcomes,” The Economic Jour-
  nal, 2015, 125 (588), F347–F371.

Zorza, Joan, “Woman Battering: A Major Cause of Homelessness,” Clearinghouse Review,
  1991, 25, 421.




                                           44
Figures and Tables




                         Hopeful about the Future Some or All of the Time
                          .46     .48       .5      .52     .54       .56




                                                                            1996                      1997
                                                                                    Year

                                                                             Positive      Negative




Figure 1: This figure shows the probability of reporting being hopeful about the future sometimes
or all of the time the week before the visit for HIV+ and HIV− women.




                                                                                   45
                                      .15




                                                                                                                            .25
Fraction of Women Experiencing DV SLV




                                                                                          Fraction of Women Who Use Cocaine
                 .125




                                                                                                          .2.15
                    .1




                                            1       2                  3         4                                                1     2                  3         4
                                                               visit                                                                               visit

                                                        Treatment      Control                                                              Treatment      Control



                                                (a) Domestic Violence                                                                 (b) Cocaine Use
                    .15
Fraction of Women Who Use Heroin
                .1  .05




                                            1       2                  3         4
                                                               visit

                                                        Treatment      Control



                                                   (c) Heroin Use

                                                   Figure 2: This figure shows pre-HAART trends in outcomes.




                                                                                     46
                                .04
                                .02
                          Mean Residual
                           -.02 -.04
                                -.060




                                          1995-1996   1999-2000        2003-2004             2007-2008
                                                                   Year

                                                            Treatment              Control




Figure 3: This figure shows residuals for the treatment group and the control group from a probit
model of experiencing domestic violence, controlling for age, age squared, age cubed, race and site
dummies.




                                                                  47
         Table 1: Relationship Between Health, Drug Use, and Employment

                                                   Full
                                                 Sample
                                      Domestic Violence
                                      CD4 count  .00007
                                                       (.0001)
                                      Obs.        13914
                                      Mean        0.054
                                      Pseudo R2   0.041
                                      Cocaine Use
                                      CD4 count -.0004∗∗∗
                                                       (.0001)
                                      Obs.       31165
                                      Mean        0.109
                                      Pseudo R2  0.044
                                      Heroin Use
                                      CD4 count  -.0001
                                                       (.0001)
                                      Obs.        31159
                                      Mean        0.044
                                      Pseudo R2   0.046
                                      Employment
                                      CD4 count .0005∗∗∗
                                                       (.00007)
                                      Obs.             31305
                                      Mean             0.308
                                      Pseudo R2        0.057


This table shows estimates from probit regressions relating health to domestic violence, illicit drug
use and employment. Each specification is clustered at the individual level and includes controls
for age at visit, age squared, age cubed, race dummies, and site dummies.




                                                  48
     Table 2: Violence, Drug Use and Employment by Time of AIDS Diagnosis

                                        Last visit pre AIDS   First visit with AIDS
                    Sexual abuse                 1.1                     1.4
                    Physical abuse               4.7                    4.2
                    Coercion                    10.5                     8.7
                    Domestic violence           11.9                     9.5
                    Cocaine use                 20.3                    15.2
                    Heroin use                   9.5                     6.6
                    Employed                    17.0                    19.5
                    Observations                800                    2508


This table shows the percent of women who experienced each type of abuse in the six months prior
to their last visit before an AIDS diagnosis and the six months prior to their first visit with AIDS.
The sample is restricted to HIV+, low CD4 count women from the first cohort before HAART was
introduced. AIDS is defined as having a CD4 count less than or equal to 200.




                                                 49
                                 Table 3: Summary Statistics

                                                           (1)        (2)         (3)
                                                        Treatment   Control   Equal means
                                                          group      group      p-value
                 Average age                                42         41         .23
                 African American                           67         64         .41
                 Hispanic                                   20         22         .68
                 White (Non-Hispanic)                       12         12         .95
                 Other                                       1          3         .13
                 Education:
                  LT high school                           37         41          .51
                  High school grad                         30         30          .94
                  Some college                             23         22          .82
                  College grad                             10          7          .34
                 Pre-HAART Income:
                  ≤ 6000                                   17         17          .97
                  6000-12000                               33         33          .93
                  12001-18000                              13         14          .72
                  18001-24000                              11         10          .64
                  24001-30000                               7          9          .33
                  > 30000                                  19         17          .60
                 Employed re-HAART                         38         43          .25
                 Married pre-HAART                         32         25          .11
                 Lived with kids at baseline               51         47          .38
                 Risky Behaviors Pre-HAART (Ever):
                   Used crack                              22         23          .79
                   Used powdered cocaine                   17         21          .34
                   Used cocaine                            28         31          .52
                   Used stimulants                         30         32          .59
                   Used heroin                             18         16          .50
                 Symptoms Pre-HAART (Ever):
                   Memory problems                         31         36          .22
                   Numbness                                39         42          .61
                   Weight loss                             33         27          .23
                   Mental confusion                        17         20          .50
                   Night sweats                            35         41          .22
                 Pre-HAART Domestic Violence (Ever):
                   Experienced sex abuse                    5          10         .09
                   Experienced physical abuse               17         19         .65
                   Experienced coercion                     26         28         .59
                   Experienced domestic violence            27         34         .14
                 Observations                              166        269
                 Person-Visits                            2477       4192

The full sample includes all women from the first cohort who answered questions about domestic
violence, employment, and illicit drug use, as well as all controls used. The treatment group is
defined as having a minimum pre-HAART CD4 count between 300 and 399. High CD4 refers to
minimum pre-HAART CD4 count greater than or equal to 400. Income is measured as yearly
household income. Cocaine is defined as crack or powdered cocaine use. Stimulants are defined as
crack, cocaine, (illicit) methadone, or methamphetamine. Domestic violence is defined as physical
or sexual abuse or coercion by an intimate partner or spouse. Coercion indicates that the partner
threatened to hurt or kill the subject or prevented her from: leaving or entering her home, seeing
friends, making telephone calls, getting or keeping a job, continuing her education, or seeking
medical attention. Column (3) shows p-values from the tests of differences in means between the
treatment group and the control group.




                                                   50
                   Table 4: Test of Equality of Pre-HAART Trends

                                     Outcome                p-value
                                     Domestic violence       0.258
                                     Cocaine use             0.091
                                     Heroin use              0.307
                                     Joint significance      0.148


This table shows the p-values from tests that the pre-HAART trends in outcomes are parallel. For
each outcome, we regress the outcome on age, age squared, race indicators, site of visit indicators,
six-month time dummies, an indicator for being in the treatment group, and an interaction of the
time bins and the treatment group. We then test that the pre-HAART interactions are zero.




            Table 5: Health, Violence and Drug Use: Probit Coefficients

                                Domestic Violence           Cocaine Use            Heroin Use
                                 [1]       [2]              [3]      [4]           [5]     [6]
        Full Sample
        HAART available         -.365∗∗∗   -.235∗∗∗       -.203∗∗∗    -.304∗∗∗   -.163∗∗∗   -.273∗∗∗
                                 (.075)      (.085)        (.052)      (.058)     (.058)     (.068)
        Treatment group          -.061       -.023         .043        .071       .091       .122
                                 (.116)      (.116)        (.098)      (.099)     (.113)     (.114)
        Treatment × HAART       -.202∗      -.213∗        -.171∗∗      -.129     -.276∗∗∗   -.242∗∗
                                 (.117)      (.121)        (.080)      (.084)     (.098)     (.104)
        Obs.                     6669        6669          16265       16265      16261      16261
        Black Sample
        HAART available         -.411∗∗∗   -.321∗∗∗       -.246∗∗∗    -.355∗∗∗   -.177∗∗    -.365∗∗∗
                                 (.092)      (.098)        (.068)      (.072)     (.081)     (.082)
        Treatment group          -.004       .039          .085        .130       .086       .096
                                 (.140)      (.141)        (.126)      (.128)     (.147)     (.152)
        Treatment × HAART       -.273∗      -.289∗         -.165       -.152     -.267∗      -.216
                                 (.145)      (.148)        (.105)      (.108)     (.139)     (.143)
        Obs.                     4280        4280          9355        9355       9352       9352
        Basic controls            N           Y             N           Y          N          Y


This table shows difference-in-differences probit model estimates where the outcome variable is
having experienced domestic violence, used cocaine, or used heroin since the last visit. Basic
controls include age at visit, age squared, age cubed, race (Caucasian omitted), and site of visit
(Chicago omitted). In all specifications, errors are clustered at the individual level.




                                                  51
              Table 6: Health, Violence and Drug Use: Marginal Effects

                                      Domestic Violence        Cocaine Use           Heroin Use
                                        [1]       [2]           [3]     [4]          [5]      [6]
 Full Sample
 Treatment × HAART                     -0.015*    -0.017*    -0.029**    -0.022   -0.022***   -0.019**
                                       (0.008)    (0.009)     (0.013)   (0.014)    (0.007)     (0.008)
                                        0.068      0.063       0.027     0.109      0.003       0.011
 Observations                           6669       6669        16265     16265      16261       16261
 Pre-HAART treatment group mean         0.103      0.103       0.178      0.178     0.087       0.087
 Mean                                   0.063      0.063       0.121      0.121     0.052       0.052
 Pseudo R2                              0.026      0.059       0.006     0.065      0.009       0.090
 Black Sample
 Treatment × HAART                    -0.021**    -0.024**     -0.034    -0.028   -0.022**     -0.016
                                       (0.011)     (0.011)    (0.021)   (0.022)    (0.010)    (0.011)
                                        0.044       0.034      0.103     0.201      0.037      0.151
 Observations                           4280        4280        9355      9355      9352        9352
 Pre-HAART treatment group mean         0.130       0.130       0.228     0.228     0.089       0.089
 Mean                                   0.069       0.069      0.145      0.145     0.053       0.053
 Pseudo R2                              0.033       0.057      0.007     0.058      0.009      0.103
 Basic controls                           N           Y           N         Y         N           Y


This table shows the marginal effects of the interaction term from the difference in differences probit
models. Standard errors are presented in parenthesis, and p-values are found below. Basic controls
include age at visit, age squared, age cubed, race (Caucasian omitted), and site of visit (Chicago
omitted). In all specifications, errors are clustered at the individual level.




                                                  52
                                       Table 7: CD4 Count

                                                               [1]              [2]
                     Full Sample
                     HAART available                       -79.940∗∗∗       -73.840∗∗∗
                                                             (12.824)         (13.338)
                                                                      ∗∗∗
                     Treatment group                       -252.501         -245.119∗∗∗
                                                             (14.061)         (14.442)
                                                                     ∗∗∗
                     Treatment × HAART                     137.740          136.016∗∗∗
                                                             (21.814)         (21.613)
                     Obs.                                    6524             6524
                     Pre-HAART treatment group mean          424.2            424.2
                     Mean                                    560.1            560.1
                     R2                                      0.069            0.090
                     Black Sample
                     HAART available                       -90.840∗∗∗       -85.041∗∗∗
                                                             (17.268)         (17.701)
                                                                      ∗∗∗
                     Treatment group                       -267.766         -265.419∗∗∗
                                                             (17.346)         (18.838)
                                                                     ∗∗∗
                     Treatment × HAART                     142.861          139.667∗∗∗
                                                             (25.966)         (25.727)
                     Obs.                                    4189             4189
                     Pre-HAART treatment group mean          421.9            421.9
                     Mean                                    559.9            559.9
                     R2                                      0.080            0.083
                     Basic controls                            N                Y


This table shows estimates from OLS difference-in-differences models where the outcome variable is
CD4 count. Basic controls include age at visit, age squared, age cubed, race (Caucasian omitted),
and site of visit (Chicago omitted). In all specifications, errors are clustered at the individual level.




                                                   53
                         Table 8: Depression Score and Symptoms

                                                      CESD Score            Any Symptoms
                                                      [1]     [2]            [3]    [4]
             Full Sample
             HAART available                     -2.734∗∗∗      -3.328∗∗∗   -.017    -.080∗∗∗
                                                   (.441)         (.507)    (.016)    (.018)
                                                          ∗∗∗         ∗∗∗
             Treatment group                     -2.406         -2.507      -.016     -.022
                                                   (.871)         (.872)    (.030)    (.029)
             Treatment × HAART                     .501           .803      .011      .028
                                                   (.720)         (.718)    (.027)    (.026)
             Obs.                                 14324          14324      16765     16765
             Pre-HAART treatment group mean       16.55          16.55       0.45      0.45
             Mean                                 15.95          15.95       0.44      0.44
             R2                                   0.010          0.043      0.000     0.037
             Black Sample
             HAART available                     -3.478∗∗∗      -4.223∗∗∗   -.004    -.068∗∗∗
                                                   (.611)         (.666)    (.021)    (.023)
                                                          ∗∗∗         ∗∗∗
             Treatment group                     -3.398         -3.074      .023      .026
                                                  (1.067)        (1.056)    (.040)    (.038)
             Treatment × HAART                     1.486         1.702∗     -.045     -.026
                                                   (.940)         (.936)    (.035)    (.034)
             Obs.                                  8205          8205       9608      9608
             Pre-HAART treatment group mean        15.97         15.97       0.48      0.48
             Mean                                  15.69         15.69       0.44      0.44
             R2                                    0.014         0.053      0.001     0.050
             Basic controls                          N             Y          N         Y


This table shows estimates from OLS difference-in-differences models. The first outcome variable
is CES-D Scale Score, where higher values mean depression is more likely. The second outcome is
having any symptom (fever, memory problem, numbness, weight loss, mental confusion, or night
sweats). Results for having any symptom are robust to a probit specification, and available upon
request. Basic controls include age at visit, age squared, age cubed, race (Caucasian omitted), and
site of visit (Chicago omitted). In all specifications, errors are clustered at the individual level.




                                                 54
                              Table 9: Drug Use and Violence

                                                            [1]        [2]        [3]
                 Heroin use                            -.143∗∗∗   -.141∗∗∗   -.143∗∗∗
                 Cocaine use                            .144∗∗∗   .142∗∗∗    .119∗∗∗
                 Age                                      -.010      -.010      -.009
                 Age squared                             .00004     .00005     .00004
                 Age cubed                             1.62e-07   1.54e-07   1.86e-07
                 Yearly income 6001-12000                    .       -.007      -.007
                 Yearly income 12001-18000                   .       -.009      -.009
                 Yearly income 18001-24000                   .       -.005      -.004
                 Yearly income 24001-30000                   .       -.015      -.015
                 Yearly income > 30000                       .       .0001      .0005
                 Employed                                    .        .002       .002
                 Yearly income 6001-12000, employed          .       -.002      -.002
                 Yearly income 12001-18000, employed         .       -.002      -.002
                 Yearly income 18001-24000, employed         .       -.019      -.020
                 Yearly income 24001-30000, employed         .        .004       .004
                 Yearly income > 30000, employed             .       -.006      -.006
                 Married                                     .       .014∗      .014∗
                 Not married, lives with prtnr               .     .020∗∗∗   .020∗∗∗
                 Widowed                                     .       -.012      -.012
                 Divorced/annuled                            .        .005       .005
                 Separated                                   .        .009       .008
                 Other marital status                        .        .003       .003
                 Used marijuana SLV                          .          .     .018∗∗∗
                 Never smoker                                .          .        .031
                 Current smoker                              .          .        .011
                 Light (lt 3 drinks/wk)                      .          .       -.003
                 Moderate (3-13 drinks/wk)                   .          .        .005
                 Heavier (gt 13 drinks/wk)                   .          .      .026∗∗
                 No. male sex prtnr SLV                      .          .      .00005
                 Obs.                                     17906     17906      17906
                 Mean                                     0.056      0.056      0.056


This table shows estimates from regressions of violence on illicit drug use. The sample is restricted
to women from the first cohort who answered questions about domestic violence, which is defined
in Table 3. Each specification uses individual level fixed effects. SLV means “since last visit.”




                                                 55
                        Table 10: Employment, Marginal Effects

                                                           [1]       [2]
                       Full Sample
                       Treatment × HAART                 0.055*    0.048*
                                                         (0.030)   (0.029)
                                                          0.065     0.099
                       Observations                       16348     16348
                       Pre-HAART treatment group mean     0.253     0.253
                       Mean                               0.335     0.335
                       Pseudo R2                          0.002     0.060
                       Black Sample
                       Treatment × HAART                 0.081*    0.077*
                                                         (0.041)   (0.040)
                                                          0.051     0.054
                       Observations                       9407      9407
                       Pre-HAART treatment group mean     0.223     0.223
                       Mean                               0.316     0.316
                       Pseudo R2                          0.003     0.058
                       Basic controls                       N         Y


This table shows the marginal effects of the interaction term from the difference in differences
probit models. The outcome of interest is being employed at the time of visit. Standard errors
are presented in parenthesis, and p-values are found below. Basic controls include age at visit,
age squared, age cubed, race (Caucasian omitted), and site of visit (Chicago omitted). In all
specifications, errors are clustered at the individual level.




                                              56
                       Table 11: Domestic Violence and Resources

                                          [1]          [2]         [3]         [4]          [5]
          Employed                     -.011∗∗          .      -.011∗∗      -.010∗∗      -.008∗
          Yearly income 6001-12000         .         -.009       -.008       -.008        -.007
          Yearly income 12001-18000        .        -.016∗∗    -.015∗∗      -.015∗∗     -.015∗∗
          Yearly income 18001-24000        .         -.011       -.010       -.011        -.011
          Yearly income 24001-30000        .        -.020∗∗    -.018∗∗      -.019∗∗     -.020∗∗
          Yearly income > 30000            .         -.003      -.0006       -.002        -.004
          Age                          -.025∗∗     -.025∗∗∗    -.024∗∗     -.025∗∗∗    -.025∗∗∗
          Age squared                   .0003        .0003       .0003       .0003       .0003
          Age cubed                   -9.10e-07   -8.32e-07   -8.53e-07   -9.14e-07   -9.60e-07
          Obs.                          25526        25526      25526        25526       25526
          Mean                          0.067        0.067       0.067       0.067       0.067
          R2                            0.022        0.022      0.023        0.023       0.032
          Basic controls                   Y            Y           Y           Y            Y
          Demographic controls             N            N           N           Y            Y
          Risky behaviors                  N            N           N           N            Y


This table shows results from an OLS model with individual level fixed effects where the outcome
variable is experiencing domestic violence since the last visit, which is defined in Table 3. Basic
controls include age, age squared, and age cubed. Demographic controls include indicator variables
for marital status (never married omitted). Risky behaviors include indicator variables for drug
use, cigarette smoking, alcohol use, and the number of male sex partners.




                                                  57
Appendix A              Additional Tables and Figures

This appendix contains additional tables and figures from “Health, Human Capital and
Domestic Violence.” We discuss them in the order that they appear in the main text of the
paper.

   Table A1 shows that demographics, being in the treatment group, and experiencing
violence pre-HAART are not related to the likelihood of leaving the sample or the number
of visits that one stays in the sample. We also test if observations are missing at random.
We regress missing visits on an indicator for the treatment group, lagged CD4 count, and
an interaction between lagged CD4 and the treatment group along with the basic controls
discussed in Section 4. Table A2 shows the coefficients on the interaction. Although health
is a significant predictor of missing a visit, we find that health does not have differential
effects on the likelihood of missing a visit in the treatment group versus the control group.

   To verify that the differences-in-differences approach is valid, we conduct an event study.
We regress each of the main outcomes we study (domestic violence, cocaine use and heroin
use) on dummies for the periods leading up to the introduction of HAART and the periods
after HAART introduction, an indicator for the treatment group, and interactions between
the treatment group and the lead/lag periods. We also include the basic controls discussed in
Section 4. In Figure A1 we show results from the interactions between the treatment group
and the time periods, plotting coefficients. Importantly, we find that the periods leading
up to HAART are never significantly negative, implying that our findings are not driven by
trends that existed before the introduction of HAART.

   To test that black women were affected more by the introduction of HAART, we interact
an indicator for the treatment group with HAART availability and being black. Table A3
shows the findings from this triple interaction and is described in Section 4.1.

   To test that our results are not driven by survival bias, we estimate models including
only women who stayed in the survey for at least 15 visits (about 7.5 years). These results


                                             58
are shown in Table A4. As an additional robustness check, we also conduct our analysis
using propensity score weighting. Table A5 shows the normalized differences for observable
characteristics of the sample. Given that these differences are all very small, we conclude
that the treatment group and high CD4 count HIV+ women are quite similar prior to
HAART. In fact, no outcomes are above the threshold of .25 suggested by Imbens (2015).
Table A6 shows the results from our propensity score estimation. We estimate both a linear
specification and a quadratic specification. Again, we follow the algorithm proposed by
Imbens (2015) in choosing the controls for the propensity score matching. Table A6 shows
that prior to HAART, the groups were very similar in terms of violence, cocaine use and
heroin use. However, we find that the introduction of HAART had a significant impact on
the treatment group in comparison to the control group. Propensity score matching requires
that the two groups have good overlap of the score, and we show that this is the case in
Figure A2. This figure shows the overlap in propensity scores between the treatment group
and the control group for domestic violence. The figures for other outcomes are quite similar
and are available upon request from the corresponding author.

   Turning to mechanisms, we allow for the fact that drug use and domestic violence may be
correlated and jointly estimate the impact of HAART on violence and cocaine use in Tables
A7 and heroin use in Tables A8. Finally, Tables A9 and A10 show regressions examining the
relationships amongst employment, health, and cocaine use and heroin use, respectively.




                                             59
Appendix A.1
 .5                                     Supplemental Tables and Figures




                                                                                                .6
                                                                                                .4
 0




                                                                                                .2
                                                                                                0
 -.5




                                                                                                -.2
                                                                                                -.4
 -1




        1994-1995 1995-1996 1996-1997 1997-2002 2002-2007 2007-2012                                   1994-1995 1995-1996 1996-1997 1997-2002 2002-2007 2007-2012
                                    Date                                                                                          Date


       (a) Domestic Violence, HIV+ High CD4                                                            (b) Cocaine Use, HIV+ High CD4
                                                 .4
                                                 .2
                                                 0
                                                 -.2
                                                 -.4
                                                 -.6




                                                       1994-1995 1995-1996 1996-1997 1997-2002 2002-2007 2007-2012
                                                                                   Date


                                                         (c) Heroin Use, HIV+ High CD4

Figure A1: This figure shows coefficients of the interaction between the treatment group and the
periods leading up to and lagging HAART. Each bar represents the estimated coefficient and the
capped, vertical line show the estimated 90% confidence interval.




                                                                                60
                      5
                      4   3
                   density
                      2
                      1
                      0




                              .2     .4             .6                 .8          1
                                              Propensity Score

                                      HIV+ High CD4              Treatment Group



Figure A2: This figure shows overlap of the estimated propensity score using a linear specification
for the treatment group and the control group.




                                                 61
                           Table A1: Test of Non-Random Attrition

                                      Leaving the Sample                    No. of Visits in Study
              Treatment group        .147    .093    .098                   -.695   -.656    -.645
                                     (.215)      (.229)          (.229)         (.817)      (.799)      (.802)
              Age                      .         .054            .049             .          .681        .678
                                                 (.509)          (.508)                     (1.592)     (1.594)
              Age squared              .         .001            .001             .          -.023      -.023
                                                 (.013)          (.013)                     (.042)      (.042)
              Age cubed                .        -.00002         -.00002           .         .0002       .0002
                                                (.0001)         (.0001)                     (.0004)     (.0004)
              Black                    .         .117            .100             .         -1.143      -1.177
                                                 (.356)          (.358)                     (1.228)     (1.239)
              Hispanic                 .         -.633           -.641            .         1.673       1.660
                                                 (.438)          (.438)                     (1.474)     (1.477)
              Other race               .         -.128           -.157            .         -1.990      -2.022
                                                 (.917)          (.924)                     (3.037)     (3.044)
              Violence pre-HAART       .           .             .101             .               .      .187
                                                                 (.242)                                 (.842)
              Obs.                    435        435             435         435             435         435
              Mean                   0.294      0.294           0.294       28.526          28.526      28.526
              Pseudo R2              0.001      0.065           0.066          .               .           .
              R2                       .          .               .         0.002           0.102       0.102


Columns 1-3 show estimated coefficients from a logit model where the outcome is leaving the study
at any time. Columns 4-6 show results from an OLS model where the outcome is the number
of visits that the woman stays in the study. In every specification, site of visit is controlled for
(Chicago omitted).


                                  Table A2: Missing Outcomes

                                    Domestic       Cocaine           Heroin           Employ-         Income
                                    Violence         Use               Use             ment
                Treatment group      -.018          -.001             -.002            -.008           .018
                                      (.069)           (.057)         (.057)             (.056)       (.026)
                Log CD4              -.017∗∗∗      -.020∗∗∗         -.019∗∗∗          -.019∗∗∗        -.001
                                      (.003)           (.003)         (.003)             (.003)       (.001)
                Treatment × CD4        .005            .001              .002            .002         -.003
                                      (.012)           (.010)         (.010)             (.009)       (.004)
                Obs.                  14949            23215         23215               23215        23215
                Mean                  0.078            0.080         0.081               0.077        0.023
                R2                    0.016            0.016         0.016               0.015        0.009
                Basic controls          Y                Y             Y                   Y            Y


This table shows results from an OLS model where the outcome variable is an indicator for missing
an observation for the event listed. Basic controls include age at visit, age squared, age cubed, race
(Caucasian omitted), and site of visit (Chicago omitted). In all specifications, errors are clustered
at the individual level. Visits from sites in Los Angeles and San Francisco are dropped from the
domestic violence outcome.


                                                       62
        Table A3: Heterogeneity in Effects of HAART on Domestic Violence

                                                      [1]       [2]
                          Panel A: Treatment vs Control Group Women
                          HAART available          -.269∗∗    -.123
                                                         (.128)      (.141)
                          Treatment Group                -.230       -.205
                                                         (.202)      (.204)
                          Black                          .242       .462∗∗
                                                         (.153)      (.180)
                          Treatment × HAART              -.005       .002
                                                         (.186)      (.197)
                          AA × HAART                     -.142       -.162
                                                         (.157)      (.164)
                          Treatment × AA                 .226        .249
                                                         (.246)      (.247)
                          Treatment × AA × HAART         -.267       -.296
                                                         (.235)      (.245)
                          Obs.                           6669        6669
                          Mean                           0.063       0.063
                          Pseudo R2                      0.030       0.061
                          Basic controls                   N           Y


This table shows difference-in-differences probit model estimates, where the outcome variable is ex-
periencing domestic violence since the last visit. We also include dummy variables and interactions
for women who are black to estimate heterogeneity in effects of HAART by race. Basic controls
include age at visit, age squared, age cubed and site of visit (Chicago omitted). In all specifications,
errors are clustered at the individual level.




                                                  63
Table A4: Health, Violence and Drug Use: Marginal Effects of Women Who Did
Not Die Within 7.5 Years of Study

                                      Domestic Violence        Cocaine Use             Heroin Use
                                        [1]       [2]          [3]      [4]           [5]       [6]
 Full Sample
 Treatment × HAART                    -0.016*     -0.017*    -0.034**   -0.031**   -0.022***   -0.021***
                                      (0.008)     (0.009)     (0.013)    (0.013)    (0.007)     (0.007)
                                       0.059       0.064       0.011      0.016      0.003       0.003
 Observations                          6448        6448        15860      15860      15857       15857
 Pre-HAART treatment group mean        0.109       0.109       0.175      0.175      0.086       0.086
 Mean                                  0.062       0.062       0.118      0.118      0.050       0.050
 Pseudo R2                             0.028       0.058       0.006      0.039      0.010       0.049
 Black Sample
 Treatment × HAART                    -0.021**   -0.023**    -0.044**   -0.043**   -0.021**     -0.018*
                                       (0.011)    (0.011)     (0.020)    (0.021)    (0.010)     (0.010)
                                        0.049      0.041       0.031      0.035      0.028       0.057
 Observations                           4097       4097        9047       9047       9044        9044
 Pre-HAART treatment group mean         0.141      0.141       0.193      0.193      0.082       0.082
 Mean                                   0.069      0.069       0.140      0.140      0.050       0.050
 Pseudo R2                              0.039      0.058       0.006      0.047      0.012       0.069
 Basic controls                           N          Y           N          Y          N           Y


This table shows the marginal effects of the interaction term from the difference-in-differences probit
models. Standard errors are presented in parenthesis, and p-values are found below. Basic controls
include age at visit, age squared, age cubed, race (Caucasian omitted), and site of visit (Chicago
omitted). In all specifications, errors are clustered at the individual level. The sample is restricted
to women who participated in the study for at least 15 visits (7.5 years).




                                                  64
                        Table A5: Normalized Differences

                                                   HIV+, Healthy Sample
             African American                              0.08
             Hispanic                                     -0.03
             White                                        -0.02
             Other race                                   -0.16
             Max income pre-HAART                         -0.00
             Max inc pre-HAART < 6000                      0.00
             Max inc pre-HAART 6001-12000                  0.02
             Max inc pre-HAART 12001-18000                -0.03
             Max inc pre-HAART 18001-24000                0.04
             Max inc pre-HAART 24001-30000                -0.09
             Max inc pre-HAART > 30000                     0.04
             Age at visit                                  0.19
             Bronx                                         0.05
             Brooklyn                                     -0.07
             DC                                            0.24
             LA                                           -0.09
             Less than HS                                 -0.08
             HS graduate                                   0.00
             Some college                                  0.08
             College graduate                              0.09
             Married pre-HAART                             0.15
             Lived with kids at baseline                  0.09
             Experienced DV pre-HAART                     -0.13
             Cocaine use pre-HAART                        -0.05
             Heroin use pre-HAART                          0.07
             Employed pre-HAART                           -0.13
             Smokes                                       -0.09
             Drinks                                       -0.01
             Time since 1st + HIV test                     0.16
             Observations                                  263
This table shows normalized differences between the treatment group and the control group.




                                           65
                          Table A6: Propensity Score Results

                                    Pre-HAART                          Post-HAART
                                  Linear                Quadratic    Linear   Quadratic
      Panel A: Treatment vs Control Group Women

      Domestic violence               0.0093              -0.0001   -0.0337∗∗∗   -0.0388∗∗∗
                                     (0.0178)            (0.0190)    (0.0121)     (0.0123)
                                       1329                1294        1697         1675

      Heroin use                      0.0084              0.0087    -0.0177∗∗∗   -0.0135∗∗
                                     (0.0112)            (0.0119)    (0.0053)     (0.0053)
                                       1435                1325        5192         4722

      Cocaine use                     0.0149              0.0032     0.0022       -0.0050
                                     (0.0151)            (0.0158)   (0.0084)     (0.0082)
                                       1351                1348       4670         4721


This table shows the average treatment effects from propensity score matching. We show findings
from both a linear and quadratic specification. Controls following the algorithm proposed by
Imbens (2015) are included. For each outcome, we show the estimated coefficient, standard error
in parenthesis, and number of observations.




                                                66
Table A7: Joint Estimation: Domestic Violence and Cocaine Use, Treatment and
Control Groups

                                                      [1]            [2]
                              Panel A: Full Sample
                              Domestic Violence
                              HAART available      -.374∗∗∗        -.248∗∗∗
                                                         (.074)     (.084)
                              Treatment group            -.070      -.028
                                                         (.115)     (.116)
                              Treatment × HAART          -.188      -.201∗
                                                         (.117)     (.121)
                              Obs.                       6669       6669
                              Cocaine Use
                              HAART available           -.154∗∗    -.190∗∗∗
                                                         (.061)     (.068)
                              Treatment group             .020       .047
                                                         (.126)     (.125)
                              Treatment × HAART          -.123      -.121
                                                         (.099)     (.101)
                              Obs.                     6669          6669
                              Mean domestic violence   0.063         0.063
                              Mean cocaine use         0.120         0.120
                              Rho                    0.331∗∗∗      0.325∗∗∗
                              Panel B: Black Sample
                              Domestic Violence
                              HAART available        -.418∗∗∗      -.331∗∗∗
                                                         (.092)     (.098)
                              Treatment group            -.011       .036
                                                         (.140)     (.141)
                              Treatment × HAART          -.262∗     -.279∗
                                                         (.145)     (.148)
                              Obs.                       4280       4280
                              Cocaine Use
                              HAART available           -.151∗∗    -.209∗∗
                                                         (.077)     (.085)
                              Treatment group             .178       .211
                                                         (.155)     (.159)
                              Treatment × HAART          -.151      -.141
                                                         (.119)     (.122)
                              Obs.                        4280       4280
                              Mean domestic violence      0.069      0.069
                              Mean cocaine use            0.130      0.130
                              Rho                       0.319∗∗∗   0.319∗∗∗
                              Basic controls                N          Y


This table shows difference-in-differences estimates from a bivariate probit model where the outcome
variables are domestic violence and cocaine use and the control group consists of relatively healthy
HIV+ women. Basic controls include age at visit, age squared, age cubed, race (Caucasian omitted),
and site of visit (Chicago omitted). In all specifications, errors are clustered at the individual level.



                                                   67
Table A8: Joint Estimation: Domestic Violence and Heroin Use, Treatment and
Control Groups

                                                      [1]            [2]
                              Panel A: Full Sample
                              Domestic Violence
                              HAART available      -.365∗∗∗        -.234∗∗∗
                                                         (.075)     (.085)
                              Treatment group            -.065      -.027
                                                         (.115)     (.116)
                              Treatment × HAART          -.199∗     -.211∗
                                                         (.117)     (.121)
                              Obs.                       6669       6669
                              Heroin Use
                              HAART available            -.055      -.125
                                                         (.069)     (.081)
                              Treatment group             .133       .153
                                                         (.144)     (.145)
                              Treatment × HAART         -.318∗∗    -.306∗∗
                                                         (.127)     (.131)
                              Obs.                     6669          6669
                              Mean domestic violence   0.063         0.063
                              Mean heroin use          0.051         0.051
                              Rho                    0.233∗∗∗      0.262∗∗∗
                              Panel A: Black Sample
                              Domestic Violence
                              HAART available        -.409∗∗∗      -.319∗∗∗
                                                         (.092)     (.098)
                              Treatment group            -.009       .033
                                                         (.140)     (.141)
                              Treatment × HAART          -.272∗     -.290∗
                                                         (.146)     (.148)
                              Obs.                       4280       4280
                              Heroin Use
                              HAART available            -.087     -.229∗∗∗
                                                         (.081)     (.081)
                              Treatment group             .161       .170
                                                         (.178)     (.177)
                              Treatment × HAART          -.298∗     -.253
                                                         (.155)     (.159)
                              Obs.                        4280       4280
                              Mean domestic violence      0.069      0.069
                              Mean heroin use             0.046      0.046
                              Rho                       0.272∗∗∗   0.289∗∗∗
                              Basic controls                N          Y


This table shows difference-in-differences estimates from a bivariate probit model where the outcome
variables are domestic violence and heroin use and the control group consists of relatively healthy
HIV+ women. Basic controls include age at visit, age squared, age cubed, race (Caucasian omitted),
and site of visit (Chicago omitted). In all specifications, errors are clustered at the individual level.



                                                   68
                    Table A9: Employment, Cocaine Use and Health

                       Current Cocaine Use
                       Cocaine                      -.065∗∗∗      -.062∗∗∗
                       CD4 count                         .       .0001∗∗∗
                       CD4 squared                       .     -7.20e-08∗∗∗
                       Age                             .017         .019
                       Age squared                    .0001        .00005
                       Age cubed                   -3.92e-06     -3.63e-06
                       Obs.                            9952         9952
                       R2                              .008          .01
                       Cocaine Use Last Year
                       Stimulant use last year       -.031∗        -.030∗
                       CD4 count                         .       .0001∗∗∗
                       CD4 squared                       .     -7.49e-08∗∗∗
                       Age                             .017         .020
                       Age squared                   .00008       .00003
                       Age cubed                   -3.84e-06     -3.53e-06
                       Obs.                            9952         9952
                       R2                              .007         .008
                       Cocaine Use Two Years Ago
                       Stimulant use two years ago    -.003        -.004
                       CD4 count                         .       .0001∗∗∗
                       CD4 squared                       .     -7.54e-08∗∗∗
                       Age                             .017         .020
                       Age squared                   .00009       .00004
                       Age cubed                   -3.88e-06     -3.57e-06
                       Obs.                            9952        9952
                       R2                              .006         .008
                       Mean                            .333         .333


This table shows results from an OLS model with individual level fixed effects where the outcome
is employment at the time of visit. Each panel shows results from including current health and
cocaine use from a different point in time: current, use last year, and use two years ago.




                                               69
                    Table A10: Employment, Heroin Use and Health

                         Current Heroin Use
                         Used heroin SLV             -.044∗∗       -.043∗∗
                         CD4 count                       .        .0001∗∗∗
                         CD4 squared                     .      -7.44e-08∗∗∗
                         Age                           .018          .021
                         Age squared                 .00006        .00002
                         Age cubed                  -3.68e-06     -3.38e-06
                         Obs.                          9947          9947
                         R2                            .007          .008
                         Heroin Use Last Year
                         Heroin use last year          -.028        -.028
                         CD4 count                        .       .0001∗∗∗
                         CD4 squared                      .     -7.48e-08∗∗∗
                         Age                            .018         .020
                         Age squared                 .00007        .00002
                         Age cubed                  -3.72e-06     -3.41e-06
                         Obs.                          9947         9947
                         R2                            .007          .008
                         Heroin Use Two Years       Ago
                         Heroin use two years ago     -.029∗        -.031∗
                         CD4 count                        .       .0001∗∗∗
                         CD4 squared                      .     -7.57e-08∗∗∗
                         Age                            .018         .021
                         Age squared                 .00006        8.85e-06
                         Age cubed                  -3.66e-06     -3.34e-06
                         Obs.                          9947          9947
                         R2                            .007          .008
                         Mean                           .333         .333


This table shows results from an OLS model with individual level fixed effects where the outcome
is employment at the time of visit. Each panel shows results from including current health and
heroin use from a different point in time: current, use last year, and use two years ago.




                                               70
