NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

UNDERSTANDING THE REAL ESTATE
PROVISIONS OF TAX REFORM:
MOTIVATION AND IMPACT

James A. Follian
Patric H. Hendershott
David C. Ling

Working Paper No. 2289

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue

Cambridge, MA 02138
June 1987

Presented at the 1987 Mid—Year Meeting of the National Tax Association—
Tax Institute of America, May 1987. The research reported here is part
of the NBER's research program in Taxation. Any opinions expressed are
those of the authors and not those of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER Working Paper #2289
June 1987

Understanding the Real Estate Provisions of Tax Reform: Motivation and Impact

ABSTRACT

Capital investment tax provisions have been changed numerous times in the
last decade, with depreciation tax lives shortened in 1981 and lengthened ever
since and capital gains taxation reduced in 1978 and 1981 and now increased.
The first part of this paper analyzes these changes and attributes a large part
of them, including the 1986 Tax Act, to changes in inflation: tax depreciation
schedules and capital gains taxation that look reasonable when the tax
depreciation base is being eroded at ten percent a year and an overwhelming
share of capital gains is pure inflation take on a different appearance when
inflation is only four percent.
The remainder of the paper critiques the typical project model used to
compute impacts of tax changes on real estate and report simulation results
using a modified model.

James A. Follain
The Office of Real
Estate Research
430 Commerce West
1206 South 6th Street
University of Illinois
Champaign-urbana, IL 61820
(217) 244—0952

Patric H. Hendershott
Hagerty Hall
1775 College Road
The Ohio State University
Columbus, Ohio 43210
(614) 292—0552

Mr. David C. Ling
Cox School of Business
Southern Methodist
University

Dallas, TX 75275
(214) 692—2785

The Economic Recovery Tax Act of 1981 (ERTA) contained the most

favorable capital investment provisions probably ever enacted: tax
lives for all depreciable property were shortened markedly, and capital
gains tax rates were lowered sharply owing to the cuts in marginal tax

rates. The Tax Reform Act of 1986 more than reverses ERTA: tax
depreciation is less generous than before 1981, capital gains tax
rates are even higher than before 1978, and new passive loss provisions

are being applied to real estate. What brought about this sea change
in tax law, and what impact will the change have on real estate?
Many explanations for the tax change exist, most relating to
political considerations in one way or another, and we certainly would

not deny politics, in its widest context, a major role. However,

political considerations do not tell the entire story. The rise in
inflation and interest rates in the late 1970s and early 1980s contributed to the investment provisions of ERTA, and the declines since

then influenced the form of the provisions in the 1986 Act. Tax
depreciation schedules and capital gains rates that look reasonable
when inflation is four percent take on a different hue when the tax
depreciation base is being eroded at ten percent a year and an overwhelming share of capital gains is pure inflation.
The "inflation matters" thesis is developed and support for it is

provided in the next section. The remainder of the paper discusses
the impact of the 1986 Act on real estate. The second section focuses
on the methodological issues surrounding many simulation analyses of

the effects of tax changes on real estate. The third section discusses the likely impacts of the new law on rents (up), owner costs

—2—

(down), and home ownership (up); the final section summarizes the main
conclusions of the paper.

I. The Apparent Rationale for the Real Estate Provisions
The key real estate provisions in the Tax Reform Act of 1986 are
those pertaining to tax depreciation, capital gains, and passive

losses. Changes in tax depreciation lives and capital gains taxation
over the last decade follow a pattern that partially explains the pro-

visions in the 1986 tax act. The passive loss rules follow as a logical consequence of not indexing either interest expense or the
depreciable basis.

A. Tax Depreciation
Prior law allowed investors in rental real estate to use the 175
percent declining balance method (with a switch to straight—line in

about year nine) and a useful life of 19 years. The new law specifies
that the straight—line method be used over a useful life of 27.5 years

(31.5 for non—residential structures). This represents the fourth
change in the depreciation schedule in the past five years. The
Economic Recovery and Tax Act of 1981 (ERTA) shortened useful life

from about 30 years to 15. The tax laws of 1984 and 1985 increased
useful life to 18 and then to 19 years. The frequency of these
changes suggests that future changes are likely. We explore the pattern of past changes in order to better anticipate future changes.
Economists argue that tax depreciation should equal real economic

depreciation at replacement cost. This criterion implies a quite low
constant annual depreciation rate for structures (less than 4 percent

—3—

per year, Hulton and Wykoff, 1981) but applied to a base indexed to

changes in the price level. That is, during inflationary periods, tax
depreciation would be backloaded (increase over time), rather than

frontloaded as it has always been. Indexation of the basis would
result in the present value of tax depreciation being independent of
inflation if the discount rate moved one—for—one with the inflation
rate.

Legislators have obviously not adopted the economistts explicit

indexation recommendation: during the past 15 years tax depreciation
has never been less than 6 1/2 percent in the initial full year and

has always declined quickly in subsequent years. However, changes in
the useful tax life over the past decade have been negatively

correlated with movements in interest rates and inflation. These
useful—life changes have had the effect of offsetting sharp changes in
the present value of the tax saving from tax depreciation allowances

generated by the interest rate movements. For example, ERTA reduced
useful life to its lowest level at a time when interest rates were at
their peak level, and useful life has increased during the 1980s as

interest rates have declined. It appears that legislators have adopted
an ad hoc strategy of indexation that involves a change in the tax
depreciation schedule in response to changes in the inflation/interest
rate environment • 1

As evidence of this ad hoc strategy, the present value of the tax
saving from tax depreciation allowances is computed for various years

during the past decade. We start out with the relatively low
inflation/interest rate environment of the middle 1970s and then

—4—

examine the impact of rising inflation (1980—81), the 1981 tax law
response (15 versus 30 year useful life), the decrease in inflation
and interest rates (1983—84), the 1984 response (15 to 18 year tax
life), the further decrease in interest rates/inflation (1986), and

finally the Tax Reform Act of 1986. Altogether, seven different
combinations of tax law and economic environment are examined. The
specific assumptions used to define these tax—economic combinations

are listed in the upper half of Table 1. Tax law changes include
changes in depreciation policy as well as changes in the marginal tax

rate of the marginal investor in real estate. Hendershott, Follain
and Ling (HFL 1987) make the case for the 0.45 tax rate (federal plus
state and local, after deductibility) under pre—1986 law and 0.36
under the 1986 Act.
The present values of the tax depreciation deductions associated
with each tax—economic regime are reported in the lower half of Table

1. The present values are computed under two assumptions: no trading
and trading at the end of the tax life of the building.2 The higher
of the two values has been ttbracketedt? in the Table. These calcula-

tions indicate that trading was suboptimal prior to ERTA and will be

suboptimal under the new law. In the interim, trading added from 2 to
5 cents to value per dollar of investment.

Under 1976 law, the tax saving from tax depreciation was 0.267 per
dollar of investment, i.e., the present value of tax depreciation
allowances multiplied by the appropriate tax rate equalled 26.7

percent of the original basis. When increases/decreases in inflation
and interest rates lowered/raised the tax saving relative to 26.7

—5—

percent, the tax depreciation schedule was adjusted to bring the

percentage back into line. However, the ERTA of 1981 and the Tax
Reform Act of 1986 more than compensated for the earlier increase!

decrease in inflation and interest rates. Thus two cycles for tax
depreciation seem to exist, an endogenous response to the

inflation/interest—rate cycle and an exogenous "political" cycle. The
1986 Tax Act reflects both of these cycles; depreciation policy under
new law is less generous than any tax—economic combination of the past
10 years (probably in the last 50).

B. The Passive Loss Provisions
The 1986 Tax Act contains special provisions for income generated
by passive activities, i.e., those in which the taxpayer does not

materially participate and rental real estate. The law states that
income from passive activities may not be used to offset regular or
portfolio income (except, possibly, upon sale of the asset), with

exceptions for small landlords and corporations. Under previous law,
a substantial portion of real estate returns to many investors during
inflationary periods was tax savings generated by using the "paper
losses" from real estate to offset taxable income from other
activities.

Large passive losses during inflationary periods are a direct
consequence of nonindexation of either interest expense or the

depreciable basis. Most important is the deductibility of nominal,

rather than real, interest expense. Not only is the inflationary
premium in interest rates deductible, but the premium itself is higher

—6—

because of the deductibility (Feldstein 1976). Also significant is
the above—discussed endogenous change in tax depreciation when

inflation accelerates (greater front—loading of allowances). The
imposition of passive loss limits is one way to prevent investors in
tax shelters from reducing taxes on their regular income.
Figure 1 indicates the amount of losses generated by a particular
real estate project during high and low inflation environments under

both new law and previous law. Each curve plots losses for different
loan—to--value ratios. The lowest two lines indicate the cumulative
losses (summation of losses until the year in which positive cash
flows are realized) as a percent of investment value for different
loan—to—value ratios for the low 1986 inflation/interest—rate environ-

ment under new law (lowest) and under old law. The next line indicates how cumulative losses under old law would rise if the economy
reverted to the 1981 high inflation/interest—rate environment but
Congress did not shorten the tax depreciation schedules (the present
value of tax saving from tax depreciation deductions would decline

from 0.295 to 0.200). The highest line indicates the cumulative
losses under old law for both high nominal interest rates and a
shorter depreciation schedule (ERTA, which raises the present value to
0.291).

The direct effect of inflation upon the amount of passive losses
under previous law is striking (line 2 vs. line 3), and the impact is

compounded by an endogenous policy response (line 4). Even all equity
projects generated negative cash flow in the early years under this
scenario, and negative cash flow would be generated throughout the tax

—7—

life of a project with 80 percent financing. It is not surprising
that concerns were raised regarding the efficiency and equity implica—
tions of such a system.

Under the new law, passive losses are not projected to be

substantial in today's moderate inflation environment. Indeed,
passive losses will not be generated for projects with less than 70
percent loan—to—value ratios once rent rises to its equilibrium level

(see below). However, passive losses will be generated, even at lower
loan—to—value ratios, at higher interest (inflation) rates.
The passive loss limits increase the riskiness of a real estate
investment because the government will not continue to share fully the

losses of an unsuccessful investment. As a result, rental real estate
income earned by proprietors and partnerships will be treated like
corporate income, fully taxable if positive, but only banked for

future deductions if negative. Investors will require higher rents on
real estate investments to compensate for this effective increase in
taxation.

C. Capital Gains Taxation
After a decade of reductions in the statutory capital gains tax
rate (the product of the regular income tax rate and one minus the

exclusion), the new law sharply increases this rate. For our assumed
marginal investor with a regular tax rate of 0.45 (federal and state)
under pre—1986 law and 0.36 under the new law, the gains rate doubles

from 0.18 to 0.36. This contrasts with the declines in 1978, when the

—8—

exclusion rate was increased from 50 to 60 percent, and in 1981, when
regular tax rate cuts lowered the gains rate further to the 0.18 discussed above.

The appropriate tax treatment of capital gains is not obvious.
Some would argue that gains should be taxed fully (no exclusion) as

they accrue, not upon realization. Others would argue for a favorable
treatment, although not necessarily for an exclusion (the deferral
advantage of taxation upon realization might be sufficient, at least

for long holding periods). Others would opt for the taxation of real
gains only, usually accompanied by the deduction of only real interest

expense. Our task is not to sort out these issues but only to find a
pattern in past legislative behavior regarding capital gains taxation.
Changes in the statutory capital gains tax rate over the last
decade are consistent with an effort to maintain a constant tax rate
on inflationary gains over a holding period of roughly five years.
Thus, accelerating inflation in the late l970s and early l980s
triggered a cut in the gains rate, while the subsequent disinflation

induced an increase in the gains rate.3 The calculations in the
lowest row of Table 1 illustrate this point. The present value of the
tax on five years of inflationary gains is computed using the weighted

average cost of capital as the discount rate. In the 1976—77 period,

the tax is 6.7 percent. The increase in inflation to its 1980 level
raises the tax to 8.7 percent, assuming no change in tax rates. The
cut in the gains rate from 0.25 to 0.18 offsets the increase in

inflation. Similarly, the fall in inflation during the l980s cut the

—9—

inflation

tax to 3.1 percent by 1986, and the 1986 increase in the

gains tax rate raises the inflation tax back to 6.2 percent.

II. The Depreciable Real Estate Project Model
A tool frequently employed to analyze the impact of tax reform

upon real estate markets is the "typical project model." This model
begins with assumptions regarding the initial loan—to—value ratio, the
debt rate, the tax rate of the marginal investor, and the required rate

of return on equity. The model computes the minimum rent needed in
the first year of operation of the project to equate the net present
value of all after—tax cash flows associated with the project
(including interest and principal payments on an amortizing mortgage),

discounted by the equity rate, to zero. The minimum rent calculation
is made with both old and new tax law parameters, and the percentage

change in initial rent is the key statistic reported. This section
discusses some shortcomings of the project model and our correction of
them.

A.

The

Problems with the Project Model

major problem with the project model is the treatment of debt

and equity. The equity rate is generally based upon what "the
industry"

seems to be requiring. An economist might specify this rate

as the "ten year" tax—exempt rate plus a risk premium. A financial
economist would likely employ an after—tax capital asset pricing model
where the required after—tax return (e) is the after—tax debt rate
[(1—t)i] plus a risk premium depending on the market risk premium

(MRP), the covariance ()

of

the returns on real estate and the market

—10—

portfolio, the loan—to—value ratio (v), and the tax rate applied to
the premium (tn).

When the debt has no default risk (v < 0.75?), the

specification is:

e =

(l—t)i

+ (1—i) ---—MRP.

(1)

Equation (1) shows a clear dependence of the required return on leverage
(the loan—to—value ratio), tax rates, and the pretax interest rate.4
The dependency of the equity rate on leverage does not exist in

the project model. Users of the model specifiy an initial v and choose

a constant discount rate e for all future cash flows. Because the
loan is amortizing and the property value is inflating, the loan—to—
value ratio is falling and thus so must be the required return to

equity (Hendershott and Ling, 1986). Setting e at a constant value in
the project model involves an internal inconsistency. Moreover, the
inconsistency leads to another error. With an assumed constant equity
rate, investors are presumed (incorrectly) to be using more and more

expensive equity and less and less cheap debt. Investors "solve" this

problem by trading properties quickly. In fact, there is little or no
need to realign the debt/equity mix

if

the equity yield is computed

correctly. Indeed, even if a need existed, investors could (likely
would) realign the debt/equity ratio by refinancing rather than by
trading.

The dependency of the equity rate on tax rates and the debt rate
is also generally missing in the project model, i.e., e is presumed to
be invariant with respect to tax law.5

—11—

In our model, the cost of capital (or capital budgeting) approach

is employed. Debt payments are not included in the cash flows.
Rather, all nondebt payments are discounted by the weighted average
cost of capital,

WACC

(2)

v(l—'r)i + (l—v)e,

to obtain the initial minimum rent substituting (1) into (2) produces

WACC =

(l—t)i

(2')

+ (l—r)8.MRP.

Note that the weighted average cost of capital is independent of the

loan—to—value ratio. Thus the initial minimum rent in this model is
independent of leverage.6
Using (2') requires specification of 8'NRP and

nontrivial

tasks. Fortunately, some information is available on t and MRP, and
8 can be chosen so that the computed e is consistent with what the
industry seemed to be requiring under prereform law at the interest

rates then existing. With this specification, e can be recomputed in
an internally consistent manner to reflect the new law. In the calculations below, i =

0.09,

11 =

0.045 and the tax rate on the risk

premium is set equal to one—third the tax rate on ordinary income plus

two—thirds the effective capital gains tax rate. This latter rate
equals one—half the statutory rate, the one—half reflecting the value

of deferral. Finally, we set 8MRP
consistent with 8 =

0.5

and MRP

0.03, a specification that is

—12—

B. Project Model Versus General Equilibrium Models
Common practice these days is to criticize the "partial equilibrium" project model in favor of a general equilibrium (GE) analysis

(Gravelle 1986). This practice is badly inisfocused. To see this,
consider the gains and losses associated with the use of a GE model

that are relevant to the impact of tax reform on rents. The gains
from a GE model include the change in the level of debt rates and

possibly other market parameters, such as the market risk premium

affecting the required return on equity. The losses are the failure
to capture the impacts of industry specific tax changes. For depreciable real estate, these include the capitalization of construction
period interest and taxes (rather than the previous 10—year write
off), changes in the gains from trading (both the higher capital gains
tax rate and lengthening of tax depreciation write off s reduce the

gains), and less favorable treatment of interest expense (passive loss

rules, interest limitations, and at—risk rules). Not only is the
latter list longer than the former, but, more importantly, GE re-

sponses can be easily factored into the project model: if GE
considerations led one to think interest rates will decline by a
percentage point, a one point decline could be used in the calculation.

The practical choice, then, is whether to use the corrected
project model (the cost of capital variant) with GE responses incorporated or to use GE models that ignore much interesting nitty gritty.
In our view the former will produce better estimates of tax reform's
impact than the latter; consequently, this procedure is followed here.

—13—

Actually, the GE models are generally less valuable than the above

discussion indicates. Take the impact of the Tax Act on interest rates.
The Act will certainly lower the level of interest rates because the
Act has a negative direct impact on the demands for all capital goods.
But the extent of the decline depends on the interest elasticity of
domestic and foreign saving, elasticities about which we are highly

uncertain. To accept the GE results from a particular model is to
accept a wide range of assumptions, many of which are quite tenuous
and others of which are not stated.8
TEn the analysis below, a one percentage point decline in interest

rates is generally assumed, somewhat less than a fixed capital stock

or constant saving model would imply (HFL, 1987). The WACC response
is calculated from (2').

TEll. Some Estimated Impacts

We compute percentage changes in rents, in the annual rental cost
of owner housing, and in the ratio of these rents, the latter being

relevant to the tenure choice decision. Our primary emphasis is on
the rent impact; estimates of the impact on costs of owner housing
were presented in HFL (1987) and are therefore only summarized here.

A. Equilibrium Rent Levels
The equilibrium level of rent under the Tax Act must increase to

replace the reduced tax benefits. Only then will investors in real
estate earn a rate of return comparable to that on other investments

of similar risk. We compute estimates of the likely rent increase for

—14—

residential properties under alternative assumptions regarding both
the tax rate of the marginal investor in real estate and the size of
the interest rate decline.

With no change in the interest rate and a 45 percent marginal tax
rate for the marginal investor, residential rents will increase by 13
percent; with a 52 percent marginal rate, the rent increase is 21 per-

cent. If a percentage point decline in interest rates is factored
into the analysis, the required residential rent increase is reduced
from 13 percent to 6 percent for the 45 percent tax—rate investor and
from 21 percent to 13 percent for the 52 percent investor.
Of these estimates, we consider the 6 percent rent increase, or

something only slightly higher, to be most likely. We believe the
marginal investor under old law to have been in the 45 percent tax
bracket (federal plus state and local, with deductibility), and we
think that interest rates have already declined by a percentage point
because of the Tax Act (see HFL 1987 for a discussion of these

points). A slightly higher percentage rent increase, say 10 percent,

might occur for the two reasons discussed above: the importance of
the relatively certain tax depreciation component of the return to
real estate will decline vis—a—vis the less certain net operating
income component and real estate losses will no longer be deductible
against nonpassive income.
The timing of the increase in rents depends upon the local rental

market. Following our earlier analysis (HFL 1987), a three—year
adjustment is reasonable in fast growing markets, while up to eight

—15—

years is reasonable in slow growing areas with vacancy rates 10 per-

centage points above equilibrium levels. Moreover, the extent of
value declines depends on how much and how long rents are expected to

be below their equilibrium level. For a 10 percent increase in equilibrium rents, the percentage declines in value for our two extreme
rent—adjustment assumptions are one and seven (HFL 1987).
Gravelle (1986) contends that a negative impact of the 1986 Tax
Act on depreciable real estate is implausible because equipment is

clearly the type of capital hardest hit. We agreed in our earlier
paper that investments losing tax credits (including real estate
historic and rehabilitation projects) would be most adversely affected

(HFL 1987, p. 75)•9 But so what? As noted above, the new law is
anti—investment across the board. Every type of capital good (except
possibly low income housing) suffers a direct negative impact from the

Act. In a world with open capital markets, all types of U.S. capital
goods could contract as capital flows abroad. With closed capital
markets, the negative impact on equipment needs to be offset by a
positive impact elsewhere, but that offset need not be depreciable

real estate. Owner—occupied housing, which is a larger component of
the total capital stock than is equipment, is certainly the most

relatively favored component of capital (see below). Thus, even with
a fixed capital stock, there is room for a negative impact on
depreciable real estate, i.e., a rise in rents.

—16—

B. Owner—Occupied Housing and Home Ownership
The 1986 Tax Act does not directly alter any of the favorable tax
provisions granted owner—occupied housing; imputed rents are still not
taxed, capital gains are taxed (if at all) with a long deferral, and
these advantages are still available to debt—financed, as well as
equity—financed, housing (interest remains deductible on two houses).
Nonetheless, the Tax Act affects the after—tax cost of owner housing

through two channels. First, the tax rates at which households deduct
housing costs are reduced. Second, the pretax level of interest rates
will be lower. In addition, the net changes in owner costs in
conjunction with the rise in market rents will probably alter the
aggregate home ownership rate. This section briefly sununarizes our
previously published results regarding these effects.
As with rental housing, the cost of owner—occupied housing depends
upon the cost of capital, property taxes, real economic depreciation,

expected appreciation, and tax savings. Two measures of this cost are
relevant: the average cost, which influences the tenure choice decision; and the marginal cost, which affects the quantity demanded by

homeowners. If interest rates are a percentage point lower, as we
contend, then households with incomes below about $30,000 will experience a 10 percent decrease in marginal housing costs; households
with incomes above about $130,000 will face a 5 percent increase; and

the change for other households will be negligible. Average housing
costs will also decrease slightly for households with incomes below
approximately $60,000; however, households with incomes above about

—17—

$120,000 will experience a 5 percent increase in costs. These calculations suggest that significant changes in the quantity of owner—
occupied housing demanded, and thus in the value of existing houses,
will be limited to households and houses at the extremes of the income

and value spectrumsJ°
Another implication pertains to the rent—own decision of house-

holds. The average cost calculations suggest that with an interest
rate decline and no change in rents, ownership is modestly more
attractive for households with incomes below about $60,000 and

slightly less attractive for higher—income households. With a 10 percent rise in rents, all currently renting households will find owner-

ship more attractive than under the old law. The magnitude of the

impact on the aggregate ownership rate is uncertain. With a high
assumed elasticity of ownership with respect to tenure prices, the

rise could eventually be as much as three percentage points. With a
low elasticity, the rise would be less than one point (Haurin,

Hendershott and Ling, 1987).

IV.

Summary

During the past decade changes in tax depreciation allowances and
in the statutory capital gains tax rate have followed a pattern that
provides both a rationale for the major real estate provisions of the

1986 Tax and a basis for anticipating future tax changes. The common
thread through the hypothesized rationale is inflation and how the tax

system is adjusted for it. If the tax system had been fully indexed
(depreciation basis, interest expense, and capital gains), little need

—18--

would have existed for the real estate provisions of the 1986 Tax Act.
The present value of tax savings from depreciation allowances would
not have increased and that of taxes on inflationary capital gains
would not have decreased in response to the declines in inflation and
interest rates since 1981; thus, offsetting legislation would have

been unnecessary (or less necessary). Moreover, the passive loss
rules would be unnecessary with a fully indexed system because
interest expense and depreciation deductions would be far less during

inflationary periods. Finally, this analysis predicts a cut in the
gains tax rate (a return of the exclusion) and a shortening of
depreciation tax lives if inflation should rebound.
In contrast to the conventional wisdom, the 1986 tax act is

unlikely to discourage real estate activity in the aggregate. Within
the broad aggregate, however, widely different effects are to be

expected. Depreciable real estate will be slightly disfavored; a 6 to
10 percent increase in the equilibrium level of rents is likely.
Historic and regular rehabilitation projects will be more negatively

affected. In contrast, owner—occupied housing, by far the largest
component of real estate, is favored, both directly by an interest

rate decline and indirectly by the increase in rents. Home ownership
should rise somewhat, and the quantity of houses demanded and value of
existing houses should increase slightly, except at the very high end
of the income and house value distributions.

—19—

FOOTNOTE S

1Feldstein and Summers (1979) made a case for cutting taxes on
capital income to offset the increase in inflation.
2

The weighted average cost of capital is used as the discount

rate. This average is defined precisely in the text below.
3Feldstein and Slemrod (1979) make a case for low (or zero) taxation of inflationary gains.
4

Of course, if (l—t)i equals the tax—exempt rate and the risk premium is measured as the second term in (1), the economist and financial economist are in full agreement.
5Another problem with the project model is the high discount rate

(e) applied to tax depreciation allowances which are less risky than

net operating income. Using e as the discount rate will generally
overstate the negative impact (increase in initial rent) of a less
generous tax depreciation schedule because the more distant deductions
are discounted too severely (Hendershott and Ling, 1986).
6Gravelle's (1986) calculations of initial rent increases that
vary with the leverage ratio are the result of not allowing e to vary
with v and thus do not provide useful information.

Although initial rents are independent of the leverage used by the
marginal investor, the expected returns to investors in tax brackets
above that of the marginal investor increase with leverage; when
excess returns (expected above required) are available, leverage pays.

—20—

7lnflation is well understood to alter the cost of capital under a
wide variety of tax regimes, including old law and the Tax Reform Act

of 1986 (see Hendershott 1987 and Henderson 1986, for example). More
specifically, inflation favors rental housing, although by less under

new law than under old. To illustrate this point, a number of
simulations were run. An increase in expected inflation from 41/2 to 9
percent would, under old law, eventually lower initial rents by 13 to
24 percent, the smaller figure being based on interest rates rising
more than one—for—one with expected inflation (both calculations
incorporate an "endogenous" shortening of tax depreciation lives to
hold the present value of the depreciation tax saving constant).
Under the 1986 Tax Act, the percentage decreases are about halved.
8

This is not meant as a criticism of GE models or modelers, but

rather of the uncritical acceptance of their simulation results.

9mis point is widely understood (see Henderson 1986 and
Hendershott 1987, for example).
10All the calculations are for "typical" married couples with two

dependents. Because tax rates of "other" household heads are reduced
relatively more, the increase in their costs of owner housing is
somewhat greater.

—21—

REFERETCE S

Feldstein, Martin, "Inflation, Income Taxes, and the Rate of Interest:
A Theoretical Analysis," American Economic Review, 66, PP. 809—20,
December 1976.

Feldstein, Martin and Joel Slemrod, "Inflation and the Excess Taxation
of Capital Gains on Corporate Stock," National Tax Journal, 31,
pp. 107—88, June 1979.

Feldstein, Martin and Lawrence Summers, "Inflation and the Taxation of
Capital Income in the Corporate Sector," National Tax Journal, 32,
pp. 445—70, December 1979.

Gravelle, Jane, "The Effect of the Passive Loss Restriction in the Tax
Reform Act on Investment in Real Estate," unpublished manuscript,
1986.

Haurin, Donald R., Patric H. Hendershott and David C. Ling, "Home

Ownership Rates of Married Couples: An Econometric Analysis,"
paper presented at the Midyear Meetings of the American Real
Estate and Urban Economics Association, Nay

1987.

Hendershott, Patric H., "Tax Reform and the Slope of the Playing
Field," in Taxes and Capital Formation, ed. Martin Feldstein,
University of Chicago Press, 1987.

Hendershott, Patric H., James R. Follain, and David C. Ling, "Effects
on Real Estate," in Tax Reform and the U.S. Economy, ed. Joseph A.
Pechman, Brookings Institute, Washington, D.C., Pp. 71—94, 1987.

—22—

Hendershott, Patric H. and David C. Ling, "Likely Impacts of the
Administration Proposal and the House Bill," in Tax Reform and
Real Estate, ed. James R. Follain, The Urban Institute,
Washington, D.C., pp. 87—112, 1986.

Henderson, Yolanda K., "Lessons from Federal Reform of Business
Taxes," New England Economic Review, Federal Reserve Bank of
Boston, Nov./Dec. 1986.
Hulten, Charles R. and Frank C. Wykoff, "The Measurement of Economic

Depreciation," in 2preciation, Inflation, and the Taxation of
Income from Capital, ed. Charles R. Hulten, Urban Institute Press,
Washington, D.C., pp. 81—129, 1981.

Trades

(1)

1976—77

.50
.25

30

——

Table
1

(3)

1983—84

(4)

1984 Tax
Response

(5)

1986

(6)

——
——

1981 Tax
Response

.45
.18

(7)
1987 Tax
Response

.36
.36

S.L.

27.5

.08

19

.09
.045

.20
——

.45
.18
18

.115

.0740

175%DB

.06

.0732

[.150]

15
175%DB

——

.145

.0870

.264

——

.135
.09

.1035

.250

.08
.065

.0905

.271

.065

.251
[.218]

.078

[.267]

[.2871

[.291]

[.2661

.194

[.3171

.243

2

4

3

4

3

2

.062

2

straight

.031

.072

balance and S.L. =

line.

.087

200%DB

(2)
1980—51

Variations in Tax Depreciation and Capital Gains Taxation by Economic Environment and Tax Regime

Assumptions
Tax Law
Ordinary Tax Rate
Capital Gains Tax Rate
Tax Life
Depreciation Method*
Economic Environment
Interest Rate
Expected InflatIon

Cost of Capital

Weighted Average
Results
Present Value of Tax
Savings per Dollar of
Depreciable Basis
No Trading

of

Trading at Tax Life
Number

declining

Present Value of Capital
Gains Tax on Inflationary Gains .067
*DB =

