NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

INVESTMENT-LESS GROWTH:
AN EMPIRICAL INVESTIGATION
Germán Gutiérrez
Thomas Philippon
Working Paper 22897
http://www.nber.org/papers/w22897

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2016

We are grateful to Janice Eberly, Olivier Blanchard, Toni Whited, René Stulz, Martin Schmalz,
Boyan Jovanovic, Tano Santos, Charles Calomiris, Glenn Hubbard, Holger Mueller, Alexis
Savov, Philipp Schnabl, Ralph Koijen, Ricardo Caballero, Emmanuel Farhi, Viral Acharya, and
seminar participants at Columbia University and New York University for stimulating
discussions. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2016 by Germán Gutiérrez and Thomas Philippon. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Investment-less Growth: An Empirical Investigation
Germán Gutiérrez and Thomas Philippon
NBER Working Paper No. 22897
December 2016, Revised January 2016
JEL No. E22,G3
ABSTRACT
We analyze private fixed investment in the U.S. over the past 30 years. We show that investment
is weak relative to measures of profitability and valuation – particularly Tobin’s Q, and that this
weakness starts in the early 2000’s. There are two broad categories of explanations: theories that
predict low investment because of low Q, and theories that predict low investment despite high Q.
We argue that the data does not support the first category, and we focus on the second one. We
use industry-level and firm-level data to test whether under-investment relative to Q is driven by
(i) financial frictions,(ii) measurement error (due to the rise of intangibles, globalization, etc), (iii)
decreased competition (due to technology, regulation or common ownership), or (iv) tightened
governance and/or increased short-termism. We do not find support for theories based on risk
premia, financial constraints, or safe asset scarcity, and only weak support for regulatory
constraints. Globalization and intangibles explain some of the trends at the industry level, but
their explanatory power is quantitatively limited. On the other hand, we find fairly strong support
for the competition and short-termism/governance hypotheses. Industries with more
concentration and more common ownership invest less, even after controlling for current market
conditions. Within each industry-year, the investment gap is driven by firms that are owned by
quasi-indexers and located in industries with more concentration and more common ownership.
These firms spend a disproportionate amount of free cash flows buying back their shares.

Germán Gutiérrez
NYU Stern School of Business
44 West 4th Street
KMC 9-190
New York, NY 10012
ggutierr@stern.nyu.edu
Thomas Philippon
New York University
Stern School of Business
44 West 4th Street, Suite 9-190
New York, NY 10012-1126
and NBER
tphilipp@stern.nyu.edu

In his March 2016 letter to the executives of S&P 500 firms, BlackRock’s CEO Laurence Fink
argues that, “in the wake of the financial crisis, many companies have shied away from investing
in the future growth of their companies. Too many companies have cut capital expenditure and
even increased debt to boost dividends and increase share buybacks.” The decline in investment has
been discussed in policy papers [Furman, 2015], especially in the context of a perceived decrease in
competition in the goods market [CEA, 2016]. There is little systematic evidence, however, on the
extent of the investment puzzle and on the potential explanations.
This paper tries to (at least partially) fill that gap. We clarify some of the theory and the
empirical evidence; and test whether alternate theories of under-investment are supported by the
data. The main contributions of the paper are to show that: (i) the lack of investment represents
a reluctance to invest despite high Tobin’s Q; and (ii) this investment wedge appears to be linked
to decreased competition and changes in governance that encourage shares buyback instead of
investment. We address the issues of causality of competition and governance in a companion paper
Gutiérrez and Philippon [2017].
It is useful, as a starting point, to distinguish two broad categories of explanations for low
investment rates: theories that predict low investment because they predict low Tobin’s Q and
theories that predict low investment despite high Tobin’s Q. The first category includes explanations
based on increasing risk aversion or decreasing expected growth. The standard Q-equation holds
in these theories, so the only way they can explain low investment is by predicting low values of Q.
The second category ranges from credit constraints to oligopolistic competition, and predicts a gap
between Q and investment due to diﬀerences between average and marginal Q (e.g., market power,
growth options) and/or diﬀerences between firm value and the manager’s objective function (e.g.,
governance, short-termism).
We find that private fixed investment is weak relative to measures of profitability and valuation
– particularly Tobin’s Q. Time eﬀects from industry- and firm-level panel regressions on Q suggest
that this weakness starts around 2000. This is true controlling for firm age, size, and profitability;
focusing on subsets of industries; and even considering tangible and intangible investment separately.
Given these results, we discard theories that predict low investment because they predict low Q;
and focus on theories that predict a gap between Q and investment. This still leaves us with a large
set of potential explanations.
We consider the following eight potential explanations, grouped into four broad categories. See
Section 2 for a detailed discussion of these hypotheses.
• Financial frictions
1. External finance
2. Bank dependence
3. Safe asset scarcity
• Measurement Error

2

4. Intangibles
5. Globalization
• Lack of Competition
6. Regulation
7. Concentration due to other factors
• Tighter Governance
8. Ownership and Shareholder Activism
We emphasize that these hypotheses are not mutually exclusive. For instance, there is a large and
growing literature that focuses precisely on the interaction between governance and competition
(see, for example, Giroud and Mueller [2010, 2011]). Thus, our tests do not map one-to-one into
hypotheses (1) to (8); some tests overlap two or more hypotheses (e.g., measures of firm ownership
aﬀect both governance and competition). We report the results of our tests and discuss their
implications for the above hypotheses in Section 4.
Testing these hypotheses requires a lot of data, at diﬀerent levels of aggregation. Some are
industry-level theories (e.g., competition), some firm-level theories (e.g., ownership), and some theories that can be tested at the industry level and/or at the firm level. Unfortunately, firm- and
industry-data are not readily comparable, because they diﬀer in their definitions of investment and
capital, and in their coverage. As a result, we must spend a fair amount of time simply reconciling
the various data sources. Much of the work is explained in Section 3 and in the Appendix.
We gather industry investment data from the BEA and firm investment data from Compustat;
as well as additional data needed to test each of the eight hypotheses. For instance, for Concentration, we obtain measures of firm entry, firm exit, price-cost margins, and concentration (including
‘traditional’ and common ownership-adjusted Herfindahls1 , as well as concentration ratios defined
as the share of sales and market value of the Top 4, 8, 20 and 50 firms in each industry). For governance and short-termism, we use measures of institutional ownership, including diﬀerent ownership
types following Brian Bushee’s institutional investor classification.2
Competition and Governance We then analyze investment patterns at the industry- and firmlevel. At the industry level, we find that industries with more quasi-indexer institutional ownership
and less competition (as measured by higher ‘traditional’ and common ownership-adjusted Herfindahls, as well as higher price-cost margins) invest less. These results are robust to controlling for
firm demographics (age and size) as well as Q.
1

We follow Salop and O’Brien [2000] and Azar et al. [2016b] to compute the common ownership-adjusted Herfindahl, which accounts for anti-competitive incentives due to common ownership. See Section 2 for additional details
2
The classification – described in Bushee [2001] – identifies Quasi-indexer, Transient and Dedicated institutional
investors based on the turnover and diversification of their holdings. Dedicated institutions have large, long-term
holdings in a small number of firms. Quasi-indexers have diversified holdings and low portfolio turnover – consistent
with a passive, buy-and-hold strategy of investing portfolio funds in a broad set of firms. Transient owners have high
diversification and high portfolio turnover. See Section 3 for additional details.

3

The decrease in competition is supported by a growing literature3 , though the empirical implications for investment have not been recently studied (to our knowledge). Similarly, the mechanisms
through which quasi-indexer institutional ownership impacts investment remain to be fully understood: while such ownership may improve governance (e.g., Appel et al. [2016a]), it may also
increase short-termism (e.g., Asker et al. [2014], Bushee [1998]) – both of which could lead to higher
buybacks and less investment. Firm-level results are consistent with industry-level results. They
suggest that within each industry-year and controlling for Q, firms with higher quasi-indexer institutional ownership invest less; and firms in industries with less competition also invest less. To
better understand the implications of safe asset scarcity and the rise of intangibles, we discuss these
hypotheses in greater detail.
Safe Assets

According to the safe asset scarcity hypothesis, the value of being able to issue

safe assets increases after the Great Recession. This should increase the value of very sage (AAA)
firms, but, to the extent that safety cannot be readily scaled up, it would not increase their physical
investment to the same extent that it increases their value. This might then account for relatively low
investment despite high Q Note that, a some broad abstract level, this is a example of (potentially
sharp) decreasing returns to (physical) scale. The problem with this theory is that it predicts that
the valuation (and investment, to a lesser extent) of highly rated firms should increase relative to
that of other firms. We regress the 2014 firm value on the 2006 value and an indicator for being
initially AA to AAA rated firms and find no support for the hypothesis. We also fail to observe
higher investment for these firms in the cross-section. The safety premium seems present in the
data, but only in 2009 and 2010, not in later years. Therefore it cannot account for the persistence
of weak investment.
Intangibles The rise of intangibles can aﬀect investment in several ways. Intangible investment
is diﬃcult to measure. Under-estimation of I would lead to under-estimation of K, and therefore
over-estimation of Q. This could translate to an ‘observed’ under-investment at industries with a
higher share of intangibles. Alternatively, intangible assets might be more diﬃcult to accumulate.
A rise in the relative importance of intangibles could then lead to a higher equilibrium value of Q
even if intangibles are correctly measured. Fortunately, the relationship between Q and intangible investment has been thoroughly studied by Peters and Taylor [2016]. Building on their work,
and using the Erickson et al. [2014] cumulant estimator, we find some support for these hypotheses
(industries with a higher share of intangibles exhibit lower investment) but we show that the aggregate impact does not seem to be quantitatively very large. It is also important to emphasize, as
Peters and Taylor [2016] do, that Q explains intangible investment relatively well, and works even
better when both tangible and intangible investments are combined, exactly as the theory would
predict. Moreover, intangible investment exhibits roughly the same weakness as tangible invest3

For instance, the Council of Economic Advisers issued a 2016 issue brief that “reviews three sets of trends that
are broadly suggestive of a decline in competition: increasing industry concentration, increasing rents accruing to a
few firms, and lower levels of firm entry and labor market mobility.” (see also Decker et al. [2015]).

4

ment. Properly accounting for intangible investment is clearly a first order empirical issue, but, as
far as we can tell, it does not lessen the puzzle that we document.
Other theories

We find some evidence that firms in industries with more regulation invest less,

but the impact does not appear to aﬀect industry-level investment. Industries with higher foreign
profits invest less in the US, as expected, but firm level investment does not depend on the share of
foreign profits. None of the other theories appear to be supported by the data. They often exhibit
the ‘wrong’ and/or inconsistent signs; or are not statistically significant.
Other Papers

Overall, our results are aligned with Lee et al. [2016] who find that industries that

receive more funds have a higher industry Q until the mid-1990s, but not since then. The change
in the allocation of capital is explained by a decrease in capital expenditures and an increase in
stock repurchases by firms in high Q industries since the mid-1990s. Our results are also related
to Alexander and Eberly [2016] who study the implications of the rise of intangibles on investment.
Last, our results somewhat contrast with Bena et al. [2016], who study the relationship between
foreign institutional ownership (proxied by additions to the MSCI World Index), investment and
innovation across 30 countries. They find that foreign institutional ownership can increase long-term
investment in fixed capital, innovation, and human capital. It will therefore be interesting, in future
work, to understand if our results are specific to the United States. Finally, the above conclusions
are based on simple regressions and therefore cannot establish causality between competition, governance and investment. In follow-up work Gutiérrez and Philippon [2017] we use a combination of
instrumental variables and natural experiments to test the causality of our two main explanations,
lack of competition and tight or short-termist governance.
From a macro-perspective, our paper is related to Jones and Philippon [2016] who explore the
macro-economic consequences of decreased competition in a DSGE model with time-varying parameters and an occasionally binding zero lower bound. They show that the trend decrease in
competition can explain the joint evolution of investment, Q, and the nominal interest rate. Absent
the decrease in competition, they find that the U.S. economy would have escaped the ZLB by the
end of 2010 and that the nominal rate today would be close to 2%.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section 1 presents five important facts
about aggregate private fixed investment in recent years. Section 2 discusses the theories that may
explain under-investment relative to Q and reviews the related literature. Section 3 describes the
data used to test our eight hypotheses. Section 4 discusses the methodology and results of our
analyses; and section 5 concludes.

1

Five Facts about US Non Financial Sector Investment

We present five important facts related to investment by the US non financial sector in recent years.
We focus on the non financial sector for three main reasons. First, this sector is the main source of
nonresidential investment. Second, we can roughly reconcile aggregate data from the Flow of Funds
5

Table 1: Current Account of Non financial Sector
Value in 2014 ($ billions)
Name
Gross Value Added
Net Fixed Capital at Rep. Cost
Consumption of Fixed Capital
Net Operating Surplus

P t Yt −

Gross Fixed Capital Formation
Net Fixed Capital Formation

Notation

Corporate1

Non corporate2

Business1+2

P t Yt

$8,641

$3,147

$11,788

$14,857

$6,126

$20,983

$1,286

$297

$1,583

Ptk Kt
δt Ptk Kt
Wt Nt − Tty − δt Ptk Kt
Ptk It
Ptk (It − δt Kt )

$1,614

$1,697

$3,311

$1,610

$354

$1,964

$325

$56

$381

with industry-level investment data from the BEA (which includes residential and non residential
investment, as well as investment in intellectual property). Last, we can use data on the market
value of bonds and stocks for the non financial corporate sector to disentangle various theories of
secular stagnation.

1.1

Fact 1: The Non financial Business Sector is Profitable but does not Invest

Table 1 summarizes some key facts about the balance sheet and current account of the non financial
corporate, non financial non corporate and non financial business sectors.
One reason investment might be low is that profits might be low. This, however, is not the case.
Figure 1 shows the operating return on capital of the non financial corporate, non financial non
corporate and non financial business sector, defined as net operating surplus over the replacement
cost of capital:
Net Operating Return =

Pt Yt − δt Ptk Kt − Wt Nt − Tty
Ptk Kt

As shown, the operating return for corporates has been quite stable over time while the operating
return of non corporates has increased substantially since 1990. For corporates, the yearly average
from 1971 to 2015 is 10.5%, with a standard deviation of only one percentage point. The minimum is
8.1% and the maximum 12.6%. In 2015, the operating return was 11.2%, very close to the historical
maximum. For non corporates, the yearly average from 1971 to 2015 is 24%, while the average since
2002 has been 27%. The maximum is 29%, equal to the operating return observed every year since
2012. A striking feature is that the net operating margin was not severely aﬀected by the Great
Recession, and has been consistently near its highest value since 2011 for both Corporates and Non
corporates.
But firms do not invest the same fraction of their operating returns as they used to. Figure 2
shows the ratio of net investment to net operating surplus for the non financial business sector:
N I/OS

=

Ptk (It − δt Kt )
Pt Yt − δt Ptk Kt − Wt Nt − Tty

The average of the ratio between 1962 and 2001 is 20%. The average of the ratio from 2002 to
6

.1

.15

.2

.25

.3

Figure 1: Net Operating Return, by Sector

1970

1980

1990
year

2000

Non Financial Corporate
Non Financial Business

2010

Non Financial Non Corporate

Note: Annual data, by Non financial Business sector.

2015 is only 10%.4 Current investment is low relative to operating margins. Similar patterns are
observed when separating corporates and non corporates.

1.2

Fact 2: Investment is low relative to Q

Of course, economic theory does not say that

N I/OS

should be constant over time. Investment

should depend on expected future operating surplus, on the capital stock, and the cost of funding
new investment; it should rely on a comparison of expected returns on capital and funding costs.
The Q-theory of investment captures this trade-oﬀ.
Consider a firm that chooses a sequence of investment to maximize its value. Let Kt be capital
available for production at the beginning of period t and let µt be the profit margin of the firm. The
basic theory assumes perfect competition so the firm takes µ as given. In equilibrium, µ depends
on productivity and production costs (wages, etc.). The firm’s program is then
Vt (Kt ) = max µt Pt Kt −
It

Ptk It

γ
− Ptk Kt
2

!

It
− δt
Kt

"2

+ Et [Λt+1 Vt+1 (Kt+1 )] ,

where Ptk is the price of investment goods. Given our homogeneity assumptions, it is easy to see
that the value function is homogeneous in K. We can then define Vt ≡
Vt = max µt Pt − Ptk (xt + δt ) −
x

where xt ≡

4

It
Kt

Vt
Kt

which solves

γ k 2
P x + (1 + x) Et [Λt+1 Vt+1 ] ,
2 t

− δt is the net investment rate. The first order condition for the net investment rate

Note that 2002 is used for illustration purposes only; the cut-oﬀ is not based on a formal statistical analysis.

7

0

.1

.2

.3

Figure 2: Net Investment Relative to Net Operating Surplus

1960

1970

1980

1990
year

2000

2010

Note: Annual data for Non financial Businesses (Corporate and Non corporate).

is

1
(Qt − 1) ,
γ

(1)

Et [Λt+1 Vt+1 ]
Et [Λt+1 Vt+1 ]
.
=
k
Pt
Ptk Kt+1

(2)

xt =
where
Qt ≡

Q is the ex-dividend market value of the firm divided by the replacement cost of its capital stock;
and γ controls adjustment costs. To build our empirical measures, we define
Q=

V e + (L − F A) − Inventories
Pk K

where V e is the market value of equity, L are the liabilities (mostly measured at book values, but
this is a rather small adjustment, see Hall [2001]), and F A are financial assets. Notice that the
BEA measure of K now includes intangible assets (including software, R&D, and some intellectual
property). As a result, our measure of Q is lower than in the previous literature. Because financial
assets and liabilities contain large residuals, we also compute another measure of Q:
Qmisc = Q +

Amisc − Lmisc
Pk K

where Amisc and Lmisc are the miscellaneous assets and liabilities recorded in the financial accounts.
Since Amisc > Lmisc , it follows that Qmisc > Q. It is unclear which measure is more appropriate.
Figure 3 shows the evolution of Q for the non financial corporate sector. As shown, Q is high
according to both measures, by historical standards.
This leads us to our main conclusion: investment is low relative to Q. The top chart in Figure 4

8

.5

Stock Q
1

1.5

2

Figure 3: Two Measures of Q

1960

1970

1980

1990
year

Stock Q (misc) − Nonfin Corp

2000

2010

Stock Q − Non fin Corp

Note: Annual data. Q for Non Financial Corporate sector (data for Non Corporate sector not available)

shows the aggregate net investment rate for the non financial business sector along with the fitted
value for a regression on (lagged) Q from 1990 to 2001. The bottom chart shows the regression
residuals (for each period and cumulative) from 1990 to 2015. Both charts clearly show that investment has been low relative to Q since sometime in the early 2000’s.5 By 2015, the cumulative
under-investment is more than 10% of capital.6
The above regression focuses on aggregate investment. To study under-investment at a more
granular level, we estimate panel regressions of industry- and firm-level investment on Q; and study
the time eﬀects. To correct for the well-known measurement errors in Q, we use the Erickson et al.
[2014] cumulant estimator in all regressions reported throughout the paper (see Section 4 for additional details).
Figure 5 shows the results: time eﬀects for the industry regression are shown on the left and
for the firm regression on the right. The vertical line highlights the average time eﬀect across all
years for each regression.7 As shown, the time-eﬀects are substantially lower for both Industryand Firm-level regressions since approximately 2000. In the industry regression, time eﬀects were
above average the 1980s; on average in the 1990s and below-average since 2002. Time eﬀects in the
firm regression were fairly high in the 1980s, but have been trending down since. They are near the
average in the early 1990s and well below-average in the early 2000s. They increase at the height
5

By definition of OLS, the cumulative residual for 2001 is zero, but the under-investment from then on is striking
We focus on the past 25 years because measures of Q based on equity are not always stable and therefore
do not fit long time series. This is a well known fact that might be due to long run changes in technology and/or
participation in equity markets that make it diﬃcult to compare the 2000’s with the 1960’s. Even in shorter windows,
van Binsbergen and Opp [2016] argue convincingly that asset pricing anomalies that aﬀect Q can have material
consequences for real investment – particularly for high Q firms. Q is therefore not a perfect benchmark, but it
enables us to control for a wide range of factors and provides theoretical support for testing the remaining hypotheses.
7
Note that the time eﬀects need not be zero, on average, given the impact of adjustment costs in Q theory and
the inclusion of a constant in the regression.
6

9

Figure 4: Net Investment vs. Q

0

.01

NI/K
.02

.03

.04

Net investment (actual and predicted with Q)

1990

1995

2000

2005

2010

2015

year

Net Investment

Fitted values

−.1

Regression residuals
−.05

0

Prediction residuals (by period and cumulative)

1990

1995

2000

2005

2010

year

Cumulative gap

Note: Annual data. Net investment for Non Financial Business sector.

10

Residual

2015

of the great recession (when Q decreased drastically) but reach their lowest level in 2013 and 2014.
These results are robust to including additional measures of fundamentals such as cash flow;
considering only a subset of industries; and even splitting tangible and intangible assets (see Figure
17). They are also consistent with results in Alexander and Eberly [2016], who consider firm-level
gross investment, defined as the ratio of capital expenditures to assets. We conclude that investment
has been low relative to Q since the early 2000’s.
Figure 5: Time eﬀects from Industry and Firm-level regressions
Industry−level time effects (BEA)

Firm−level time effects (Compustat)

year==1980
year==1981
year==1982
year==1983
year==1984
year==1985
year==1986
year==1987
year==1988
year==1989
year==1990
year==1991
year==1992
year==1993
year==1994
year==1995
year==1996
year==1997
year==1998
year==1999
year==2000
year==2001
year==2002
year==2003
year==2004
year==2005
year==2006
year==2007
year==2008
year==2009
year==2010
year==2011
year==2012
year==2013
year==2014

year==1980
year==1981
year==1982
year==1983
year==1984
year==1985
year==1986
year==1987
year==1988
year==1989
year==1990
year==1991
year==1992
year==1993
year==1994
year==1995
year==1996
year==1997
year==1998
year==1999
year==2000
year==2001
year==2002
year==2003
year==2004
year==2005
year==2006
year==2007
year==2008
year==2009
year==2010
year==2011
year==2012
year==2013
year==2014
−.08

−.06

−.04

−.02

−.3

0

−.2

−.1

0

Note: Time fixed eﬀects from errors-in-variables panel regressions (Erickson et al. [2014]) of de-meaned net investment
on median/firm-level Q. Industry investment data from BEA; Q and firm investment (defined as CAPX/PPENT
minus depreciation) from Compustat. See Section 4.2.1 for additional details on the regression approach.

1.3

Fact 3: Following a Secular Increase, Depreciation Has Remained Stable
Since 2000

The decrease in net investment could be the result of changes in the depreciation rate. To test
this, Figure 6 shows the gross investment rate, the net investment rate and the depreciation rate
for the non financial corporate sector on the top, and the non financial non corporate sector on the
bottom. Note that these series include residential structures, but their contribution is relatively
small for non financial businesses. The gross investment rate is defined as the ratio of ‘Gross fixed
capital formation with equity REITs’ to lagged capital. Depreciation rates are defined as the ratio
of ‘consumption of fixed capital, equipment, software, and structures, including equity REIT’ to
11

Figure 6: Investment and Depreciation Rate for Non financial Business Sector

0

.05

.1

.15

Non Financial Corporate

1960

1970

1980

1990
year

Net I/K
Depreciation/K

2000

2010

Gross I/K

0

.05

.1

.15

Non Financial Non Corporate

1960

1970

1980

1990
year

Net I/K
Depreciation/K

2000

2010

Gross I/K

Note: Annual data. Non financial corporate sector on the top, non financial non corporate sector on the bottom.

lagged capital; and net investment rates as the gross investment rate minus the depreciation rate.
In the non corporate sector, depreciation is stable and net investment follows gross investment.
The evolution is more complex in the corporate sector. There was a secular increase in depreciation
from 1960 until 2000, driven primarily by a shift in the composition of corporate investment (from
structures and equipment to intangibles). As a result, the trend in net investment is significantly
lower than the trend in gross investment from 1960 to 2000. Since 2000, however, the share of
intangible assets has remained flat such that depreciation has been more stable, and, if anything, it
has decreased. The drop in net investment over the past 15 years is therefore due to a drop in gross
investment, not a rise in depreciation. Because the corporate sector contributes the lion share of
investment, the aggregate figure for the combined non-financial sector resembles the top panel (see
Table 1).
12

1.4

Fact 4: Firm Entry has Decreased

Figure 7 shows two measures of firm entry: the establishment entry and exit rates as reported by
the U.S. Census Bureau’s Business Dynamics Statistics (BDS); and the average number of firms by
industry in Compustat. In the early 1990s, we see a large increase in firms in Compustat, driven
primarily by firms going public. Since then, both charts provide strong evidence of a decline in the
number of firms. This downward trend in business dynamism has been highlighted by numerous
papers (e.g., Decker et al. [2014]) but the trend has been particularly severe in recent years. In fact,
Decker et al. [2015] argue that, whereas in the 1980s and 1990s declining dynamism was observed in
selected sectors (notably retail), the decline was observed across all sectors in the 2000s, including
the traditionally high-growth information technology sector.
Figure 7: Firm entry, exit and number of firms

.08

.1

.12

.14

.16

Establishment entry and exit rates (Census)

1980

1985

1990

1995

2000

2005

2010

2015

year
Entry rate (Census)

Exit rate (Census)

60

70

80

90

100

110

Average number of firms by industry (Compustat)

1980

1985

1990

1995
year

Note: Annual data.

13

2000

2005

2010

2015

The Compustat and Census patterns above appear quite diﬀerent. However, focusing on the
post-2000 period (the main period of interest) and the sectors for which Compustat provides good
coverage, we find significant similarities. Figure 8 shows the 3-year log change in the number of
firms based on Compustat and the number of establishments based on Census BDS data (excluding
agriculture and construction for which Compustat provides limited coverage). As shown, changes
in the number of firms are roughly similar across all sectors, including manufacturing, mining and
retail which are the main contributors of investment.
Figure 8: Comparison of 3-Year log change in # of establishments (Census) and firms (Compustat),
by SIC sector
TCU

Wholesale

Retail

Services
.4

−.1

−.4

−.2

0

0

.1

.2

.2

−.1

−.4

−.2

0

0

.1

.2

.4

Manufacturing

.2

Mining

2000

2005

2010

20152000

2005

2010

20152000

2005

2010

2015

year
Census (left)

Compustat (right)

Note: Annual data. Agriculture and construction omitted due to limited coverage in Compustat

1.5

Fact 5: Institutional Ownership and Payouts Have Increased

The top graph of Figure 9 shows the total buybacks and payouts for all US-incorporated firms in
Compustat. As shown, there has been a substantial increase in total payouts, primarily driven by
an increase in share buybacks. The increase starts soon after 1982, when SEC Rule 10b-18 was
instituted (noted by the vertical line). Rule 10b-18 allows companies to repurchase their shares on
the open market without regulatory limits.
The bottom graph shows the average share of institutional ownership, by type. Again, we see a
substantial increase in institutional ownership – particularly since 2000. The increase is primarily
driven by growth in transient and quasi-indexer institutions. This is not shown in the figure, but the
increase is particularly pronounced for smaller firms: since 2000, the dollar-weighted share of quasiindexer institutional ownership increased from ~30% to ~45%, while the median share increased
from ~15% to ~50%. That is, while the dollar-weighted quasi-indexer ownership increased by about

14

50%, it more than doubled for the median firm.
These two eﬀects are remarkable, and closely match the timing of decreasing investments at the
aggregate level.
Figure 9: Payouts and Institutional ownership

0

.02

.04

.06

.08

Share Buybacks and Payouts

1970

1975

1980

1985

1990
1995
year

Payouts/Assets

2000

2005

2010

2015

Buybacks/Assets

0

.2

.4

.6

Average share of institutional ownership, by type

1980

1985

1990

1995

2000

2005

2010

2015

year
All institutions
Dedicated

Quasi−Indexer
Transient

Notes: Annual data for all US incorporated firms in Compustat. Results are similar when including foreignincorporated firms. The vertical line in the first graph highlights the passing of SEC rule 10b-18, which allows
companies to repurchase their shares on the open market without regulatory limits.

2

What might explain the under-investment?

The basic Q-equation (1) says that Q should be a suﬃcient statistic for investment, while equation
(2) equates Q with the average market to book value. This theory is based on the following
assumptions [Hayashi, 1982]:
• no financial constraints;
15

• shareholder value maximization;
• constant returns to scale and perfect competition;
Low investment despite high levels of Q might be explained by a variety of theories – we consider
the following eight (grouped into four broad categories)8 :
• Financial frictions
1. External finance constraints: A large literature has argued that frictions in financial markets can constrain investment decisions and force firms to rely on internal funds.
See Fazzari et al. [1987], Gomes [2001], Moyen [2004], and Hennessy and Whited [2007].9
Similarly, Rajan and Zingales [1998] show that industrial sectors that are relatively more
in need of external financing develop disproportionately faster in countries with more
developed financial markets. Thus, if certain sectors depend on external finance to invest and are unable to obtain the required funds, they may under-invest relative to Q.
Relatedly, Acharya and Plantin [2016] study optimal monetary policy in the presence of
financial stability concerns. They show that monetary easing subsidizes ineﬃcient maturity transformation by financial intermediaries, which crowds out real investment (by
re-allocating savings away from real investment into carry trades).
2. Bank dependence: Financial constraints may diﬀer between bank-dependent firms
and firms with access to the capital markets. As a result, we also test whether bank
dependent firms are responsible for the under-investment (see, for instance, Alfaro et al.
[2015]). This hypothesis is supported by recent papers such as Chen et al. [2016], which
shows that reductions in small business lending has aﬀected investment by smaller firms.10
3. Safe asset scarcity: Safe asset scarcity and/or changes in the composition of assets
may aﬀect corporations’ capital costs (see Caballero and Farhi [2014], for example). In
their simple form, such variations would impact Q. They would not cause a gap between
Q and investment. However, a gap may appear if safe firms are unable or unwilling to
take full advantage of low funding cost (due to, for example, product market rents). See
section 4.2.5 for additional discussion and results relevant to this hypothesis.
• Measurement Error
8
We also considered changes in R&D expenses as a proxy for lack of ideas (i.e., diﬀerences between average and
marginal Q). Firms increasing R&D expenses are likely to have better ideas and therefore a higher marginal Q. So
we test whether under-investing industries (and firms) exhibit a parallel decrease in R&D expense. We do not find
support for this hypothesis, but this is inconclusive: under some theories, a rise in R&D may actually imply lower
marginal Q (e.g., if ideas are harder to identify). We were unable to find a better measure for (lack of) ideas, so we
cannot rule out this hypothesis.
9
There is considerable controversy about the implications of financial frictions, of course, but this does not matter
for our analysis because we are not interested in estimating elasticities. While financial frictions make internal funds
relevant, it is not at all clear that they increase the sensitivity of investment to cash flows. Kaplan and Zingales
[1997] and Gomes [2001] show that financial frictions might not decrease the fit of the Q equation much.
10
We should say from the outset that our ability to test this hypothesis is rather limited. Our industry data
includes all firms, but investment is skewed and tends to be dominated by relatively large firms. Our firm-level data
does not cover small firms.

16

4. Intangibles: The rise of intangibles may aﬀect investment in several ways: first, intangible investment is diﬃcult to measure and is therefore prone to measurement error.
Under-estimation of I would lead to under-estimation of K, and therefore over-estimation
of Q; and would translate to an ‘observed’ under-investment at industries with a higher
share of intangibles. Alternatively, intangible assets might be more diﬃcult to accumulate. A rise in the relative importance of intangibles could then lead to a higher
equilibrium value of Q even if intangibles are correctly measured.
Both of these eﬀects are analyzed in Peters and Taylor [2016]. They propose a new proxy
of Q that explicitly accounts for intangible capital, thereby correcting for measurement
error. This new proxy (referred to as ‘total Q’) is shown to be a better proxy of both
tangible and intangible investment.11 They also show that intangible capital adjusts
more slowly to changes in investment opportunities than tangible capital; which reflects
higher adjustment costs.

12

5. Globalization: oﬃcial GDP statistics on private investment aim to capture investment
that occurs physically in the US, regardless of where the firm making the investment is
incorporated. For example, the investment series would include a manufacturing plant in
Michigan built by a German company and exclude investment in China by a US Retail
company. Thus, we may observe lower US private investment if US firms with foreign
activities are investing more abroad, or foreign firms are investing less in the US. This
would be pure measurement error: consolidated investment at the firm-level would still
follow Q, but would not be included in US Financial Accounts.
• Competition
6. Regulations & uncertainty: Regulation and regulatory uncertainty may aﬀect investment in two ways. First, increased regulation may stifle competition by raising barriers
to entry. Second, per the theory of investment under uncertainty, irreversible investment
in an industry may decline if economic agents are uncertain about future payoﬀs (see,
for example, Bernanke [1983]). Thus, increased regulation and the associated regulatory
uncertainty may restrain investment.13
7. Concentration: A large literature has studied the link between competition, investment, and innovation (see Aghion et al. [2014] for a discussion). From a theoretical
11

Our results are robust to using ‘total Q’ instead of the traditional measure of Q described in the data section,
although the significance of QIX ownership decreases slightly at the industry-level.
12
Intangibles can also interact with information technology and competition. For instance, Amazon does not need
to open new stores to serve new customers; it simply needs to expand its distribution network. This may lead to a
lower equilibrium level of tangible capital (e.g., structures and equipment), thus a lower investment level on tangible
assets. But this would still be consistent with Q theory since the Q of the incumbent would fall. On the other hand,
Amazon should increase its investments in intangible assets. Whether the Q of Amazon remains large then depends
mostly on competition. Finally, intangible assets can be used as a barrier to entry. For all these reasons, we think
that it is important to consider intangible investment together with competition.
13
Increases in firm-specific uncertainty may also lead to lower investment levels due to manager risk-aversion
Panousi and Papanikolauo [2012] and/or irreversible investment [Pindyck, 1988, Dixit and Pindyck, 1994]. We test
this hypothesis using stock market return and sales volatility; and find some, albeit limited support.

17

perspective, we know that the relationship is non-monotonic because of a trade-oﬀ between average and marginal profits. For a large set of parameters, however, we can expect
competition to increase innovation and investment. Firms in concentrated industries, aging industries and/or incumbents that do not face the threat of entry might have weak
incentives to invest.14
This hypothesis is supported by a growing literature that argues that competition may
be decreasing in several economic sectors (see for example CEA [2016], Decker et al.
[2015]) and is prevalent even at the product market level (e.g., Mongey [2016]). Similarly, Jovanovic and Rousseau [2014] highlight diﬀerences in the sensitivity of investment
to Q between incumbents and new entrants. Blonigen and Pierce [2016] studies the impact of mergers and acquisitions (M&As) on productivity and market power, and finds
that M&As are associated with increases in average markups. Given the rise in M&A
over the past decades, this suggests a potential rise in market power.
In addition, the rapid increase in institutional ownership (see Figure 9), and the increased
concentration in the asset management industry may have introduced substantial anticompetitive eﬀects of common ownership.15 Such anti-competitive eﬀects are the subject
of a long theoretical literature in industrial organization, which argues that common
ownership of natural competitors may reduce incentives to compete (see, for example,
Salop and O’Brien [2000]). Azar et al. [2016a] and Azar et al. [2016b] show that this
eﬀect is empirically important using the U.S. Airline and the U.S. Banking industries as
test cases.16
• Governance
8. Ownership and Shareholder Activism: beyond the anti-competitive eﬀects of common ownership discussed above, ownership can aﬀect management incentives through
short-termism (i.e., investment horizon) and governance. Regarding short-termism, some
have argued that equity markets can put excessive emphasis on quarterly earnings, and
that higher stock-based compensation incentivizes managers to focus on short term share
prices rather than long term profits (see Martin [2015], Lazonick [2014], for example).
In particular, Almeida et al. [2016] show that the probability of share repurchases is
sharply higher for firms that would have just missed the EPS forecast in the absence of
a repurchase; and Jolls [1998] shows that firms which rely heavily on stock-option-based
14

We do not take a stand on the drivers of increased concentration; simply that it appears in the data.
For instance, Fichtner et al. [2016] show that the “Big Three” asset managers (BlackRock, Vanguard and State
Street) together constitute the largest shareholder in 88 percent of the S&P500 firms, which account for 82% of
market capitalization.
16
It is worth noting that the exact mechanisms through which common ownership reduces competition remain to
be identified; but they need not be explicit directions from shareholders. They may result from lower incentives for
owners to push firms to compete aggressively if they hold diversified positions in natural competitors; or from the
ability of board members elected by and representing the largest shareholders to minimize breakdowns of cooperative
arrangements and undesirable price wars between their commonly owned firms. See Salop and O’Brien [2000] and
Azar et al. [2016b] for additional details.
15

18

compensation are significantly more likely to repurchase their stock than firms which
rely less heavily on stock options to compensate their top executives. Given the rise of
institutional ownership, an increase in market-induced short-termism may lead firms to
increase buybacks and cut long term investment.
On the other hand, ownership may improve governance. A large literature following
Jensen [1986] argues that conflicts of interest between managers and shareholders can
lead firms to invest in ways that do not maximize shareholder value.

17

Harford et al.

[2008] and Richardson [2006] find evidence that poor governance associates with greater
industry-adjusted investment. Thus, improvements in governance driven by changes in
ownership may lead to lower investment levels.
The implications of shareholder activism and institutional ownership on governance and
payouts are studied in several papers. Appel et al. [2016a] find that passive owners influence firms’ governance choices (they lead to more independent directors, lower takeover
defenses, and more equal voting rights; as well as more votes against management).
Appel et al. [2016b] find that larger ownership stakes of passive institutional investors
make firms more susceptible to activist investors (increasing the ambitiousness of activist objectives as well as the rate of success); and Crane et al. [2016] show that higher
(total and quasi-indexer) institutional ownership causes firms to increase their payouts.
But the evidence is not clear-cut: Schmidt and Fahlenbrach [2016] find opposite eﬀects
for some governance measures (including the likelihood of CEO becoming chairman and
appointment of new independent directors), and an increase in value-destructing M&A
linked to higher institutional ownership.
In the end, it is unclear whether the higher payouts and the increased susceptibility to activist investors are evidence of tighter governance or increased short-termism.
Some papers provide qualitative support for governance (e.g., Crane et al. [2016] refer
to Chang et al. [2014] which argues that increasing passive institutional ownership leads
to share price increases), but it is inconclusive. And other studies such as Asker et al.
[2014] show that public firms invest substantially less and are less responsive to changes
in investment opportunities than private firms. In the end, we are unable to diﬀerentiate between these two hypotheses empirically.18 Improvements in governance reduce
managerial entrenchment and require managers to continuously demonstrate strong performance, just as increased short-termism would. We simply test whether increases in
(passive) institutional ownership lead to higher payouts and lower investment.

17

This does not necessarily imply that managers invest too much; they might invest in the wrong projects instead.
The general view, however, is that managers are reluctant to return cash to shareholders, and that they might
over-invest.
18
This is true despite the very diﬀerent mechanisms through which they impact investment: improved governance
aligns the (manager’s) maximization problem with that of the shareholder’s, thereby increasing the focus on long
term value. Increased short-termism shifts the objective function of the maximization towards short-term value.

19

Table 2: Data sources

Primary
datasets

Additional
datasets

3

Data fields
Aggregate investment and Q
Industry-level investment and
operating surplus
Firm-level financials
Sales and Market Value
Concentration
Entry/Exit; firm demographics
Occupational Licensing
Regulation index
Industry-level spreads
Institutional ownership
Bushee’s institutional investor
classification

Source
Flow of Funds
BEA

Granularity
US
~NAICS L3

Compustat
Census

Firm
NAICS L3

Census
PDII Survey
Mercatus
Egon Zakrajsek
Thomson Reuters 13F
Brian Bushee’s website

SIC L2
NAICS L3
NAICS L3
NAICS L3
Firm
Institutional
Investor

Data

Testing the above theories requires the use of micro data. We gather and analyze a wide range
of aggregate-, industry- and firm-level data. The data fields and data sources are summarized in
Table 2. Sections 3.1 and 3.2 discuss the aggregate and industry datasets, respectively. Section
3.3 discusses the firm-level investment and Q datasets; and 3.4 discusses all other data sources,
including the explanatory variables used to test each theory. We discuss data reconciliation and
data validation results where appropriate.

3.1

Aggregate data

Aggregate data on funding costs, profitability, investment and market value for the US Economy
and the non financial sector is gathered from the US Flow of Funds accounts through FRED. These
data are used in the aggregate analyses discussed in Section 1; in the construction of aggregate Q;
and to reconcile and ensure the accuracy of more granular data. In addition, data on aggregate firm
entry and exit is gathered from the Census BDS; and used in aggregate regressions similar to those
reported in Section 4.

3.2
3.2.1

Industry investment data
Dataset

Industry-level investment and profitability data – including measures of private fixed assets (currentcost and chained values for the net stock of capital, depreciation and investment) and value added
(gross operating surplus, compensation and taxes) – are gathered from the Bureau of Economic
Analysis (BEA).
20

Fixed assets data is available in three categories: structures, equipment and intellectual property
(which includes includes software, R&D and expenditures for entertainment, literary, and artistic
originals, among others). This breakdown allows us to (i) study investment patterns for intellectual
property separate from the more ‘traditional’ definitions of K (structures and equipment); and (ii)
better capture total investment in aggregate regressions, as opposed to only capital expenditures.
Investment and profitability data are available at the sector (19 groups) and detailed industry
(63 groups) level, in a similar categorization as the 2007 NAICS Level 3. We start with the 63
detailed industries and group them into 47 industry groupings to ensure investment, entry and
concentration measures are stable over time. In particular, we group detailed industries to ensure
each group has at least ~10 firms, on average, from 1990 - 2015 and it contributes a material share
of investment (see Appendix I: Industry Investment Data for details on the investment dataset).
We exclude Financials and Real Estate; and also exclude Utilities given the influence of government
actions in their investment and their unique experience after the crisis (e.g., they exhibit decreasing
operating surplus since 2000). Last, we exclude Management because there are no companies in
Compustat that map to this category. This leaves 43 industry groupings for our analyses, whose
total net investment since 2000 is summarized in Table 14 in the appendix. All other datasets are
mapped into these 43 industry groupings using the NAICS Level 3 mapping provided by the BEA.
We define industry-level gross investment rates as the ratio of ‘Investment in Private Fixed
Assets’ to lagged ‘Current-Cost Net Stock of Private Fixed Assets’; depreciation rates as the ratio
of ‘Current-Cost Depreciation of Private Fixed Assets’ to lagged ‘Current-Cost Net Stock of Private
Fixed Assets’; and net investment rates as the gross investment rate minus the depreciation rate.
Investment rates are computed across all asset types, as well as separating intellectual property
from structures and equipment.
The Gross Operating Surplus is provided by the BEA, while the Net Operating Surplus is
computed as the ‘Gross Operating Surplus’ minus ‘Current-Cost Depreciation of Private Fixed
Assets’. OS/K is defined as the ‘Net Operating Surplus’ over the lagged ‘Current-Cost Net Stock
of Private Fixed Assets’.
3.2.2

Data validation

In order to ensure industry-level figures are consistent with aggregate data, we reconcile the two
datasets. We first note that industry-level figures include all forms of organization (financials and
non financials, as well as corporates, non corporates and non businesses). A breakdown between
financials and non financials or corporates and non corporates by industry is not available. Thus,
a full reconciliation can only be achieved at the aggregate level or considering pre-aggregated BEA
series (such as non financial corporates). But these do not provide an industry breakdown. Instead,
we note that aggregating capital, depreciation and operating surplus across all industries except
Financials and Real Estate yields very similar series as the aggregated non financial business series
from the Flow of Funds (see Figure 10). The remaining diﬀerences appear to be explained by
non-businesses (households and non profit organizations) but cannot be reconciled due to data
21

availability. Regardless, the trends are suﬃciently similar to suggest that conclusions based on
industry data will be consistent with the aggregate-level under-investment discussed in Section 1.
Figure 10: Reconciliation of Flow of Funds and BEA industry datasets

Notes: Flow of Funds data for non financial business sector; BEA data for all industries except Finance and Real
Estate. Remaining diﬀerences – particularly for OS/K – appear to be driven by non-businesses (households and non
profit), which are included in the BEA series but not in the Flow of Funds series.

3.3
3.3.1

Firm-level investment and Q data
Dataset

Firm-level data is primarily sourced from Compustat, which includes all public firms in the US.
Data is available from 1950 through 2016, but coverage is fairly thin until the 1970s. We exclude
firm-year observations with assets under $1 million; with negative book or market value; or with
missing year, assets, Q, or book liabilities.19 In order to more closely mirror the aggregate and
industry figures, we exclude utilities (SIC codes 4900 through 4999), real estate (SIC codes 5300
through 5399) and financial firms (SIC codes 6000 through 6999); and focus on US incorporated
firms (see Section 3.3.2 for additional discussion).
Firms are mapped to BEA industry segments using ‘Level 3’ NAICS codes, as defined by the
BEA. When NAICS codes are not available, firms are mapped to the most common NAICS category
among those firms that share the same SIC code and have NAICS codes available. Firms with an
‘other’ SIC code (SIC codes 9000 to 9999) are excluded from industry-level analyses because they
cannot be mapped to an industry.
Firm-level data is used for two purposes: first, we aggregate firm-level data into industry-level
metrics and use the aggregated quantities to explain industry-level investment behavior (e.g., by
computing industry-level Q). We consider the aggregate (i.e., weighted average), the mean and the
median for all quantities, and use the specification that exhibits the highest statistical significance.
19

These exclusion rules are applied for all measures except firm age, which starts on the first year in which the
firm appears in Compustat irrespective of data coverage

22

0

500

1000

1500

2000

2500

Figure 11: Comparison of Flow of Funds and Compustat CAPX ($B)

1970

1980

1990
year

2000

2010

Non Financial Business Investment
Total CAPX (all Compustat firms)
Total CAPX (US incorporated firms)

Note: Annual data. Note that all Compustat figures are before the application of our exclusion criteria (e.g., excluding
Financials). The qualitative conclusions remain the same after applying our exclusion criteria.

Second, we use firm-level data to analyze the determinants of firm-level investment through panel
regressions (see Section 4 for additional details).
3.3.2

Data validation

The sample of Compustat firms that we study represents a wide cross-section of firms in the US.
Still, this set of firms may not be representative of aggregate and industry-level investment figures.
For instance, Compustat captures investment by US public firms, while oﬃcial GDP statistics
capture all investment that occurs physically in the US irrespective of the listing status or country
of the firm making the investment. To address this issue, Figure 11 plots the gross fixed capital
formation for non financial businesses (from the Flow of Funds) versus total capital expenditures
(CAPX) for two sets of Compustat firms: all firms in Compustat, irrespective of country of incorporation, and all domestically incorporated firms. Simply summing up CAPX for all firms results in
a series that roughly tracks, and sometimes exceeds, the oﬃcial Flow of Funds estimates. However,
this Compustat series exhibits a much stronger recovery after the Dotcom bubble and the Great
Recession than the oﬃcial estimates: total CAPX accounts for 85% of investment from 1980 to
2000, on average; but 117% from 2008 to 2015. Focusing on US incorporated firms largely resolves
the diﬀerences: the new series accounts for 63% of investment from 1980 to 2000 and 59% from
2008 to 2015, on average. These results suggest that foreign-incorporated firms are investing more
than US-incorporated firms, but this investment is occurring outside the US.
In order to more closely mirror US aggregate figures, we restrict our sample to US incorporated
firms for the remainder of our analyses. None of the qualitative conclusions in this paper are sensitive
to the inclusion of all firms irrespective of country of incorporation.

23

We are interested in using Compustat firm-level data to reach conclusions about industry-level
investment. Thus, we need to understand whether Compustat firms in a given industry provide a
good representation of the industry as a whole. We define the following two measures of ‘coverage’:
the ratio of Compustat total CAPX to BEA Investment by industry, and the ratio of Compustat
total PP&E to BEA Capital. Table 14 in the Appendix shows the coverage for the 43 industries
under consideration. As shown, our Compustat sample provides good coverage for the majority of
material industries. In particular, Compustat provides at least 10% coverage across both metrics for
19 industries, which account for 55% of total net investment from 2000 to 2015. The most material
sectors for which Compustat does not provide good coverage are Health Care, Professional Services
and Wholesale Trade.
Low coverage levels increase the noise in Compustat estimates, but are not expected to bias
the results. We therefore include all industries in our analyses, and confirm that qualitative results
remain stable when including only industries with >10% coverage across both metrics.
3.3.3

Investment definition

We consider two investment definitions. First, the ‘traditional’ gross investment rate is defined
as in Rajan and Zingales [1998] (among others): capital expenditures (Compustat item CAPX) at
time t scaled by net Property, Plant and Equipment (item PPENT) at time t − 1. Net investment
rate is calculated by imputing the industry-level depreciation rate from BEA figures. In particular,
note that the depreciation figures available in Compustat include only the portion of depreciation
that aﬀects the income statement, and therefore exclude depreciation included as part of Cost of
Goods Sold. For consistency, and because we are interested in aggregate quantities, we assume all
firms in a given industry have the same depreciation rate, and compute the net investment rate as
the gross investment rate minus the BEA-implied depreciation rate for structures and equipment
in each industry. Second, we estimate investment in intangibles as the ratio of R&D expenses to
assets (Compustat XRD / AT)20 . We consider only the gross investment rate (i.e., do not subtract
depreciation) because a good proxy for R&D depreciation is not available.21
The resulting firm-level net investment figures closely mirror the BEA oﬃcial estimates. Figure
11 shows the BEA oﬃcial net investment rate along with the aggregate net investment rate for our
Compustat sample (adjusted to mirror the BEA industry mix). The Compustat series is higher
because of the diﬀerences in definitions (e.g., PP&E covers only a portion of capital; the BEA
includes all firms while Compustat includes only public firms), but the trends are very similar from
20

XRD set to zero if missing
In order to ensure robustness, we also test three alternate definitions: (i) capital expenditures plus R&D expense
over total assets (Compustat (CAPX + XRD) / AT); (ii) a broader definition of investment constructed from the
statement of cash flows (capital expenditures plus increase in investments minus sale of investments over the sum
of PP&E, Investment and Advances (equity) and Investment and Advances (other) (Compustat (CAPX + IVCH SIV)/(PPE+IVAEQ+IVAO); and (iii) investment over market value, in which case Q is omitted from the regression
equations. Definitions (i) and (ii) aim to capture a broader set of long term investment activities than just capital
expenditures. We use the total BEA-implied depreciation rate to compute net investment under all three alternate
definitions. All qualitative conclusions are robust to using either of these broader definitions of investment.
21

24

.18
.16

0

.08

.1

.01

BEA NI/K
.02
.03

.12
.14
Compustat NI/K

.04

.05

Figure 12: Comparison of Compustat and BEA net investment rates

1970

1980

1990
year
BEA NI/K

2000

2010

Compustat NI/K

Note: Annual data. BEA and Compustat NI/K for selected sample.

each other.
3.3.4

Q definition

Firm-level stock Q is defined as the book value of total assets (AT) plus the market value of equity
(ME) minus the book value of equity scaled by the book value of total assets (AT). The market
value of equity (ME) is defined as the total number of common shares outstanding (item CSHO)
times the closing stock price at the end of the fiscal year (item PRCC_F). Book value of equity is
computed as AT - LT - PSTK.
Figure 13 shows the aggregate, mean and median Q across all firms in our Compustat sample,
along with the measure of Q constructed for non financial corporates using Flow of Funds data. As
shown, the aggregate and mean Q from Compustat closely mirror the Flow of Funds series. The
median Q is substantially lower in the early 2000s, because the corresponding increase in average
Q was driven by a few firms concentrated in particular industries. For some tests, we supplement
this traditional measure of Q with the ‘total Q’ of Peters and Taylor [2016], which aims to control
for intangible capital.

3.4

Explanatory Variables

Last, a wide range of additional variables are gathered and/or computed to test our eight theories
of under-investment.
3.4.1

Financial Frictions

External finance constraints. For external finance constraints, we are interested in the amount
of investment that cannot be financed through internal sources, i.e., the cash flow generated by the
25

.5

1

1.5

2

2.5

Figure 13: Comparison of Compustat and Flow of Funds Q

1970

1980

1990
year

Stock Q − Non fin Corp
Mean Q

2000

2010

Compustat Q
Median Compustat Q

Note: Annual data. Flow of Funds Q for Non Financial Corporate sector due to data availability. Compustat Q for
selected sample.

business. We follow Rajan and Zingales [1998] and define a firm’s dependence on external finance as
the ratio of cumulative capital expenditures (item CAPX) minus cash flow from operations divided
by capital expenditures over the 10-year prior period (to avoid over-weighting a particular year).
Cash flow from operations is defined as the sum of Compustat cash flow from operations (item
FOPT) plus decreases in inventories (item INVCH), decreases in receivables (item RECCH), and
increases in payables (item APALCH).22 The dependence on external equity finance is defined as the
ratio of the net amount of equity issues (item SSTK minus item PRSTKC) to capital expenditures;
and the dependence on external debt finance as the ratio of the net amount of debt issues (item
DLTIS minus item DLTR) to capital expenditures.23 We use these metrics to test whether firms or
industries with high dependence on external finance are under-investing.
Bank dependence. Since financial constraints may diﬀer between bank-dependent firms and
firms with access to capital markets, we follow Kashyap et al. [1994] (and others) and define a
borrower as bank-dependent if it does not have a long-term issuer rating from S&P. Again, we test
whether bank-dependent firms or industries are under-investing. As explained earlier, however, note
that in order to test the bank dependence hypothesis, we would need to over-sample small firms.
Safe asset scarcity.

For safe asset scarcity, we gather firm-level S&P corporate bond ratings

(available in the CRSP-Compustat Merged database) and industry-level corporate bond spreads.
The former is used for firm-level analyses, and aggregated to the industry level based on the share of
firms rated AA to AAA. The latter was kindly provided by Egon Zakrajsek, and measures the simple
22

This definition is used for cash flow statements with format codes 1, 2, or 3. For format code 7 we use the sum
of the following items: ibc, dpc, txdc, esubc, sppiv and fopo
23
Note that debt finance dependence is not computed by Rajan and Zingales

26

average corporate bond spread across all bonds in a given NAICS Level 3 code. This dataset was
used in Gilchrist and Zakrajsek [2011]. Not all industries are covered by the bond spread dataset.
3.4.2

Measurement Error

Intangibles. For Intangibles, we compute two types of metrics. First, we compute the investment
rate for tangible and intangible assets separately (as described above) and use these to (i) test
for under-investment in intangible assets and (ii) test whether the hypotheses supported for total
investment also hold for intangible assets. Second, we compute the ratio of intangibles excluding
goodwill to assets (Compustat (INTAN-GDWL)/AT); and use this ratio to test for measurement
error in intangibles. See Section 4.2.6 for additional details. Goodwill is excluded because it
primarily measures M&A activity, not formation of intangible capital.24
Globalization. For Globalization, we use Compustat item PRETAX INCOME - FOREIGN to
identify industries and firms with substantial foreign activities. This field contains the income of
a company’s foreign operations before taxes. It is reported only by some firms25 , yet there are no
other indicators of the extent of a firm’s foreign operations available in Compustat (Foley et al.
[2007]). For industry-level analyses, we compute the industry share of foreign income as the ratio of
total PRETAX INCOME - FOREIGN to total PRETAX INCOME (i.e., across all firms in a given
industry and year). For firm-level analyses, we consider three transformations of foreign activities
given the potential for missing data: one omitting all firms with missing PRETAX INCOME FOREIGN; one setting missing PRETAX INCOME - FOREIGN equal to zero; and one with an
indicator for populated PRETAX INCOME - FOREIGN. We use these measures to test whether
industries with substantial foreign activities are over-investing relative to Q.
3.4.3

Competition

Regulation and Uncertainty

For regulation and uncertainty, we consider two measures.

As a measure of the amount and change in regulations aﬀecting a particular industry, we gather
the Regulation index published by the Mercatus Center at George Mason University. The index
relies on text analysis to count the number of relevant restrictions for each NAICS Level 3 industry from 1970 to 2014. Note that most, but not all industries are covered by the index. See
Al-Ubaydli and McLaughlin [2015] for additional details. Second, as a proxy for barriers to entry,
we gather the share of workers requiring Occupational Licensing in each NAICS Level 3 industry
from the 2008 PDII.26

24

We also tested the ratio of intangibles to assets, but excluding goodwill is more appropriate and exhibits a
stronger link to investment
25
Security and Exchange Commission regulations stipulate that firms should report foreign activities separately
in each year that foreign assets, revenues or income exceed 10% of total activities
26
The 2008 PDII was conducted by Westat, and analyzed in Kleiner and Krueger [2013]. It is based on a survey
of individual workers from across the nation.

27

Concentration and demographics. For concentration and firm demographics we use three
diﬀerent sources: Compustat, the US Census Bureau and Thomson-Reuters’ Institutional Holdings
(13F) Database.
From Compustat, we compute four measures of concentration (i) the log-change in the number
of firms in a given industry as a measure of entry and exit; (ii) sales Herfindahls27 , (iii) the share
of sales and market value held by the top 4, 8 and 20 firms in each industry, and (iv) the pricecost ratio (also known as the Lerner index). We use Compustat item SALE for measures of sales
concentration and market value as defined in the computation of Q above for measures of market
value concentration. To compute the Lerner index, we follow Datta et al. [2013] and calculate the
ratio of operating profit (Compustat SALE - COGS - XSGA) to sales. We also compute (iv) age
(from entrance into Compustat) and (v) size (log of total assets) as measures of firm demographics.
The Lerner index diﬀers from the Herfindahl and Concentration ratios because it does not rely on
precise definitions of geographic and product markets; rather it aims to measure a firm’s ability to
extract rents from the market.
From the U.S. Census Bureau, we gather industry-level establishment entry/exit rates and demographics (age and size); and industry-level measures of sales and market value concentration The
former are available in the Business Dynamics Statistics (BDS) for 9 broad sectors (SIC Level 2)
since 1977. The latter are sourced from the Economic Census, and include the share of sales/market
value held by the top 4, 8, 20 and 50 firms in each industry; and are available for a subset of NAICS
Level 3 industries for 1997, 2002, 2007 and 2012. We aggregate concentration ratios to our 43
industry groupings by taking the average across industries.
The main benefit of the census data is that it covers all US firms (public and private). But
the limited granularity/coverage poses significant limitations for its use in regression analyses. We
mapped the 9 SIC sectors for which census entry/exit data are available to the BEA investment
categories and analyzed industry-level investment patterns. However, limited conclusions could be
reached given the very broad segmentation: Q exhibited significant measurement error, leading to
unintuitive coeﬃcients. So we use these data only to validate the representativeness of relevant
Compustat series. For instance, Figure 8 above shows that from 2000 onward, changes in the
number firms in Compustat closely resemble those of the US as a whole.
Similarly, the census concentration data is available at a more granular level, but only for a subset
of years and industries. We use these metrics to test whether more concentrated industries exhibit
lower investment; and to compare nationwide concentration measures with those computed from
Compustat. Census and Compustat measures of concentration are found to be fairly correlated,
and both are significant predictors of industry-wide (under-)investment. We use Compustat as the
basis of our analyses because the corresponding measures are available for all industries and all
years; but we also report some regression results using Census-based concentration measures.
Last, to account for anti-competitive eﬀects of common ownership, we compute the modified
Herfindahl. We use Compustat as well as Thomson-Reuters’ Institutional Holdings (see the next sub27

Market value Herfindahl also considered, but Sales Herfindahl performs better and is therefore reported.

28

section). The Modified Herfindahl – described in Salop and O’Brien [2000] and Azar et al. [2016b]
– is defined as
M HHI = HHI +

##
j

k̸̸=j

$
γij βik
sj sk $i
i γij βij

= HHI + HHIadj
where sj and sk denote the share of sales for firms j, k in a given industry. γij and βik denote
the control share and the ownership share of investor i in firm j, respectively. The first term is
the traditional Herfindahl, while the second term is a measure of the anti-competitive incentives
due to common ownership. Theoretical justification for this measure can be derived using the
modified Herfindahl-Hirschman Index (MHHI) in a Cournot setting. See Salop and O’Brien [2000]
and Azar et al. [2016b] for additional details. We consider the combined M HHI in most of our
tests; but also separate HHI and HHIadj to assess their impact independently in some cases.
We make two assumptions to compute this measure empirically: first, because ownership data
is only available for institutional investors, we compute γij and βik as the control and ownership
share of investor i in firm j relative to total institutional ownership reported in the 13F database,
not total ownership. This is not expected to substantially influence the results because ownership
by non-institutional investors is likely limited and restricted to a single firm, which does not induce
common ownership links. Second, because data on the total number of voting shares per company is
not readily available, we assume γij = βik (i.e., we consider total ownership rather than voting and
non-voting shares separately).28 Last, following Azar et al. [2016b], we restrict the data to holdings
of at least 0.5% of shares outstanding.
3.4.4

Governance

For governance, we gather data on institutional ownership from Thomson-Reuters’ Institutional
Holdings (13F) Database. This data set includes investments in all US publicly traded stocks by
institutional investors managing more than $100 million.
We define the share of institutional ownership as the ratio of shares owned by fund managers filing
13Fs on a given firm over total shares outstanding.29 We also add Brian Bushee’s permanent classification of institutional owners (transient, quasi-indexer, and dedicated), available on his website.
This classification is based on the turnover and diversification of institutional investor’s holdings.
Dedicated institutions have large, long-term holdings in a small number of firms. Quasi-indexers
have diversified holdings and low portfolio turnover – consistent with a passive, buy-and-hold strategy of investing portfolio funds in a broad set of firms. Transient owners have high diversification
and high portfolio turnover. Quasi-indexers are the largest category, and account for ~60% of total
28

We also measured γij based on the (sole and shared) voting shares held by institutional investors only, but this
exhibits lower statistical significance.
29
We use CRSP’s total shares outstanding instead of Thomson Reuter’s since the latter are available only in
millions for some periods.

29

institutional ownership. This includes ‘pure’ index investors as well as actively managed investors
that hold diversified portfolios. Quasi-indexer ownership is therefore heavily influenced by index
position and participation. This is obvious for index funds, but also aﬀects actively managed funds
that benchmark against these indices (see, for example, Wurgler [2011]).
Bushee [2001] shows that high levels of ownership by transient institutions are associated with
significant over-weighting of the near-term earnings component of firm value. And Asker et al.
[2014], shows that firms with more transient ownership exhibit lower investment sensitivity to Q.
Appel et al. [2016a,b] and Crane et al. [2016] all use Bushee’s classifications when studying the
implications of institutional ownership on governance and payouts. The classification is available
from 1981 to 2013.30
3.4.5

Other measures

In addition to the above metrics tied to specific theories, we compute the ratio of goodwill (item
GDWL) to assets as a measure of past M&A activity; and the ratio of share repurchases (item
PRSTKC) to assets as a measure of buybacks.31 These two variables cut across several hypothesis.
Acquisitions clearly has an impact on competition, but it can also be a sign of weak governance (a
view supported by a large literature) or a sign of short-termism (since combining capital and labor
into new units is much more time consuming than buying existing units of production). Similarly,
high payout ratios can be a sign of strong governance, short-termism, or low competition.
Table 3 summarizes the data fields considered for each explanation. Investment rates as well
as measures of external finance dependence; measures of intangibles; R&D expense; the ratio of
operating surplus to capital; cash flow to assets; and foreign pretax income are all winsorized at the
2% and 97% level by year to control for outliers. Buybacks are capped at 10% of assets and Q is
capped at 10.

4

Results

Armed with the requisite industry- and firm-level data, we can analyze the determinants of aggregate, industry and firm-level under-investment. We start by showing that the aggregate-level
investment gap is explained by low competition and high quasi-indexer institutional ownership. We
then discuss industry- and firm-level panel regression results, which confirm (i) that the observed
aggregate-level under-investment appears consistently at the industry- and firm-level; and (ii) that
industries with more quasi-indexer institutional ownership and less competition (as measured by
the traditional and modified Herfindahl as well as the Lerner index) invest less. We report summary
results in the body of the document, and detailed regression output in the Appendix.

30

We also considered the GIM index of Gompers et al. [2003] as a proxy for managerial entrenchment; and the
industry-level Earnings Response Coeﬃcient, which measures the sensitivity of stock prices to earnings announcements. However,we did not find a strong relationship between these measures and investment.
31
We also considered total payouts to assets and found very similar results

30

Table 3: Summary of data fields by potential explanation
Potential explanation

Financial
Frictions

Relevant data field(s)

1. External finance

Firm- and industry-level Rajan-Zingales (1998) external

constraints

finance dependence (aggregate, equity and debt)

2. Bank

Firm-level bank-dependence indicator (firms missing S&P

dependence

rating)

3. Safe asset

Industry-average spread
Firm-level Corporate Bond ratings
Separate CAPX vs. Intangible investment rates (firm- and

Measurement

4. Intangibles

error

industry-level)
Intangibles ex. goodwill/assets

5. Globalization
6. Regulation &
uncertainty

Share of foreign profits, as proxy for foreign activities
Mercatus industry-level regulation index (restriction count)
Share of workers with Occupational Licensing (PDII)
Sales and stock market return volatility
Change in number of firms (Compustat and Census BDS)

Competition

Share of total sales/market value of top X firms (Compustat
7. Concentration

and Economic Census)
Lerner index; i.e., price-cost margin (Compustat)
Traditional Herfindahl (Compustat)
Modified Herfindahl, i.e., common-ownership adjusted
(Compustat)

Governance

8. Ownership

Firm-level share of institutional ownership
Firm-level share of Quasi-indexer, Dedicated and Transient
ownership (Bushee (2001), updated through 2013)

31

It is well-known that OLS regressions of Q suﬀer from two problems: the slopes on Q are biased
due to measurement error in Q; and the corresponding R2 depends on the extent of measurement
error. To correct for this, all industry- and firm-level panel regression results reported in the paper
are based on the cumulant estimator of Erickson et al. [2014] (unless otherwise noted). Qualitative
results are robust to using simple OLS, but coeﬃcients on Q and other parameters are smaller as
expected. In addition to the unbiased slopes produced by the estimator, we report the R2 of the
regression, labeled ρ2 . Note that this errors-in-variables estimator requires de-meaned data (and
does not compute fixed eﬀects internally). We therefore de-mean all industry-/firm-level dependent
variables.

4.1

Aggregate-level results

We start by regressing the aggregate net investment rate (from the flow of funds) on mean Q (from
Compustat), along with additional explanatory variables X.32
N It
= β0 + βQt−1 + γX + εt
Kt−1
Table 4 shows the results of these regressions for our ‘core’ explanations: industry concentration and
quasi-indexer ownership. We report results using the median sales Herfindahl across all industries
as our measure of concentration, but alternate measures such as Census- and Compustat-based firm
entry and exit rates, changes in the number of firms, and average concentration ratios (% of sales
by top 4, 8, 20 firms) are also significant predictors with appropriate signs.
Columns 1 through 3 include regressions from 1980 onward while columns 4 to 6 include results
from 1990 onward. As shown, Q exhibits a substantially better fit since 1990, hence we focus on this
period for most of our analyses. Note, however, that measures of competition and quasi-indexer
ownership are fairly stable and significant across both periods. Columns 2 and 5 show that an
increase in the sales Herfindahl is correlated with lower investment. Columns 3 and 6 add quasiindexer institutional ownership, and show that increases in such ownership are correlated with lower
investment. Note that the R2 in column 6 is 81%, suggesting a very high correlation between these
measures and investment.
These results are based on time series regressions of fairly persistent series. To control for the
over-estimation of T-values, Table 15 in the appendix reports moving average regression results with
1 and 2 year lags. The coeﬃcients are very similar and often significant.

4.2
4.2.1

Industry and Firm-level results
Testing under-investment

In order to test our more granular hypotheses, we now move to industry- and firm-level data. We
start by documenting that the observed under-investment at the aggregate-level persists at the
32

The Flow of Funds measure of Q is also significant under most specifications. We focus on Compustat Q and
Herfindahls for consistency with the rest of the paper.

32

Table 4: Aggregate Net Investment: OLS Regressions
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

Net I/K
Mean Stock Q (t-1)

≥1980

≥1980

≥1980

≥1990

≥1990

≥1990

0.002

0.001

0.012**

0.019**

0.010**

0.016**

[3.78]

[0.48]
Median Sales Herfindahl(t-1)†

[0.24]

[3.58]

[2.86]

[4.10]

-0.576**

-0.270**

-0.451**

-0.260*

[-6.93]

[-2.79]

[-5.48]

[-2.61]

Mean % QIX own (t-1)

-0.059**
[-3.90]

-0.045**
[-2.89]

Observations

36

36

33

26

26

25

R2

1%

60%

74%

37%

73%

81%

Notes: Annual data. T-stats in brackets. + p<0.10, * p<0.05, ** p<.01. Investment from the US Flow of Funds; Q, Herfindahl
and Ownership across all US incorporated firms in Compustat.
† Alternate measures of competition including changes in number of firms (Compustat), concentration (Compustat), and firm
entry and exit (Census) are also significant.

industry- and firm-level. In particular, we perform the following errors-in-variables panel regression
across industries or firms i:
N Iit
− µi = β0 + βQi,t−1 + ηt + εit
Kit−1
where β0 represents a constant, µi denotes the mean industry-/firm-level investment over the regression period; and ηt represents year fixed eﬀects. We omit the regression results for brevity (which
exhibit the expected signs) and instead focus on the time fixed eﬀects. The results are shown in
Figure 5. The left (right) chart shows the time eﬀects for the industry (firm) panel regression. The
vertical line highlights the average time eﬀect across all years for each regression. As shown, the
time-eﬀects are substantially lower for both industry- and firm-level regressions from approximately
2000. In the industry regression, time eﬀects were above average in most years in the 1980s; on
average in the 1990s and below-average since 2002. In the firm regression, time eﬀects were fairly
high in the 1980s, and have been trending down since. They are near the average in the early 1990s
and well below-average in the early 2000s. They increase at the height of the great recession (when
Q decreased drastically) but reach their lowest level in 2013 and 2014. Note that time eﬀects need
not be zero on average, given the impact of adjustment costs in Q theory and the inclusion of a
constant in the regression.
These results confirm that the decline in investment is observed conditional on Q, and consistent
across industries and firms (given the fixed eﬀects). They are also robust to including additional
financials such as operating surplus in the regression or including only a subset of industries.
4.2.2

Testing hypotheses

Having established the observed under-investment relative to fundamentals since 2000, we now test
our eight theories of under-investment. We do so by expanding the above errors-in-variables panel
33

regression to include additional measures for each theory:
N Iit
− µi = β0 + βQi,t−1 + γXit−1 +α Yit−1 + ηt + εit
Kit−1
where, again, β0 and ηt represent a constant and year fixed eﬀects, respectively. µi denotes the mean
industry-/firm-level investment over the regression period. Xit−1 denotes our ‘core’ explanations,
which are included in all regressions. These include the modified Herfindahl and the share of quasiindexer institutional ownership; as well as controls for age and size . We use the modified Herfindahl
as our base measure of competition because it exhibits the highest statistical significance, and
because it controls for anti-competitive eﬀects of common ownership as well as traditional measures
of concentration. Yit−1 denotes the additional measures for each hypotheses, including measures
of financial constraints, globalization, etc. These measures are first included individually and then
simultaneously (if significant) to assess their correlation with cross-sectional investment levels.
Note that including year fixed eﬀects implies that we no longer see under-investment relative
to Q. Instead, these regressions identify cross-sectional diﬀerences in investment, including which
variables explain under-/over-investing relative to Q. For industry-level regressions, the dependent
variable is the BEA net investment rate, and Q is the median Q across all Compustat firms in
a given industry.33 For firm-level regressions, the dependent variable is firm-level net investment
(based on CAPX/PPENT) and Q is the corresponding a firm-level value. Results for intangible
investment (using Intellectual Property investment at the industry level, and R&D expenses at the
firm-level) are reported and discussed in Section 4.2.6.
Table 5 summarizes industry- and firm-level error-corrected regression results across all hypotheses. Tick-marks (

) identify those variables that are significant and exhibit the ‘right’ coeﬃcient.

Crosses ( ) identify variables that are not significant or exhibit the ‘wrong’ coeﬃcient. A minus
sign after a tick-mark (

-) highlights that the variable is significant but not robust across peri-

ods, against the inclusion of other predictor variables or against changes in the specification (e.g.,
census-based concentration ratios are significant, but Compustat-based ratios are not; coeﬃcients
on Dedicated and Transient ownership flip signs or are not significant under some robustness tests).
Detailed regression results underlying this summary table are included in Tables 16 to 19 in the
appendix. Specifically, Table 16 includes industry-level results for all variables except measures of
competition, which are included in Table 17. Table 18 shows firm-level errors-in-variables results for
all explanations except governance and short-termism, which are shown in Table 19. Last, Tables
20 to 23 show the same results as Tables 16 to 19 but from 2000 onward, to demonstrate that results
remain generally stable and robust over the more recent period (although coeﬃcients are not always
significant given the short fitting period).
Note that, for brevity, we include only the most significant variables/transformations for each
type of measure in our reported regression results (e.g, we exclude the less significant transformations of foreign profits for Globalization, and the industry-average spread for safe asset scarcity).
Qualitative results are robust to using the alternate definitions of firm-level investment; including
33

We also considered the weighted average and mean Q but median Q exhibits higher T-stats

34

Table 5: Summary of Firm- and Industry-level results
Significance
Potential explanation
1. External
Financial
constraints

finance
2. Bank
dependence
3. Safe asset

Measurement 4. Intangibles
error

Relevant data field(s)

Firm

RZ external finance dependence (’99)
Missing S&P rating (’99)
Industry spread (’99)
Firm-level ratings (’99)
Intangibles ex. goodwill/assets

5. Globalization

% foreign profits

6. Regulation &

Regulation index

uncertainty

Industry

Occupational Licensing
∆Log #of firms

Competition

% sales/market value of top X firms
7. Concentration

-

Lerner index (Compustat)
Herfindahl (Compustat)
Modified Herfindahl (Compustat)
Share of Institutional ownership

Governance

8. Ownership

Share of QIX ownership
Share of DED ownership

-

-

Share of TRA ownership

-

-

Notes: Table summarizes industry- and firm-level errors-in-variables regression results across all potential explanations. Tick-marks ( ) identify those variables that are significant and exhibit the ‘right’ coeﬃcient. Crosses ( )
identify variables that are not significant or exhibit the ‘wrong’ coeﬃcient. A minus sign after a tick mark ( -)
highlights that the variable is significant but not robust to inclusion of additional variables, sensitive to treatment of
measurement error or to alternate regression periods. See Appendix for detailed regression results and the text for
caveats and discussions of the limitations of our results (e.g., in the case of bank dependence).

only industries with good Compustat coverage; and (almost always) allowing for measurement error
in MHHI and Lerner index in addition to Q.
As shown, we find strong support for measures of competition and ownership; some support
for intangibles and globalization (at the industry-level) and regulation (at the firm-level); and no
support for the remaining hypotheses. Several measures of competition appear to be significant at
the industry- and firm-level – particularly the modified Herfindahl (and both of its components)
and the Lerner index.
Similarly, all four measures of ownership appear to be strongly correlated with industry- and
firm-level under-investment (see Table 19). We emphasize quasi-indexer ownership throughout the
paper because it exhibits high levels of significance across all specifications and robustness tests;
and because of its rapid growth since 2000. But the significance of all ownership measures in our
base specification suggests that the under-investment may in fact be linked to the financialization
of the economies broadly, rather than the growth of a particular type of ownership.
Among the remaining hypotheses, we find some support for intangibles, globalization and regula35

tion. Industries with a higher share of intangibles excluding goodwill tend to invest less, supporting
the measurement error and adjustment cost hypotheses. Industries with higher foreign profits also
exhibit lower US investment. This is expected, given their larger foreign operations. However,
since this result is not significant at the firm-level (where we include all investment irrespective of
the location), the under-investment in the US does not appear to be driven by US firms investing
disproportionately more abroad, but rather by all firms investing less. Last, firms in industries
with more regulations also appear to invest less; though this result is substantially less robust than
measures of competition and quasi-indexer ownership; and does not appear at the industry-level.
We highlight that these results cannot discard the theories for all subsets of firms. For instance,
other papers have documented that reductions in bank lending aﬀect investment by smaller firms
(e.g.,Chen et al. [2016]). We do not observe such an eﬀect in our sample, using the lack of corporate
bond ratings as a proxy for bank dependence. Still, our results are not inconsistent with the
existing literature. Industry-level investment tends to be dominated by relatively large firms (which
are rarely bank-dependent); and our firm-level data does not cover small firms. What our results
suggest is that under-investment by small firms is unlikely to account quantitatively for the bulk
of the aggregate investment gap. Finally, another caveat is that bank lending matters for business
formation [Alfaro et al., 2015]. A decrease in bank lending can then, over time, lead to an increase
in concentration.
The remainder of this section discusses the results in more detail. Section 4.2.3 and 4.2.4 discuss
the primary industry and firm-level regression results. Section 4.2.5 provides additional analysis
and support for discarding the safe asset scarcity hypothesis; while Section 4.2.6 discusses the
implications of rising intangibles on investment. Detailed results are included in the Appendix.
4.2.3

Industry Results

Table 6 shows the results of error-corrected industry regressions for our ‘core’ explanations. We
include the modified Herfindahl in columns 1 and 2, and separate the traditional and common ownership components in columns 3 and 4. As shown, all measures of concentration are significant from
1980 and 1990 onward. The diﬀerences in the magnitude of coeﬃcients relative to the Aggregate
results of Table 4 are driven by a larger coeﬃcient on Q due to measurement error correction. It
is worth noting that the coeﬃcient on the common ownership adjustment is substantially larger
than the coeﬃcient on the traditional Herfindahl. Measures of quasi-indexer ownership are also
significant.
4.2.4

Firm Results

Table 7 shows firm-level regression results including the modified Herfindahl and quasi-indexer
ownership. Columns 1 to 3 regress net investment (defined as CAPX/PPE), and columns 4 to 6
regress the ratio of buybacks to assets.
Columns 1 and 2 include year fixed eﬀects; and the investment rate is de-meaned within each
industry and firm, respectively. As shown, quasi-indexer institutional ownership and concentration
36

Table 6: Industry regressions: ‘Core’ explanations
Table shows the results of industry errors-in-variables panel regressions of Net I/K over the periods specified. NI/K from BEA;
remaining variables primarily from Compustat. Annual data. T-stats in brackets. + p<0.10, * p<0.05, ** p<.01.

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

≥1981

≥1990

≥1981

≥1990

Median Q (t-1)

0.101**

0.102**

0.101**

0.100**

[4.942]

[6.180]

[4.776]

[5.784]

Mean % QIX own (t-1)

-0.108*

-0.118*

-0.109*

-0.114*

[-2.272]
-0.056**

[-2.417]
-0.067*

[-2.430]

[-2.391]

[-2.880]

[-2.491]
-0.028+

-0.033+

[-1.701]

[-1.697]

-0.108**

-0.116**

[-2.951]

[-3.015]

Net I/K

Mod-Herfindahl (t-1)
Herfindahl (t-1)
CO Herf adjustment (t-1)

Observations

1,398

1,063

1,398

1,063

Age and Size Controls

YES

YES

YES

YES

Year FE

YES

YES

YES

YES

Industry de-meaned

YES

YES

YES

YES

0.334

0.35

0.323

0.336

ρ

2

are significant predictors of investment. Firms with more quasi-indexer institutional ownership
and firms in industries with higher modified Herfindahls, invest less. Note that the corresponding
coeﬃcients on quasi indexer ownership are similar to those recovered in industry-regressions, while
the coeﬃcient on the modified Herfindahl is larger.
Column 3 de-means the dependent variable for each industry-year, and excludes the measure of
concentration because it would be absorbed into the means. As shown, quasi-indexer institutional
ownership is significant, suggesting that, within each industry-year and controlling for Q, firms with
more quasi-indexer institutional ownership invest less.
Where do the excess funds go? Share buybacks. As shown in columns 4 to 6, firms with more
quasi-indexer ownership do more buybacks. This is true including year, as well industry (column
4), firm (column 5) and industry-firm (column 6) fixed eﬀects, and controlling for a wide range of
financials such as market value, cash flow, profitability, leverage, sales growth, etc.
Some recent literature highlights that weak governance aﬀects primarily firms in noncompetitive
industries. In unreported tests, we interact ownership and competition measures, and find that
ownership leads to under-investment only in noncompetitive industries. This aligns with the results
in Giroud and Mueller [2010, 2011].

37

Table 7: Firm regressions: ‘Core’ explanations
Table shows the results of firm-level errors-in-variables panel regressions of Net CAPX/PPE and Buybacks/assets over the
periods specified. Data primarily sourced from Compustat. Annual data. T-stats in brackets. + p<0.10, * p<0.05, ** p<.01.

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

Net CAPX/PPE
≥1990
Stock Q (t-1)
% QIX own MA2(t-1)
Mod-Herfindahl (t-1)

≥1990

≥1990

≥1990

≥1990

0.174**

0.165**

0.168**

-0.006**

0.016**

-0.006**

[32.835]

[24.868]

[31.137]

[-9.256]

[5.086]

[-7.700]

-0.099**

-0.126**

-0.077**

0.012**

0.006**

0.011**

[-5.686]

[-7.938]

[-4.540]

[7.448]

[5.314]

[7.332]

-0.157**

-0.145**

[-6.840]

[-7.160]
...

...

...

59,310

59,310

59,310

55,486

55,486

55,486

Age and Size Controls

YES

YES

YES

YES

YES

YES

Year FE

YES

YES

NO

YES

YES

NO

Industry de-meaned

YES

NO

NO

YES

NO

NO

Firm de-meaned

NO

YES

NO

NO

YES

NO

Industry-Year de-meaned
ρ2

4.2.5

(6)

≥1990

Other controls (market cap, OS/K, etc.)
Observations

(5)
Buybacks/Assets

NO

NO

YES

NO

NO

YES

0.274

0.188

0.236

0.161

0.0471

0.13

Drill-down: Debt issuance and investment by high-rated firms

There has been substantial discussion on the implications of safe asset scarcity on debt issuance;
and to a lesser extent, on investment. To better understand whether this hypothesis is supported
by the data, this section discusses valuation and investment patterns of AA to AAA rated firms
and below AA-rated firms. To mitigate endogeneity problems, we assign firms to rating groups
based on their 2006 rating, before the Great Recession. 2006 is chosen because safe asset scarcity
is understood to be a post-Great Recession eﬀect.
We start with valuations. According to the safe asset scarcity hypothesis, the value of being
able to issue safe assets increased after the Great Recession. In that case, the valuation of highly
rated firms should increase relative to other firms. We regress the 2014 value on the 2006 value and
an indicator for AA to AAA rated firms:

logM Vi,2016 = β0 + β1 log agei + β2 log assetsi,2006 + log M Vi,2006 + I{AA − AAAi,2006 } + εi
We include industry fixed eﬀects in some regressions; and run a similar regression for capital (PP&E)
and assets to test for higher (cumulative) capital expenditures or balance sheet growth. Table 8
summarizes the results. As shown, the coeﬃcient on the AA to AAA rated indicator is not significant
and, if anything, it is negative. At least for corporates, we do not find support for the safe asset
scarcity hypothesis.
Graphically, Figure 14 shows the average log-change in total assets and the average net invest38

Table 8: Safe Asset Scarcity: Valuation test
Table shows the results of firm-level OLS regressions of Market Value, PP&E and Assets as of 2014 on 2006 Market value and
a AA-to-AAA rating indicator. Annual data, sourced from Compustat. T-stats in brackets. + p<0.10, * p<0.05, ** p<.01.

(1)

(2)

Log MV (2014)
AA to AAA rated (2006)

(1)

(2)

Log PPE (2014)

(1)

(2)

Log Assets (2014)

-0.042

-0.21

-0.29

-0.139

-0.161

-0.236

[-0.20]

[-0.96]

[-0.78]

[-0.43]

[-0.85]

[-1.23]

Log MV (2006)

1.103**

1.078**

0.364**

0.513**

0.576**

0.593**

[26.03]

[24.61]

[5.01]

[7.82]

[15.49]

[15.46]

Log Assets (2006)

-0.088*

-0.06

0.739**

0.533**

0.415**

0.390**

[-2.06]

[-1.34]

[10.09]

[7.99]

[11.08]

[9.98]

-0.011

-0.032

0.158+

0.130+

-0.021

-0.022

[-0.23]

[-0.63]

[1.90]

[1.74]

[-0.49]

[-0.51]

Log(age)
Industry FE

No

Yes

No

Yes

No

Yes

Observations

1680

1680

1675

1675

1680

1680

Overall R2

0.848

0.857

0.693

0.78

0.871

0.879

ment rate (including R&D expenses) for both groups of firms.34 At least until 2012, both groups
of firms seem to be increasing assets at roughly the same rate. In contrast, the investment rate
of highly rated firms has been well-below that of lower rated firms since 1990. This suggests that
highly rated firms have grown their balance sheets at roughly the same rate as lower-rated firms
but have invested less.
Have these firms reduced external financing given the lower investment? To answer this question,
we follow Frank and Goyal [2003] and compute the uses and sources of funding based on Compustat
data. Specifically, we define the total finance deficit as the sum of dividends, investment and changes
in working capital minus internal cash flow:35
DEF = DIV + IN V + ∆W C − IntCF
Note that this definition of investment is substantially broader than capital expenditures: it includes
all short and long term investment as defined in the statement of cash flows. We also compute net
debt and equity issuance, such that DEF = N etDebtIss + N etEqIss.
Figure 15 shows the 2-year cumulative financing deficit, debt and equity issuance by rating group,
normalized by total assets. We highlight the year 1982, when SEC Rule 10b-18 was instituted,
which allows companies to repurchase their shares on the open market without regulatory limits.
Two interesting conclusions arise: first, both types of firms have either maintained or increased their
debt issuance since the mid-1990s. Highly rated firms issued a substantial amount of debt in 2009,
at the height of the Great Recession. Such debt issuance allowed them to maintain large buybacks
34

Conclusions are qualitatively similar excluding R&D expenses from the NI/K calculation
The following Compustat items are used: Div = div, IN V = capx + ivch + aqc − sppe − siv − ivstch − ivaco,
∆W C = −recch − invch − apalch − txach − aoloch + chech − f iao − dlcch and IntCF = ibc + xidoc + dpc + txdc +
esubc+sppiv +f opo+exre. Note that adjusted definitions are used for prior disclosure regimes – see Frank and Goyal
[2003] for additional details.
35

39

Figure 14: Assets and investment, by rating

−.05

0

.05

.1

.15

.2

Average Log−change in Total Assets

1970

1975

1980

1985

1990
1995
year

A and below

2000

2005

2010

2015

2010

2015

AA to AAA

.06

.08

.1

.12

.14

.16

Average NI/K, inc R&D

1970

1975

1980

1985

1990
1995
year

A and below

2000

2005

AA to AAA

Note: Annual data. Firms mapped to categories based on ratings as of 2006.

40

despite lower internal funds. They decreased issuance in the early 2010s but returned to the market
in 2015 as internal funds decreased but buybacks remained high. Low rated firms issued almost
no debt during the Great Recession, which led to a substantial decrease in buybacks. But they
quickly returned to the market after the crisis, and used the funds raised primarily for buybacks.
Second, buybacks at highly-rated firms increased soon after 1982, moving almost one-to-one with
the internal finance deficit for the past 20 years. In contrast, the increase in buybacks is much
less pronounced for lower rated firms until the mid-2000s. In fact, lower rated firms maintained a
positive finance deficit until about 2000, which was financed primarily with debt.
Figure 15: Uses and sources of financing, by rating
AA to AAA

−.05

0

.05

A and below

1970

1980

1990

2000

2010

1970

1980

1990

2000

2010

year
Financing deficit
Equity Issuance

Debt Issuance

Note: 2-year cumulative rates, normalized by total assets. Based on annual data. Firms mapped to categories based
on ratings as of 2006. The vertical line on 1982 highlights the passing of SEC rule 10b-18, which allows companies
to repurchase their shares on the open market without regulatory limits.

The improving finance deficit and associated buybacks may be driven by increasing profits, or
by decreasing investments. Table 9 decomposes the sources and uses of financing for highly rated
firms and lower-rated firms. As shown, the improving finance deficit for both types of firms is driven
by decreasing investments and, to a lesser extent, working capital. Cash dividends have remained
stable while cash flow decreased slightly. The decrease in investment is particularly pronounced for
highly rated firms, from ~11% in the 1970s and 1980s to only 6% in the 2000s.

41

Table 9: Funds flow and financing as a fraction of total assets, by rating (%)
Rating

1970-1979

1980-1989

1990-1994

1995-1999

2000-2004

2005-2009

2010-2015

3.7

3.9

4.3

4.7

4.5

4.2

4

9.7

11.9

8.4

7.9

7.3

6.2

6.2

∆Working capitalc

1.6

-0.3

0.5

1.4

1.4

0.8

0.1

AA to AAA

Internal cash flowd

14.2

15.8

13.8

15.6

16.3

15.7

13

rated firms

Financing deficita+b+c-d

0.7

0.1

-0.7

-1.9

-2.7

-3

-2.3

Net debt issues1

0.6

0.2

0.4

0.3

0.4

1.1

0.6

Net equity issues2

0.1

-0.1

-1.1

-2.2

-3.1

-4.1

-2.9

Net external financing1+2
Cash dividendsa

0.7

0.1

-0.7

-1.9

-2.7

-3

-2.3

2.6

2.5

2.1

1.8

1.3

1.7

2

Investmentsb

10.7

12.2

7.8

9.3

6.8

7.4

7.8

∆Working capitalc

1.8

0.9

0.8

2

1.9

1.6

1.5

Below AA

Internal cash flowd

13.4

14

10.1

11.7

9.8

11.3

11.7

rated firms

Financing deficita+b+c-d
Net debt issues1

1.5

1.1

0.4

1

0.2

-0.7

-0.6

1.2

1.1

0.2

1.6

0.6

1.3

1.7

Net equity issues2

0.3

0

0.2

-0.7

-0.4

-2.1

-2.4

Net external financing1+2

1.5

1.1

0.4

0.9

0.2

-0.8

-0.7

42

Field / Year
Cash dividendsa
Investmentsb

Notes: Annual data, in percentages. Based on the average of yearly cumulative totals across all firms in each category. Firms mapped to categories based on 2006
ratings.

4.2.6

Drill-down: Intangible investment

The top graph of Figure 16 shows the ratio of intangibles to assets (with and without goodwill)
for all US-incorporated firms in Compustat. As shown, the share of intangibles has been increasing
rapidly since 1985, and experienced its largest increase in the late 1990s. The rise is primarily driven
by goodwill, such that total intangibles are primarily a measure of past M&A activity rather than
a true shift in the asset mix. Intangibles excluding goodwill remained low until the 2000s but have
increased rapidly since then, to ~7% of assets. The bottom graph shows the share of intellectual
property capital and investment reported by the BEA (as a percent of total capital and investment,
respectively). As shown, both series experienced a substantial increase from 1980 to about 2000,
but have remained stable since.
Figure 16: Intangibles and IP investment

0

.05

.1

.15

.2

Intangibles/Assets (Compustat)

1980

1985

1990

1995

2000

2005

2010

2015

2010

2015

year
Mean Intangibles/Assets
Mean Intangibles ex. Goodwill/Assets

0

.1

.2

.3

.4

Intellectual Property share of I and K (BEA)

1980

1985

1990

1995

2000

2005

year
(IP Investment)/(Total Investment)

(IP Capital)/(Total Capital)

Notes: Annual data. Top chart includes all US incorporated firms in Compustat. Bottom chart based on BEAreported figures for the industries in our sample (see Section 3).

43

The rise of intangibles may aﬀect investment in two ways: first, intangible investment is diﬃcult
to measure and is therefore prone to measurement error. This can be seen, for instance, in the
very diﬀerent trends between the share of intangibles in BEA data and the intangibles excluding
goodwill in Compustat. If intangible investment is under-estimated, K would be under-estimated,
and therefore Q would be over-estimated. Second, intangible assets might be more diﬃcult to
accumulate. A rise in the relative importance of intangibles could lead to a higher equilibrium value
of Q even if intangibles are correctly measured. We test each of these hypothesis separately. We
find some support for them but their impact seems to be quantitatively limited.
Measurement error. Denote net investments in tangible and intangible assets by N I T and N I I ,
such that total investments are N I = N I T + N I I . Assume that tangible capital is perfectly
measured but intangible capital is under-estimated by a factor α – that is, assume that intangible
investment is consistently under-estimated across all industries. This is a simplifying assumption,
but it highlights the main reason for concern.
Under this assumptions, measured investment is given by
T
I
NˆI ≡ NˆI + NˆI

= N I T + αN I I
The under-estimation of investment leads to under-estimation of capital K̂ and, since Q̂ is the ratio
of market value to replacement cost of capital, it leads to over-estimation of Q. Thus, a regression
of the form
NˆIit
K̂ I
+ µi + ηt + εit
= β Q̂i,t−1 + γ
ˆ
ATi,t−1
Kit−1
would yield a negative and significant coeﬃcient γ. More complex measurement errors would yield
diﬀerent structures, but broadly the negative coeﬃcient should remain. Industries with higher
dependence on intangibles would appear to be under-investing due to an over-estimation of Q and
an under-estimation of investment.
We test this in two ways. First, we run measurement-error corrected regressions at the industry
level, using BEA measures of investment (which includes intellectual property investment) and the
traditional Compustat Q. The results are shown in columns 1 and 2 of Table 10. As shown, the
coeﬃcient on intangibles is significant and negative, suggesting that industry-years with a larger
share of intangibles exhibit more under-investment relative to the traditional Q.
Second, we replace the Compustat Q with the ‘total Q’ of Peters and Taylor [2016]. Total Q aims
to correct for measurement error in intangibles by recognizing R&D and part of SG&A expenses
as investments. This procedure reduces the measurement error in Q due to intangibles, and should
therefore reduce the explanatory power of

KˆI
ATi,t−1 .

The results are shown in column 3. Intangibles

remain significant but the corresponding coeﬃcient is 30% smaller than using the Compustat Q, as
44

Table 10: Industry regressions: Intangible Measurement Error
Table shows the results of industry errors-in-variables panel regressions of Net I/K on intangible assets, over the periods specified.
NI/K from BEA; remaining variables primarily from Compustat. Total Q from Peters and Taylor [2016], aims to correct for
measurement error in intangibles. Annual data. T-stats in brackets. + p<0.10, * p<0.05, ** p<.01.

(1)

(2)

(3)

Intan Net I/K
≥1990
≥1990
≥1990
Median Stock Q (t-1)

0.102**

0.098**

[6.180]

[6.579]

Median ‘Total’ Q (t-1)

0.048**
[12.535]

Mean % QIX own (t-1)
Mod-Herfindahl (t-1)

-0.118*

-0.131**

-0.064+

[-2.417]

[-2.935]

[-1.800]

-0.067*

-0.066*

-0.031*

[-2.491]
Intan ex. GW/Assets(t-1)

[-2.463]

[-2.077]

-0.359**

-0.234**

[-3.465]

[-3.492]

Observations

1,063

1,063

1,063

Age and Size Controls

YES

YES

YES

Year FE

YES

YES

YES

Industry de-meaned

YES

YES

YES

0.35

0.37

0.32

ρ

2

expected.
These results provide some support for the intangibles hypotheses. Note, however, that our
‘core’ hypotheses of competition and quasi-indexer ownership remain significant, and the addition
of intangibles in the regression has limited eﬀect on the coeﬃcients (when using the Compustat Q,
otherwise coeﬃcients change due to diﬀerences in the total Q series) or the R2 . Intangibles therefore
appear to have limited explanatory power.
Higher equilibrium Q.

A rise in the relative importance of intangibles could lead to a higher

equilibrium value of Q even if intangibles are correctly measured. This would result in lower aggregate investment relative to Q, particularly at industries with a large share of intangible assets.
We test this by analyzing investment patterns on tangible and intangible assets separately. If this
hypothesis is correct, the under-investment relative to Q should vanish when considering asset types
separately.
To begin with, Figure 17 shows the time eﬀects from industry- and firm-level regressions of
intangible investment on Q (i.e., the same analysis as above, but using net investment in intellectual
property as the industry level dependent variable, and the ratio of R&D expenses to assets as the
firm-level dependent variable). Time eﬀects exhibit very similar patterns as those observed above
for total investment at the industry-level and CAPX at the firm-level. In particular, industry time
eﬀects were above average in the 1980s and 1990s but decrease substantially since 2000. Firm time
eﬀects decrease consistently since the 1980s. They are near the average in the 1990s and well below45

Figure 17: Time Eﬀects from Intangible Asset Regressions
Industry−level time effects (BEA)

Firm−level time effects (Compustat)

year==1980
year==1981
year==1982
year==1983
year==1984
year==1985
year==1986
year==1987
year==1988
year==1989
year==1990
year==1991
year==1992
year==1993
year==1994
year==1995
year==1996
year==1997
year==1998
year==1999
year==2000
year==2001
year==2002
year==2003
year==2004
year==2005
year==2006
year==2007
year==2008
year==2009
year==2010
year==2011
year==2012
year==2013
year==2014

year==1980
year==1981
year==1982
year==1983
year==1984
year==1985
year==1986
year==1987
year==1988
year==1989
year==1990
year==1991
year==1992
year==1993
year==1994
year==1995
year==1996
year==1997
year==1998
year==1999
year==2000
year==2001
year==2002
year==2003
year==2004
year==2005
year==2006
year==2007
year==2008
year==2009
year==2010
year==2011
year==2012
year==2013
year==2014
−.2

−.1

0

.1

−.05

.2

−.04

−.03

−.02

−.01

0

Note: Time fixed eﬀects from errors-in-variables panel regressions of de-meaned net investment on median/firm-level
Q. Industry IP investment data from BEA; firm investment based on XRD/Assets from Compustat; omits firms with
zero or missing R&D expenses. See Section 4.2.1 for additional details on regression approach.

average in the 2000s. They again increase at the height of the great recession but reach their lowest
level in 2013 and 2014.
It may be, however, that the eﬀect of competition and quasi-indexer ownership applies only
for tangible investment. In that case, our conclusions would only apply to a subset of asset types.
We test this by replicating the core industry-level regressions above, but separating tangible and
intangible assets; and by analyzing firm-level investment in R&D.
Industry-level results are shown in Table 11. Quasi-indexer ownership exhibits significantly
negative coeﬃcients for all assets and non-IP assets; and negative but insignificant coeﬃcients for
IP. Measures of competition are significant in almost all tests. Note that the t-stat on Q and the
R2 is the largest for all assets. This aligns with results in Peters and Taylor [2016] who find that
the ‘traditional’ measure of Q explains explains total investment better than either physical or
intangible investment separately.
Firm level results are shown in Table 12 (they should be compared to Table 7). As shown,
increased concentration and quasi-indexer ownership leads to under-investment in R&D.
Combined, these results suggest that the rise of intangibles accounts for some but not all of the
observed under-investment. Corporations have reduced investment in both tangible and intangible
46

Table 11: Industry regressions, by asset type
Table shows the results of industry errors-in-variables panel regressions of Net I/K since 1990, split by asset type. NI/K from
BEA; remaining variables primarily from Compustat. Annual data. T-stats in brackets. + p<0.10, * p<0.05, ** p<.01.

(1)

(2)

All fixed
assets1+2

Excluding
IP1

Median Q (t-1)

0.102**

0.044*

[6.180]

[2.529]

[3.424]

[5.784]

[2.560]

[4.763]

Mean % QIX own (t-1)

-0.118*

-0.092*

-0.183

-0.114*

-0.092*

-0.193

[-2.417]

[-2.545]

[-1.018]

[-2.391]

[-2.523]

[-1.068]

-0.067*

-0.040*

-0.078+

[-2.491]

[-2.137]

[-1.843]
-0.033+

-0.032+

-0.072

[-1.697]

[-1.909]

[-1.544]

-0.116**
[-3.015]

-0.054+
[-1.826]

-0.123*
[-2.322]

Mod-Herfindahl (t-1)

(3)

(4)
Net I/K
IP2
All fixed
assets1+2
0.069**

0.100**

Herfindahl (t-1)
CO Herf adjustment (t-1)

(5)

(6)

Excluding
IP1

IP2

0.046*

0.094**

Observations

1,063

1,063

1,062

1,063

1,063

1,062

Age and Size Controls

YES

YES

YES

YES

YES

YES

Year FE

YES

YES

YES

YES

YES

YES

Industry de-meaned

YES

YES

YES

YES

YES

YES

0.35

0.27

0.164

0.336

0.267

0.165

ρ

2

Table 12: Firm regressions: R&D expenses
Table shows the results of firm errors-in-variables panel regressions of R&D expenses over assets, for the periods specified.
Firms with missing or zero R&D are omitted. Annual data. T-stats in brackets. + p<0.10, * p<0.05, ** p<.01.

(1)

(2)

(3)

R&D/Assets
≥1990
Stock Q (t-1)

≥1990

≥1990

0.031**

0.025**

0.030**

[24.563]

[17.412]

[24.455]

% QIX own MA2(t-1)

-0.016*

-0.011**

-0.013+

[-2.045]

[-2.787]

[-1.687]

Mod-Herfindahl (t-1)

-0.035**

-0.028**

[-2.888]

[-4.915]

29,334

29,334

29,334

Observations
Age and Size Controls

YES

YES

YES

Year FE

YES

YES

NO

Industry de-meaned

YES

NO

NO

Firm de-meaned

NO

YES

NO

Industry-Year de-meaned

NO

NO

YES

0.27

0.173

0.259

ρ

2

47

assets since 2000, suggesting that other factors are in play.

5

Conclusion

Private fixed investment in the United States has been lower than expected since the early 2000’s.
The trend started before 2008, but the Great Recession made it more striking. Investment in the
is low despite high levels of profitability and Tobin’s Q. This simple observation rules out a whole
class of theories that would explain low investment by low values of Tobin’s Q. We test 8 alternative
theories that can explain the investment gap, i.e., low investment despite high Q. Among these,
the only ones that find consistent support in our industry and firm level datasets are decreased
competition, tightened governance and, potentially, increased short-termist pressures. Combined,
the competition and governance measures explain about 80% of the aggregate under-investment
relative to Q. The rise of intangibles explains some of the remaining investment gap, and it does
not diminish the explanatory power of competition and governance.
The above conclusions are based on simple regressions and therefore cannot establish causality
between competition, governance and investment. In follow-up work Gutiérrez and Philippon [2017]
we use a combination of instrumental variables and natural experiments to test the causality of our
two main explanations: lack of competition and tight or short-termist governance.

References
Viral Acharya and Guillaume Plantin. Monetary easing and financial instability. 2016.
Philippe Aghion, Stefan Bechtold, Lea Cassar, and Holger Herz. The causal eﬀects of competition
on innovation: Experimental evidence. Working Paper, 2014.
Omar Al-Ubaydli and Patrick A. McLaughlin. Regdata: A numerical database on industry-specific
regulations for all united states industries and federal regulations, 1997 to 2012. Regulation &
Governance, 2015.
Lewis Alexander and Janice Eberly. Investment hollowing out. Working Paper, 2016.
Laura Alfaro, Thorsten Beck, and Charles Calomiris. Foreign bank entry and entrepreneurship.
Working Paper, 2015.
Heitor Almeida, Vyacheslav Fos, and Mathias Kronlund. The real eﬀects of share repurchases.
Journal of Financial Economics, 119(1):168–185, jan 2016.
Ian R. Appel, Todd A. Gormley, and Donald B. Keim. Passive investors, not passive owners. Journal
of Financial Economics, 121(1):111 – 141, 2016a.
Ian R. Appel, Todd A. Gormley, and Donald B. Keim. Standing on the shoulders of giants: The
eﬀect of passive investors on activism. September 2016b.
48

John Asker, Joan Farre-Mensa, and Alexander Ljungqvist. Corporate investment and stock market
listing: A puzzle? Review of Financial Studies, 2014.
Jose Azar, Sahil Raina, and Martin C. Schmalz. Ultimate ownership and bank competition. 2016a.
Jose Azar, Martin C. Schmalz, and Isabel Tecu. Anti-competitive eﬀects of common ownership.
2016b.
Jan Bena, Miguel A. Ferreira, Pedro P. Matos, and Pedro Pires. Are foreign investors locusts?
the long-term eﬀects of foreign institutional ownership. European Corporate Governance Institute
(ECGI) - Finance Working Paper No. 468/2016, 2016.
Ben S. Bernanke. Irreversibility, uncertainty, and cyclical investment. The Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 98(1):85–106, 1983.
Bruce A. Blonigen and Justin R. Pierce. Evidence for the eﬀects of mergers on market power and
eﬃciency. October 2016.
Brian J. Bushee. The influence of institutional investors on myopic r&d investment behavior. The
Accounting Review, 73(3):305–333, 1998.
Brian J. Bushee. Do institutional investors prefer near-term earnings over long-run value? Contemporary Accounting Research, 18(2):207–246, 2001.
Ricardo J. Caballero and Emmanuel Farhi. The safety trap. February 2014.
CEA. Benefits of competition and indicators of market power. Issue Brief, April 2016.
Yen-Cheng Chang, Harrison Hong, and Inessa Liskovich. Regression discontinuity and the price
eﬀects of stock market indexing*. Review of Financial Studies, 2014.
Brian Chen, Samuel G. Hanson, and Jeremy C. Stein. The decline in big-bank lending to small
businesses: Causes and consequences. Working paper, 2016.
Alan D. Crane, Sebastien Michenaud, and James P. Weston. The eﬀect of institutional ownership
on payout policy: Evidence from index thresholds. Review of Financial Studies, 2016.
Sudip Datta, Mai Iskandar-Datta, and Vivek Singh. Product market power, industry structure, and
corporate earnings management. Journal of Banking & Finance, 37(8):3273 – 3285, 2013.
Ryan Decker, John Haltiwanger, Ron Jarmin, and Javier Miranda. The role of entrepreneurship in
us job creation and economic dynamism. Journal of Economic Perspectives, 28(3):3–24, August
2014.
Ryan A. Decker, John Haltiwanger, Ron S. Jarmin, and Javier Miranda. Where has all the skewness
gone? the decline in high-growth (young) firms in the u.s. November 2015.

49

Avinash K. Dixit and Robert S. Pindyck. Investment under Uncertainty. Princeton University
Press, 1994.
Timothy Erickson, Colin Huan Jiang, and Toni Whited. Minimum distance estimation of the errorsin-variables model using linear cumulant equations. Journal of Econometrics, 183(2):211–221,
2014.
Steven Fazzari, R. Glenn Hubbard, and Bruce C. Petersen. Financing constraints and corporate
investment. September 1987.
Jan Fichtner, Eelke M. Heemskerk, and Javier Garcia-Bernardo. Hidden power of the big three?
passive index funds, re-concentration of corporate ownership, and new financial risk. 2016.
C. Fritz Foley, Jay C. Hartzell, Sheridan Titman, and Garry Twite. Why do firms hold so much
cash? a tax-based explanation. Journal of Financial Economics, 86(3):579–607, dec 2007.
Murray Z. Frank and Vidhan K. Goyal. Testing the pecking order theory of capital structure.
Journal of Financial Economics, 2003.
Jason Furman. Business investment in the united states: Facts, explanations, puzzles, and policies.
2015.
Simon Gilchrist and Egon Zakrajsek. Credit spreads and business cycle fluctuations. forthcoming
in American Economic Review, 2011.
Xavier Giroud and Holger M. Mueller. Does corporate governance matter in competitive industries?
Journal of Financial Economics, 95(3):312 – 331, 2010.
Xavier Giroud and Holger M. Mueller. Corporate governance, product market competition, and
equity prices. The Journal of Finance, 66(2):563–600, 2011.
Joao F. Gomes. Financing investment. American Economic Review, 91(5):1263–1285, December
2001.
Paul Gompers, Joy Ishii, and Andrew Metrick. Corporate governance and equity prices. The
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 118(1):107–156, 2003.
Germán Gutiérrez and Thomas Philippon. Competition, governance and investment. mimeo NYU,
2017.
Robert E. Hall. The stock market and capital accumulation. American Economic Review, 91(5):
1185–1202, December 2001.
Jarrad Harford, Sattar A. Mansi, and William F. Maxwell. Corporate governance and firm cash
holdings in the us. Journal of Financial Economics, 87(3):535 – 555, 2008.

50

Fumio Hayashi. Tobin’s marginal q and average q: A neoclassical interpretation. Econometrica, 50
(1):213–224, 1982.
Christopher A. Hennessy and Toni M. Whited. How costly is external financing? evidence from a
structural estimation. The Journal of Finance, 62(4):1705–1745, 2007.
Michael Jensen. Agency costs of free cash flow, corporate finance, and takeovers. American Economic
Review, 76(2):323–29, 1986.
Christine Jolls. Stock repurchases and incentive compensation. Mar 1998.
Callum Jones and Thomas Philippon. The secular stagnation of investment? 2016.
Boyan Jovanovic and Peter L. Rousseau. Extensive and intensive investment over the business cycle.
Journal of Political Economy, 122(4):863–908, aug 2014.
Steven N. Kaplan and Luigi Zingales. Do investment-cash flow sensitivities provide useful measures
of financing constraints? The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 112(1):169–215, 1997.
Anil K Kashyap, Owen A. Lamont, and Jeremy C. Stein. Credit conditions and the cyclical behavior
of inventories. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 109(3):565–592, 1994.
Morris M. Kleiner and Alan B. Krueger. Analyzing the Extent and Influence of Occupational
Licensing on the Labor Market. Journal of Labor Economics, 31(S1):S173 – S202, 2013.
William Lazonick. Profits without prosperity. Harvard Business Review, September 2014.
Dong Wook Lee, Hyun-Han Shin, and Rene M. Stulz. Why does capital no longer flow more to the
industries with the best growth opportunities? Fisher College of Business Working Paper, 2016
(15), September 2016.
Roger Martin. Yes, short-termism really is a problem. Harvard Business Review, October 2015.
Simon Mongey. Market structure and monetary non-neutrality. Working paper, 2016.
Nathalie Moyen. Investment cash flow sensitivities: Constrained versus unconstrained firms. The
Journal of Finance, 59(5):2061–2092, 2004.
Vasia Panousi and Dimitris Papanikolauo. Investment, idiosyncratic risk, and ownership. The
Journal of Finance, 67(3):1113–1148, 2012.
Ryan H. Peters and Lucian A. Taylor. Intangible capital and the investment-q relation. Journal of
Financial Economics, 2016. ISSN 0304-405X.
Robert S. Pindyck. Irreversible investment, capacity choice, and the value of the firm. The American
Economic Review, 78(5):969–985, 1988.

51

Raghuram G. Rajan and Luigi Zingales. Financial dependence and growth. American Economic
Review, 88:559–586, 1998.
Scott A. Richardson. Over-investment of free cash flow. Review of Accounting Studies, 11(2-3):
159–189, jun 2006.
Steven C. Salop and Daniel P. O’Brien. Competitive eﬀects of partial ownership: Financial interest
and corporate control. Antitrust Law Journal, 2000.
Cornelius Schmidt and Rudiger Fahlenbrach. Do exogenous changes in passive institutional ownership aﬀect corporate governance and firm value? Journal of Financial Economics, Forthcoming,
2016.
Jules H. van Binsbergen and Christian C. Opp. Real anomalies. Working paper, 2016.
Jeﬀrey Wurgler. On the economic consequences of index-linked investing. Challenges to Business
in the Twenty-First Century, 2011.

52

Appendix I: Industry Investment Data
As noted above, investment is available for 63 granular industry groupings from the BEA. These are
grouped into 47 categories (3 of which are omitted) to ensure all groupings have material investment
and better Compustat coverage. Industries are grouped to ensure measures of investment and
concentration are stable over time. In particular, we group industries to ensure each group has at
least ~10 firms, on average, from 1990 - 2015 and it contributes a material share of investment.
The groupings are summarized in Table 13, including the BEA industry code, the granular industry
name and the mapped industry group. We also include the dollar value and % of total capital as
of 2014. Table 14 shows the total (nominal) investment from 2000 to 2015 by grouping, along with
the Compustat coverage ratios defined as described in the text.

53

Table 13: Mapping of BEA industries to segments
BEA code

Industry

Mapped segment

Capital

% of

(2014)

total

721

Accommodation

Acc_accommodation

358.9

2.2%

722

Food services and drinking places

Acc_food

249.2

1.5%
1.2%

561

Administrative and support services

Adm_and_waste_mgmt

189.2

562

Waste management and remediation services

Adm_and_waste_mgmt

102.3

0.6%

110

Farms

Agriculture

567.7

3.5%

113

Forestry, fishing, and related activities

Agriculture

62.3

0.4%

713

Amusements, gambling, and recreation industries

Arts

163.7

1.0%

Performing arts, spectator sports, museums, and

Arts

159.9

1.0%

711

related activities
230

Construction

Construction

284.6

1.7%

334
335

Computer and electronic products
Electrical equipment, appliances, and

Dur_Computer
Dur_Electrical

506.3
73.5

3.1%
0.5%

333

Machinery

Dur_Machinery

234.4

1.4%

337

Furniture and related products

Dur_Furniture

22.8

0.1%

components

338

Miscellaneous manufacturing

Dur_Misc

115.1

0.7%

336

Motor vehicles, bodies and trailers, and parts

Dur_Transportation

383.7

2.4%

321

Wood products

Dur_Wood

42.6

0.3%

327

Nonmetallic mineral products

Dur_nonmetal

87.1

0.5%

331

Primary metals

Dur_prim_metal

165.5

1.0%

332

Fabricated metal products

Dur_fab_metal

175.3

1.1%

610
521

Educational services
Federal Reserve banks

Educational
Finance

557.7
Omitted

3.4%

522

Credit intermediation and related activities

Finance

Omitted

523

Securities, commodity contracts, and investments

Finance

Omitted

524

Insurance carriers and related activities

Finance

Omitted

525

Funds, trusts, and other financial vehicles

Finance

Omitted

622

Hospitals

Health_hospitals

916.1

5.6%

623

Nursing and residential care facilities

Health_hospitals

94.6

0.6%

54

Table 14: Investment and coverage, by industry (cont’d)
BEA code

Industry

Mapped segment

Capital
(2014)

% of
total

621

Ambulatory health care services

Health_other

352

2.2%

624

Social assistance

Health_other

65.4

0.4%

514
512

Information and data processing services
Motion picture and sound recording industries

Inf_data
Inf_motion

168.3
287.8

1.0%
1.8%

511

Publishing industries (includes software)

Inf_publish

196.5

1.2%

513

Broadcasting and telecommunications

Inf_telecom

1352.5

8.3%

550

Management of companies and enterprises

Mgmt

401.4

2.5%

212

Mining, except oil and gas

Min_exOil

186.5

1.1%

211

Oil and gas extraction

Min_Oil_and_gas

1475.2

9.1%

213

Support activities for mining

Min_support

142

0.9%

325

Chemical products

Nondur_chemical

900.1

5.5%

311

Food and beverage and tobacco products

Nondur_food

336.4

2.1%

313

Textile mills and textile product mills

Nondur_textile

40.4

0.2%

315
322

Apparel and leather and allied products
Paper products

Nondur_apparel
Nondur_paper

17.5
120.7

0.1%
0.7%

323

Printing and related support activities

Nondur_printing

49.4

0.3%

326

Plastics and rubber products

Nondur_plastic

104.2

0.6%

324

Petroleum and coal products

Nondur_petroleum

221

1.4%

810

Other services, except government

Other_ex_gov

619.5

3.8%

541

Legal services

Prof_serv

42.6

0.3%

541

Computer systems design and related services

Prof_serv

74.3

0.5%

541

Miscellaneous professional, scientific, and

Prof_serv

477.6

2.9%

531

Real estate

Real Estate

Omitted

532

Rental and leasing services and lessors of
intangible assets

Real Estate

Omitted

44R

Retail trade

Retail_trade

1236.4

7.6%

481

Air transportation

Transp_air

249.1

1.5%

484

Truck transportation

Transp_ground

143.6

0.9%

485

Transit and ground passenger transportation

Transp_other

44.8

0.3%

487

Other transportation and support activities

Transp_other

132.6

0.8%

493

Warehousing and storage

Transp_other

46

0.3%

486

Pipeline transportation

Transp_pipeline

227.3

1.4%

482

Railroad transportation

Transp_rail

405.7

2.5%

483

Water transportation

Transp_other

45.6

0.3%

220
420

Omitted
Wholesale trade

Utilities
Wholesale_trade

Omitted
590.1

3.6%

technical services

55

Table 14: Investment and coverage, by industry
Rank

Industry

Total
investment

% of total

(’00- ’15; USD)

PPE

CAPX

Coverage

Coverage

(’00-’15)

(’00-’15)

32%

56%

1

Inf_telecom

$462.9

12%

2
3

Health_hospitals

$411.3

11%

4%

5%

Nondur_chemical

$358.3

9%

34%

39%

4

Prof_serv

$259.2

7%

7%

9%

5

Retail_trade

$225.1

6%

15%

34%

6

Min_Oil_and_gas

$201.6

5%

36%

93%

7

Educational

$174.4

5%

1%

2%

8

Inf_data

$160.2

4%

22%

23%

9

Wholesale_trade

$157.6

4%

7%

9%

10

Agriculture

$145.6

4%

2%

2%

11

Health_other

$120.2

3%

2%

3%
5%

12

Adm_and_waste_mgmt

$101.1

3%

3%

13

Other_ex_gov

$99.7

3%

1%

1%

14

Inf_motion

$98.5

3%

6%

7%

15

Transp_pipeline

$96.8

3%

15%

20%

16

Arts

$90.9

2%

6%

7%

17

Dur_Computer

$84.2

2%

30%

40%

18

Nondur_Petro

$81.4

2%

100%

100%

19

Acc_accomodation

$80.7

2%

20%

31%

20

Construction

$66.0

2%

2%

4%

21

Nondur_Food

$62.0

2%

39%

63%

22

Transp_truck

$61.9

2%

9%

11%

23

Min_support

$55.0

1%

37%

65%

24

Inf_publish

$54.6

1%

12%

18%

25

Dur_Transp

$51.3

1%

51%

57%

26

Min_exOil

$49.6

1%

51%

63%

27

Acc_food

$26.8

1%

23%

42%

28

Dur_Misc

$23.5

1%

14%

23%

29

Transp_rail

$23.3

1%

29%

67%

30

Dur_Machinery

$22.9

1%

25%

49%

31

Transp_air

$21.9

1%

28%

48%

32

Dur_fab_metal

$14.5

0%

11%

19%

33

Nondur_plastic

$8.3

0%

14%

17%

34

Dur_nonmetal

$5.4

0%

14%

20%

35

Dur_Furniture

($0.3)

0%

17%

27%

36

Dur_Wood

($0.9)

0%

39%

29%

37

Transp_other

($2.2)

0%

20%

44%

38

Nondur_Apparel

($7.3)

0%

52%

100%

39

Nondur_Printing

($7.7)

0%

8%

13%

40

Dur_Electrical

($10.3)

0%

23%

43%

41

Dur_prim_metal

($14.1)

0%

18%

39%

42

Nondur_Textile

($20.5)

-1%

8%

21%

43

Nondur_Paper

($23.8)

-1%

53%

63%

56

Appendix II: Detailed Regression Results
This appendix contains detailed regression results. In particular, it includes the following Tables:
1. Detailed regression results
(a) Table 15: Aggregate Moving Average Regressions
(b) Table 16: Industry regressions: all explanations except competition
(c) Table 17: Industry regressions: competition
(d) Table 18: Firm regressions: all explanations except governance and short-termism
(e) Table 19: Firm regressions: governance and short-termism
2. Post-2000 regression results
(a) Table 20: Post-2000 Industry regressions: all explanations except competition
(b) Table 21: Post-2000 Industry regressions: competition
(c) Table 22: Post-2000 Firm regressions: all explanations except governance and short-termism
(d) Table 23: Post-2000 Firm regressions: governance and short-termism

57

Table 15: Aggregate Moving Average Regressions
Table shows the results of aggregate moving average regressions of Net I/K on Q, measures of competition and quasi-indexer institutional ownership over the periods specified.
As shown, the coeﬃcients remain stable and often significant even when accounting for serial correlation in the time series. Annual data. T-stats in brackets. + p<0.10, *
p<0.05, ** p<.01.

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

Net I/K
Mean Stock Q (t-1)

≥1980

≥1980

≥1980

≥1990

≥1990

≥1990

0.008**

0.004+

0.007+

0.009*

0.007+

0.008*

[1.70]

[1.87]

[2.31]

[1.78]

[2.19]

-0.288*

-0.234

-0.282+

-0.241

[-1.34]

[-1.85]

[-1.35]

[3.01]
Median Sales Herfindahl(t-1)†

58

[-2.39]
Mean % QIX own (t-1)
MA (t-1)
MA (t-2)

-0.047+

-0.031

[-1.83]

[-0.81]

1.103

1.045**

0.771**

1.011**

0.813**

0.727*

[0.00]

[3.79]

[2.95]

[3.68]

[3.24]

[2.55]

1

0.614*

0.463+

1.082*

0.651*

0.7

[0.00]

[2.40]

[1.71]

[2.08]

[2.07]

[1.59]

Observations

36

36

33

26

26

25

Log-likelihood

144.284

148.923

139.915

107.735

111.875

108.149

Notes: Annual data. T-stats in brackets. + p<0.10, * p<0.05, ** p<.01. Investment from the US Flow of Funds; Q, Herfindahl and Ownership across all US incorporated firms
in Compustat.
† Alternate measures of competition including changes in number of firms, concentration, firm entry and firm exit are also often significant.

Table 16: Industry regressions: all explanations except competition
Table shows the results of industry errors-in-variables panel regressions of Net I/K over the periods specified. All regressions include our ‘core’ explanations: Q, modified
herfindahl and quasi-indexer ownership, as well as age and size controls (mean log-age and mean log-size), and time fixed eﬀects. The dependent variable is de-meaned within
each industry group. We add additional explanatory variables one by one in columns 3-7 and simultaneously (when significant and properly signed) in column 8. Annual data.
T-stats in brackets. + p<0.10, * p<0.05, ** p<.01.

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

≥1980

≥1990

≥2000

≥2000

≥2000

≥1990

≥1990

≥1990

Median Stock Q (t-1)

0.101**

0.102**

0.075**

0.077**

0.070**

0.098**

0.102**

0.099**

[4.942]

[6.180]

[7.501]

[7.031]

[7.370]

[6.579]

[6.389]

[7.117]

Mean % QIX own (t-1)†

-0.108*

-0.118*

-0.089**

-0.067+

-0.162**

-0.131**

-0.122*

-0.135**

[-2.272]

[-2.417]

[-2.657]

[-1.889]

[-4.755]

[-2.935]

[-2.440]

[-3.005]

Mod-Herfindahl (t-1)

-0.056**

-0.067*

-0.059+

-0.060+

-0.042+

-0.066*

-0.062*

-0.061*

[-2.880]

[-2.491]

[-1.893]
0.001

[-1.829]

[-1.718]

[-2.463]

[-2.400]

[-2.382]

Net I/K

Mean ext fin dep (’96-’00)

59

[0.175]
Mean % bank dep (’96-’00)

0.025
[0.809]

% rated AA to AAA (’96-’00)

-0.355**
[-3.172]

Mean (Intan ex GW)/at (t-1)

-0.359**

-0.366**

[-3.465]

[-3.588]

Mean % foreign prof (t-1)‡

-0.049*

-0.051*

[-2.068]

[-2.325]

Observations

1,398

1,063

630

630

630

1,063

1,063

1,063

Age and size controls

YES

YES

YES

YES

YES

YES

YES

YES

Year FE

YES

YES

YES

YES

YES

YES

YES

YES

Industry de-meaned

YES

YES

YES

YES

YES

YES

YES

YES

0.33

0.35

0.32

0.32

0.33

0.37

0.35

0.38

ρ

2

† Quasi-indexer ownership measured as the change from average 1996-2000 level in columns 3, 4 and 5
‡ Foreign profits set to zero if missing

Table 17: Industry regressions: competition
Table shows the results of industry errors-in-variables panel regressions of Net I/K over the periods specified. All regressions include Q, quasi-indexer ownership, age and size
controls, and alternate measures of competition. Regression includes time fixed eﬀects and the dependent variable is de-meaned within each industry group. Herfindahl’s, Lerner
index and Census-based concentration remain significant once correcting for measurement error in Q. Annual data. T-stats in brackets. + p<0.10, * p<0.05, ** p<.01.

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

≥1990

≥1990

≥1990

≥1990

0.114**

0.102**

0.100**

[5.462]

[6.180]

[5.784]

-0.076

-0.118*

-0.114*

[-1.391]

[-2.417]

[-2.391]

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

(9)

≥1990

≥1990

≥1990

≥1990

≥2000

0.110**

0.115**

0.112**

0.081

-0.041

0.080**

[11.559]

[7.104]

[6.386]

[1.480]

[-0.510]

[4.909]

-0.122*

-0.067

-0.074

-0.181**

-0.07

-0.013

[-2.280]

[-1.145]

[-1.289]

[-2.994]

[-1.562]

[-0.336]

Net I/K
Mean Stock Q (t-1)
Mean % QIX own (t-1)
3Y∆Log#of Firms (t-1)

-0.007
[-0.551]

Mod-Herfindahl (CP) (t-1)

-0.067*
[-2.491]

Sales Herfindahl (CP) (t-1)

-0.033+

CO Herf adjustment (t-1)

-0.116**

[-1.697]

60

[-3.015]
Lerner Index (t-1)

-0.146**
[-3.054]

% sales Top 8 (CP) (t-1)

0.021
[0.840]

% MV Top 8 (CP) (t-1)

0.007
[0.330]

% sales in Top 20 (Census) (t-1)‡

-0.001*
[-2.089]

Log of Reg index (t-1)

0.001
[0.271]

% Licensed (’08)

0.005
[0.421]

Observations

1,063

1,063

1,063

1,063

1,063

1,063

530

735

643

Age and Size Controls

YES

YES

YES

YES

YES

YES

YES

YES

YES

Year FE

YES

YES

YES

YES

YES

YES

YES

YES

YES

Industry de-meaned

YES

YES

YES

YES

YES

YES

YES

YES

YES

0.348

0.35

0.336

0.34

0.351

0.351

0.333

0.188

0.308

ρ

2

‡ When a given BEA category includes more than one NAICS Level 3 code, we use the simple average of Census-based concentrations across all relevant NAICS Level 3
categories. We assume concentration remains flat at the last reported level between census (e.g., from 1997 to 2002).

Table 18: Firm regressions: all explanations except governance and short-termism
Table shows the results of firm-level errors-in-variables panel regressions of Net CAPX/PPE over the periods specified. All regressions include our ‘core’ firm-level explanations:
Q, measures of competition and quasi-indexer ownership, as well as firm log-age and log-size. We add additional explanatory variables individually in columns 1-7. Annual
data. T-stats in brackets. + p<0.10, * p<0.05, ** p<.01.

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

Net CAPX/PPE
≥1990

≥2000

≥2000

≥2000

≥1990

≥1990

≥1990

Stock Q (t-1)

0.165**

0.075**

0.188**

0.159**

0.170**

0.165**

0.167**

[24.868]

[8.912]

[27.752]

[18.854]

[19.612]

[24.871]

[20.260]

% QIX own MA2†

-0.126**

0.02

-0.034

-0.024

-0.140**

-0.125**

-0.125**

[-7.938]

[0.733]

[-1.308]

[-0.925]

[-8.225]

[-7.867]

[-7.135]

-0.145**

-0.171**

-0.259**

-0.225**

-0.140**

-0.144**

0.005

[-7.160]

[-4.778]

[-7.222]

[-6.680]

[-6.294]

[-7.132]

[0.240]

Mod-Herfindahl (t-1)
Ext fin dep (’96-’00)

0.007+
[1.837]

61

Bank dep (’00)

0.037**
[3.339]

AA to AAA rating (’00)

-0.106**
[-3.744]

(Intan ex GW)/at (t-1)

0.103**
[2.972]

% foreign prof (t-1)

-0.008+
[-1.719]

Log of Reg index (t-1)

-0.025**
[-10.560]

Observations

59,310

11,608

26,182

24,070

48,560

59,308

47,253

Age and Size Controls

YES

YES

YES

YES

YES

YES

YES

Year FE

YES

YES

YES

YES

YES

YES

YES

Firm de-meaned

YES

YES

YES

YES

YES

YES

YES

0.188

0.12

0.364

0.256

0.179

0.188

0.185

ρ

2

† Quasi-indexer ownership measured as the change from average 1996-2000 level in columns 2, 3 and 4

Table 19: Firm regressions: governance and short-termism
Table shows the results of firm-level errors-in-variables panel regressions of Net CAPX/PPE over the periods specified. Regressions include alternate measures of ownership as
well as firm-level Q and firm demographics. Annual data. T-stats in brackets. + p<0.10, * p<0.05, ** p<.01.

(1)

(2)

≥1990

≥1990

(3)

(4)

Net CAPX/PPE
Stock Q (t-1)

≥1990

≥1990

0.165**

0.166**

0.167**

0.165**

[24.868]

[24.418]

[22.813]

[24.788]

Mod-Herfindahl (t-1)

-0.145**

-0.149**

-0.138**

-0.130**

[-7.160]
-0.126**

[-7.278]

[-6.759]

[-6.488]

% QIX own MA2

62

[-7.938]
% Inst own MA2

-0.122**
[-9.309]

% TRA own MA2

-0.328**
[-9.195]

% DED own MA2

-0.059*
[-2.252]

Observations

59,310

59,310

59,310

59,310

Age and Size Controls

YES

YES

YES

YES

Year FE

YES

YES

YES

YES

Firm de-meaned

YES

YES

YES

YES

0.188

0.185

0.181

0.187

ρ

2

Table 20: Post-2000 Industry regressions: all explanations except competition
Table shows the results of industry errors-in-variables panel regressions of Net I/K over the periods specified. All regressions include our ‘core’ explanations: Q, modified
herfindahl and quasi-indexer ownership, as well as age and size controls (mean log-age and mean log-size), and time fixed eﬀects. The dependent variable is de-meaned within
each industry group. We add additional explanatory variables one by one in columns 2-6 and simultaneously (when significant and properly signed) in column 7. Annual data.
T-stats in brackets. + p<0.10, * p<0.05, ** p<.01.

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

≥2000

≥2000

≥2000

≥2000

≥2000

≥2000

≥2000

0.076**

0.075**

0.077**

0.070**

0.073**

0.076**

0.073**

Net I/K
Median Stock Q (t-1)
Mean % QIX own (t-1)†
Mod-Herfindahl (t-1)

[7.551]

[7.501]

[7.031]

[7.370]

[7.158]

[7.767]

[7.305]

-0.049

-0.089**

-0.067+

-0.162**

-0.058+

-0.052

-0.060+
[-1.715]

[-1.321]

[-2.657]

[-1.889]

[-4.755]

[-1.673]

[-1.360]

-0.058*

-0.059+

-0.060+

-0.042+

-0.056*

-0.056*

-0.055*

[-2.083]

[-1.893]
0.001

[-1.829]

[-1.718]

[-2.055]

[-2.058]

[-2.030]

Mean ext fin dep (’96-’00)

63

[0.175]
Mean % bank dep (’96-’00)

0.025
[0.809]

% rated AA to AAA (’96-’00)

-0.355**
[-3.172]

Mean (Intan ex GW)/at (t-1)

-0.226**

-0.227**

[-2.936]

[-2.996]

Mean % foreign prof (t-1)‡

-0.016

-0.016

[-0.880]

[-0.933]

Observations

643

630

630

630

643

643

643

Mean age and size controls

YES

YES

YES

YES

YES

YES

YES

Year FE

YES

YES

YES

YES

YES

YES

YES

Industry de-meaned

YES

YES

YES

YES

YES

YES

YES

0.305

0.323

0.322

0.33

0.326

0.302

0.324

ρ

2

† Quasi-indexer ownership measured as the change from average 1996-2000 level in columns 2, 3 and 4
‡ Foreign profits set to zero if missing

Table 21: Post-2000 Industry regressions: competition
Table shows the results of industry errors-in-variables panel regressions of Net I/K over the periods specified. All regressions include Q, quasi-indexer ownership, age and size
controls, and alternate measures of competition. Regression includes time fixed eﬀects and the dependent variable is de-meaned within each industry group. Herfindahl’s, Lerner
index and Census-based concentration remain significant once correcting for measurement error in Q. Annual data. T-stats in brackets. + p<0.10, * p<0.05, ** p<.01.

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

≥2000

≥2000

≥2000

≥2000

0.083**

0.076**

0.073**

[3.660]

[7.551]

[6.461]

-0.007

-0.049

[-0.165]

[-1.321]

(5)

(6)

(8)

(9)

(10)

≥2000

≥2000

≥2000

≥2000

≥2000

0.076**

0.078**

0.079**

0.062

0.166

0.080**

[4.902]

[4.864]

[5.108]

[1.380]

[0.590]

[4.909]

-0.043

-0.038

0.001

-0.005

-0.116*

-0.006

-0.013

[-1.144]

[-0.970]

[0.013]

[-0.115]

[-2.376]

[-0.051]

[-0.336]

Net I/K
Mean Stock Q (t-1)
Mean % QIX own (t-1)
3Y∆Log#of Firms (t-1)

0.004
[0.274]

Mod-Herfindahl (CP) (t-1)

-0.058*
[-2.083]

Sales Herfindahl (CP) (t-1)

-0.033
[-1.586]

CO Herf adjustment (t-1)

-0.092**

64

[-2.771]
Lerner Index (t-1)

-0.082*
[-2.538]

% sales Top 8 (CP) (t-1)

0.022
[1.234]

% MV Top 8 (CP) (t-1)

0.011
[0.657]

% sales in Top 20 (Census) (t-1)‡

-0.000+
[-1.802]

Log of Reg index (t-1)

-0.01
[-0.618]

% Licensed (’08)

0.005
[0.421]

Observations

643

643

643

643

643

643

496

446

643

Age and Size Controls

YES

YES

YES

YES

YES

YES

YES

YES

YES

Year FE

YES

YES

YES

YES

YES

YES

YES

YES

YES

Industry de-meaned

YES

YES

YES

YES

YES

YES

YES

YES

YES

0.318

0.305

0.294

0.292

0.3

0.305

0.193

0.368

0.308

ρ

2

‡ When a given BEA category includes more than one NAICS Level 3 code, we use the simple average of Census-based concentrations across all relevant NAICS Level 3
categories. We assume concentration remains flat at the last reported level between census (e.g., from 1997 to 2002).

Table 22: Post-2000 Firm regressions: all explanations except governance and short-termism
Table shows the results of firm-level errors-in-variables panel regressions of Net CAPX/PPE over the periods specified. All regressions include our ‘core’ firm-level explanations:
Q, measures of competition and QIX ownership, as well as firm log-age and log-size. We add additional explanatory variables individually in columns 2-7. Annual data. T-stats
in brackets. + p<0.10, * p<0.05, ** p<.01.

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

Net CAPX/PPE
≥2000

≥2000

≥2000

≥2000

≥2000

≥2000

≥2000

Stock Q (t-1)

0.158**

0.075**

0.188**

0.159**

0.157**

0.158**

0.159**

[25.734]

[8.912]

[27.752]

[18.854]

[22.321]

[25.796]

[22.763]

% QIX own MA2†

-0.087**

0.02

-0.034

-0.024

-0.091**

-0.086**

-0.097**

[-4.640]

[0.733]

[-1.308]

[-0.925]

[-4.794]

[-4.577]

[-4.766]

-0.215**

-0.171**

-0.259**

-0.225**

-0.216**

-0.213**

-0.070*

[-7.548]

[-4.778]

[-7.222]

[-6.680]

[-7.296]

[-7.502]

[-2.176]

Mod-Herfindahl (t-1)
Ext fin dep (’96-’00)

0.007+
[1.837]

65

Bank dep (’00)

0.037**
[3.339]

AA to AAA rating (’00)

-0.106**
[-3.744]

(Intan ex GW)/at (t-1)

0.031
[0.829]

% foreign prof (t-1)

-0.011*
[-2.218]

Log of Reg index (t-1)

-0.028**
[-10.903]

Observations

33,801

11,608

26,182

24,070

30,665

33,800

26,829

Age and Size Controls

YES

YES

YES

YES

YES

YES

YES

Year FE

YES

YES

YES

YES

YES

YES

YES

Firm de-meaned

YES

YES

YES

YES

YES

YES

YES

0.259

0.12

0.364

0.256

0.247

0.259

0.266

ρ

2

† QIX ownership measured as the change from average 1996-2000 level in columns 2, 3 and 4

Table 23: Post-2000 Firm regressions: governance and short-termism
Table shows the results of firm-level errors-in-variables panel regressions of Net CAPX/PPE over the periods specified. Regressions include alternate measures of governance
and short-termism as well as firm-level Q and firm demographics. Annual data. T-stats in brackets. + p<0.10, * p<0.05, ** p<.01.

(1)

(2)

≥2000

≥2000

(3)

(4)

Net CAPX/PPE
Stock Q (t-1)

≥2000

≥2000

0.158**

0.158**

0.155**

0.157**

[25.734]

[25.249]

[24.262]

[25.556]

Mod-Herfindahl (t-1)

-0.215**

-0.210**

-0.197**

-0.199**

[-7.548]
-0.087**

[-7.347]

[-6.977]

[-7.071]

% QIX own MA2

66

[-4.640]
% Inst own MA2

-0.050**
[-3.422]

% TRA own MA2

-0.002
[-0.047]

% DED own MA2

-0.058+
[-1.868]

Observations

33,801

33,801

33,801

33,801

Age and Size Controls

YES

YES

YES

YES

Year FE

YES

YES

YES

YES

Firm de-meaned

YES

YES

YES

YES

0.259

0.257

0.256

0.258

ρ

2

