NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

PURCHASING POWER DISPARITY BEFORE 1914
Peter H. Lindert
Working Paper 22896
http://www.nber.org/papers/w22896

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2016

For comments on earlier versions, and for help with data, the author thanks Robert Allen, Leticia
Arroyo Abad, John Devereux, Kyoji Fukao, Alfonso Herranz Loncán, Philip T. Hoffman, Branko
Milanovic, Chiaki Moriguchi, Leandro Prados de la Escosura, Osamu Saito, Masanori
Takashima, Jeffrey G. Williamson, and seminar participants at Hitotsubashi University and the
University of Tampere. Excel files showing the underlying estimation process are available in the
relevant country folders in the “Main Data Sets” folder at http://gpih.ucdavis.edu. Earlier datagathering stages of this research were funded by the US National Science Foundation, as detailed
on the gpih website. An earlier version of this working paper appeared as Hitotsubashi Institute
for Advanced Study Discussion Paper HIAS-E-35 (October 2016). The views expressed herein
are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2016 by Peter H. Lindert. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.

Purchasing Power Disparity before 1914
Peter H. Lindert
NBER Working Paper No. 22896
December 2016
JEL No. I31,N0,N30
ABSTRACT
Economic historians’ Divergence debates since 2000 have asked a different question from
that asked by Angus Maddison. The issue has become “when did countries’
contemporaneous purchasing powers diverge?”, not “when did countries’ productivity grow
at different rates?” The two questions have different answers, especially before 1914. Using
pre-1914 prices to compare real purchasing powers on six continents, this article sketches
some historical geography of the departures from the conventional Maddison estimates.
One underlying reason for the divergence between projections back from 1990 and direct
price comparisons from long ago is that before the great 1870-1914 wave of trade
globalization, consumer staples were not traded over great distances, and regions specialized
in narrow luxury trade. Inter-continental price ratios for subsistence goods thus varied more
widely than since 1914.
The new measures open up a new economic history of international differences in
purchasing power before 1914. Northwest Europe was further ahead of Asian countries than
earlier measures have shown. The discrepancy stems from a Gerschenkron effect, magnified
before 1914 by Engel effects as well as by Balassa-Samuelson. Yet Northwest Europe was
behind America and Australia across the nineteenth century, consistent with the same
accounting framework but not with Maddison’s estimates.

Peter H. Lindert
Department of Economics
University of California, Davis
Davis, CA 95616
and NBER
phlindert@ucdavis.edu

I. What do we want to compare?

To understand how some countries became richer than others, we want to know

how and when their relative purchasing power differed in the past. To trace out how we
got to today’s gaps between rich and poor, say between Britain and Asia, requires

answering one of these two similar-looking questions for any past date, say 1700:
(1) How did the purchasing power of the average British resident compare with

that of the average Asian back in 1700, given what we know about their average
purchasing powers today, and about their GDP growth rates since 1700?

(2) How did the purchasing power of the average British resident compare with

that of the average Asian back in 1700, given their nominal (current-price) GDPs and the
prices they paid back in 1700?

At first glance, the two questions might seem to be the same, and might seem have a

common answer. After all, the questions read exactly the same, until we read about what
data are given. Wouldn’t we get the same answer either way, if we had full data?

The two questions would indeed have such equivalent answers if we lived in a

world where each country produced only one good with only one human input. Suppose
that every country’s population produced only one good called “GDP thing,” which could
be used for anything. That is, suppose that this GDP thing could be eaten, shaped into a
factory, or made to perform a Bach cantata. The difference in the two countries’ perperson purchasing power would be the same thing as the difference in their average

human productivity in any year. We can compare their average abilities to buy the GDP
thing back in 1700, either by finding the ratio of their quantities per person today, and

knowing how fast the two average quantities have grown since 1700, or by going to the
archives and finding its values and prices in the two places back in 1700.

Yet we live in a world of multiple products, and the “index number problem” is

massive. For the real world of multiple products and varying budget shares, the different
kinds of comparisons would be algebraically inconsistent, even if we had perfect data.

1

Using today’s weights for different products is not the same as using weights that reflect
their importance back in 1700. Indeed, the products themselves come and go. A

comparison of average purchasing powers in 1700 using the prices and quantities of

oatmeal, mutton, lamp oil, and carts in 1700 will give a different answer from a calculation
that uses national growth rates and today’s prices of Cheerios, Big Macs, electric lighting,
and cars.

Since they will give different answers, these two approaches are not the same, and

hard choices have to be made. At the close of the twentieth century, the first approach

was preferred, because we had better numbers for comparing people’s purchasing power
between, say, Britain and Asia in 1990, and we had pretty good ideas of national growth
rates going back in time. 1 Using this indirect “projection” approach, the late Angus

Maddison gave us the best available history of every country’s real incomes, or purchasing
power. True, the national growth estimates only went back into the mid- or late

nineteenth century, so for any earlier time Maddison had to use rougher guesstimates

about growth rates and about when societies first rose above bare subsistence. While
some scholars thought Asia was as rich as Britain in 1700 or so, Maddison’s own

projections convinced him that Britain and Northwest Europe had been far ahead for
many centuries. His estimates still dominate our view of past income levels. 2

Starting around the year 2000, some economic historians chose the second path,

the one that used only numbers from history itself. Going directly to historical data,

without projections back from today’s international comparisons, has the drawback that
the needed data are still scarce and questionable. Yet it has the obvious virtue of being
true to the historical context. It also simplifies by giving us just one set of tough index
number decisions (say, British conditions versus Asian conditions in 1700) instead of

three sets of them (choosing index numbers for British growth in a changing world, for
That the first approach, the back-projection approach, dominated at the close of the
twentieth century does not mean that the second approach had never been applied. For a
successful undertaking of the task of directly comparing per-capita purchasing powers for
Britain and France 1781-1913, see Patrick O’Brien and Çağlar Keyder (1978, pp. 34-74).
2 See Maddison 1995, 2001, 2010; and Maddison Project 2013. For an update of his
historical national accounts of many countries, 1870-present, see the Groningen site
http://www.rug.nl/ggdc/historicaldevelopment/na/.
1

2

Asian growth in a changing world, and for British conditions versus Asian conditions

today). The direct historical path also benefits from the fact that the electronic revolution
is improving our quantitative view of deeper history faster than our view of alreadyquantified recent history. 3

Using the second approach, the direct or current-price approach, these scholars

have opened up a whole new debate about “the Great Divergence” of purchasing power
between Europe and Asia, and some “Little Divergences” of purchasing power within

Europe and its overseas extensions. Were the leaders in the nineteenth century also the

leaders in the sixteenth century or earlier? And when did American catch up to Britain?
The leaders here were Kenneth Pomeranz on China versus Europe, Robert Allen and his

co-authors on real wage rates in five continents, and Marianne Ward and John Devereux
on America versus Britain in the nineteenth century. 4

This paper follows the second path, preferring comparisons that use data only from

the historical contexts shared by the comparison countries. It generalizes and globalizes
the recent literature, going beyond China versus Europe or America versus Britain, and

judging overall national purchasing powers instead of real wage rates. I offer three kinds
of tentative conclusions:

• The direct comparisons, the ones using only historical data, yield international
contrasts that are often very different from those that Angus Maddison saw
through the lens of long-run back projection.

• The revisions reveal some rough patterns. If the direct comparisons are correct,
Maddison underestimated Eurasian inequalities. Before 1914, Asia was even

further behind Britain in average purchasing power. On the other hand, rich settler
countries like America and Australia were even richer, relative to Britain, than
Maddison and others thought.

For the growing (and downloadable) quantitative global history of incomes, prices, and
wage rates, see the internet sites of the Global Price and Income History Group
(gpih.ucdavis.edu), the International Institute of Social History (iisg.nl/hpw), and the
Maddison Project site at the University of Groningen (Bolt and van Zanden 2013).
4 See Pomeranz (2000, 2005, 2011), Allen (2001, 2005, 2007, 2013), Allen et al. (2011,
2012), Ward and Devereux (2003, 2004, 2006, 2016), and for Latin America versus
Europe, Arroyo Abad, Davies, and van Zanden (2012).
3

3

• The discrepancies between the new direct historical comparisons and Maddison’s
back-projections seem to relate to the greater share of non-tradables in the world
economy before 1870, to the Balassa-Samuelson effect on relative purchasing
powers, and to a Gerschenkron effect inherent in international comparisons
anchored in a postwar price base.

The rest of this paper travels through three stages to reach to these concluding
suggestions. First, Sections II and III take a tour of some benchmark historical

comparisons on six continents, using some available benchmarks on nominal incomes per

capita and the prices of staple goods to generate measures of subsistence (or “barebones”)
purchasing power per capita for various countries relative to Britain. Each of these ratios,
of the form (other country / Britain), is compared with the corresponding ratio from the

Maddison estimates, in search of discrepancies. Section IV notes a striking pattern in the
relative costs of subsistence goods before and after 1870, and links this pattern to the

Balassa-Samuelson effect, using the fact that subsistence goods were non-tradable and had
a large budget share.

The second stage confronts the tension between the breadth of the GDP per capita

numerator and the narrowness of the “barebones” price denominator of each of our ratios
for deriving real purchasing power: Shouldn’t one divide nominal GDP by a GDP deflator
that covers the whole economy? Having internationally comparable prices only for the

most common staple goods would seem to be a weakness. Section V of the paper turns this
potential weakness of the purchasing-power ratio into a strength. True, other goods –

luxury consumer goods and capital goods in particular – are harder to compare across

countries or eras because these goods are so heterogeneous and changing in quality. Yet I
present evidence suggesting that the price of such luxury and capital goods, relative to

staples, was lower in Northwest Europe than anywhere else in the world between 1500
and 1914.

The final stage interprets this new evidence in Section VI. The departures from

Maddison’s estimates are tentatively explained, leading to Section VII’s menu of take-

aways for revising our history of international inequalities.

4

II. A disturbing initial result: America versus Britain

Although economic historians have heavily used Angus Maddison’s pioneering

estimates, some have recognized that his estimates could give misleading impressions

about the comparisons of real incomes in the past. Maddison himself repeated general

warnings about his numbers, and invited revisions based on better evidence. The current
Maddison Project aims to add such revisions, as better evidence comes available. 5 While

many have noted the general possibility that Maddison’s international comparisons might

be misleading, only a few have stepped forward to offer specific alternative measures. For
the world as a whole back to 1820, Leandro Prados de la Escosura (2000) offered a

plausible compendium of alternative conjectures of GDP per capita for high-income

countries back to 1820, based on statistical regressions capturing patterns from 19501990 in the relationship of economic structure to GDP per capita in the International

Comparisons Project (Penn World Tables). Prados’s plausible conjectures, like those of

Maddison, call out for confirmation or contradiction based in deeper evidence on as many
bilateral comparisons as possible. 6 The two bilateral comparisons that have attracted the
most attention are America versus Britain and China versus Northwest Europe. The

American-British comparison, unlike that between China and Northwest Europe, offers a
disturbingly sharp challenge to Maddison’s view of relative real incomes.

The new American-British direct (current-price) comparisons depart dramatically

from Maddison’s projections of the ratio of American to British purchasing power since
1700. The conventional wisdom quantified by Angus Maddison is that British colonial
America was far behind the mother country in average living standards, and that the

independent United States continued to lag behind Great Britain in incomes until around
1900. So say the Maddison Project estimates expressed as an American / British ratio in
Figure 1. Indeed, the current Maddison Project estimates for 1720 imply that per capita

Maddison (1995), Maddison (2001, p. 44), Bolt and Van Zanden (2014, p. 628). For upto-date online revisions, consult http://www.ggdc.net/maddison/maddisonproject/data.htm and Bolt and Van Zanden (2014).
6 Prados (2016) has now underlined his critique of the Maddison procedure with
calculations of the biases it introduces in the case of Spanish history.
5

5

incomes in the British mainland colonies of North America were only 53 percent of those
of Great Britain, and still only 79 percent of British average incomes 150 years later.

Such conjectural contrasts have been challenged. Even without seeing alternative

numbers, one may ask how it could be that so many English kept migrating to America,

where the average incomes were allegedly so much lower, even among whites alone. That

is mathematically feasible, of course, either if migrants kept repeating the same economic
mistake, or if America attracted only the dregs of British society for generations. Still, the
idea is at best counter-intuitive. Another challenge came from the American-British

contrasts reported by Prados (2000), who implied that the United States had already

matched Britain in average income as of 1820, the earliest date to which he applied his

regression-based technique. Meanwhile, Marianne Ward and John Devereux (2003, 2004,
2006), compared nominal incomes and prices contemporaneously for the United States
and Britain in the nineteenth century. They found an even greater American advantage

over Britain. 7 Several other scholars, including Robert Allen, have begun to make direct

international comparisons between workers’ real purchasing powers. Where these

studies included North America, they similarly found that real wages in the thirteen

counties were near that of London in 1725-1749, and well above the London real wage
later in the eighteenth century (Allen et al. 2012).

Jeffrey Williamson and I have now compared American and British purchasing

powers per capita, producing new estimates for the entire period 1650-1870 (Lindert and
Williamson, 2016, Chapters 2-6 and Appendices A-G). These independent estimates of
nominal national income for America, anchored in the benchmarks 1774, 1800, 1850,

1860, and 1870, are derived from the income side of the national accounts. We estimate

that the nominal national income of the thirteen mainland colonies in 1774, on the eve of

their rebellion, was about 30 percent higher than the guesses made by other scholars. Our
nominal income figures are similarly above those of earlier scholars for 1850-1870,

though our 1800 benchmark produced little disagreement with past guesses. For the

nominal income of Great Britain, we have used the new estimates from Broadberry et al.
(2015). The nominal incomes on both sides of the ocean are then deflated by the

Broadberry (2003) expressed doubts about the initial comparisons by Ward and
Devereux.

7

6

respective costs of a fixed barebones subsistence bundle, as estimated by Robert Allen. In
effect, our direct comparison addresses the same question implicitly addressed by Prados
and by Ward and Devereux: How did the two countries compare in their ability to use all
of nominal national income to purchase a given bundle of consumer products, where all
data come from the same year? And, as Figure 1 shows, we get an even stronger Anglo-

America contrast. 8

There is more to the emerging story of American-British contrasts than just the

finding that America was ahead. Our new estimates have a richer history to tell, one that
includes Figure 1’s three episodes in which the Americans briefly lost their leadership –
during the Revolution, during the Civil War decade, and again in the early 1930s. The

moment of greatest American advantage over Britain in purchasing power was, of course,
at the end of World War II. Over the long run, the average American has usually had a

purchasing power about 30 percent about the British average -- in the century before the

Revolution, or in the mid-nineteenth century, or around 1900, or even today. Maddison’s
belief that America did not surpass Britain in average purchasing power until 1900 is off

the mark by at least two centuries, according to direct current-price comparisons from the
past. 9

The sharp challenge to Maddison’s view of American versus British incomes raises

an obvious question, to which we now must turn: What would happen to the relative

positions of other countries over recent centuries, if we again replace his back-projections

with direct current-price historical comparisons? How would the new procedure and new
evidence affect the different “Great Divergence” and “Little Divergence” debates?

III. Global departures from Britain before 1914

Vincent Geloso (2015a, 2015b) has similarly found that the ability to buy a barebones
bundle was higher for workers in colonial French Canada than in France, 1688-1760.
However, this Canada-France contrast did not hold up when the comparison involved
more middle-class “respectability” bundles.
9 See the detailed evidence in Lindert and Williamson (2016, Chapters 2, 3, 5, 6, and 10,
and related appendices). We note that broadening the price deflator, going beyond
common staples to include luxuries and capital goods, would dampen the AmericanBritish contrast in estimates only slightly.
8

7

For certain countries and benchmark dates, the direct current-price approach can

serve as a valuable cross-check against the Maddison back-projection approach to the

history of relative purchasing power. 10 This paper exploits the occasional existence of
credible measures of nominal GDP (or GNP) per person, and of prices in both of two

countries being compared. For readers’ convenience, all countries will be compared with
the same base country, Britain, where Britain means England and Wales up to 1700, then
Great Britain 1700-1870, then the United Kingdom including all of Ireland until World

War I, and then today’s United Kingdom. 11 What makes the British base so convenient is

the landmark Broadberry-Campbell-Klein-Overton-van Leeuwen study of British Economic
Growth 1270-1870 and the abundance of English historical price series since 1209, mainly
the price series collated by Gregory Clark. 12

For the nominal GDP numerator, the usual choice is between an aggregate value of

all production, an aggregate value of all expenditures on what the same nation produces,

and an aggregate value of all income earned from production. 13 In a perfect-data world all
three values would be equal. Where the data yield a credible aggregate value from the
income side, I prefer that version of GDP because it is the most distant from the

information used by Maddison, so that it holds the most promise as an independent

valuation. In many other cases, however, the data appear to have been more solid on the
production side, the side used most heavily by Stephen Broadberry and his co-authors.

Comparing countries’ real incomes in the past was not Maddison’s only objective or his
only achievement, however. His work has also served as the best statement of what is
known about the global history of national growth rates in GDP.
11 To see the per capita income adjustments of moving from one national unit to another,
one can use these (Baxter) per capita income ratios from 1867: Great Britain/Eng-Wales =
0.961, and Great Britain /UK = 1.113. Using such ratios to imagine an equivalent Great
Britain before 1700 would call for lowering the income per capita for England and Wales
by 3.9%, and to imagine an equivalent Great Britain after 1870 would call for raising the
UK income per capita by 11.3%, and lowering all purchasing-power international ratios by
11.3%. (http://gpih.ucdavis.edu/Distribution.htm, using the file “Baxter EW & UK 1867.”)
12 Broadberry et al. (2015), Clark (2006). Clark’s price series are drawn from the
compilations by Thorold Rogers, the UK Board of Trade, and William Beveridge.
13 The concept measured here is actually gross national income, which is virtually the
same as GNP for most economies. Yet we use the term “GDP” (gross domestic product”)
for reader familiarity, ignoring the small quantitative differences between GNP and GDP.
10

8

Where the production side (or expenditure side) is used, however, it will turn out that the
most reliable data are also limited to those products that are most uniform and of most
common use.

For the price denominator, data availability again dictates the choice. Here the

binding constraints are familiar. For comparisons across countries or across centuries,
the usual price series are again those of products that are most uniform and of most

common use. In study after study, the set of prices ends up covering income-inelastic

goods, alias consumer staples or necessities, plus such homogeneous intermediate goods
as unprocessed grains, fabrics, or minerals. Other products – those consumer goods
toward the luxury end of the spectrum, or capital goods, or services – tend to be too

heterogeneous and too changing in their quality to generate reliable international price

comparisons or price time series. In the case of prices, unlike quantities, we can sharpen

our international comparisons with a two-stage procedure. For the rest of this section, we
will use the prices of products in a staple-goods “bare-bones” bundle of necessities, à la

Robert Allen, as if it were a comprehensive GDP price deflator. It is not, of course, but in
Part V we will able to use a mix of history and economics to establish the direction in

which having an all-covering GDP deflator would tilt the results obtained by using a simple
subsistence deflator.

Let us turn to some Asian countries featured in the “Great Divergence” debate,

beginning with Japan, a particularly well-researched case.
A. Japan 1602 – 1912

Thanks to the recent work of several scholars, we now have plausible estimates of

Japan’s national product, consumption patterns, and price structure across the Edo Period
(Tokugawa Shogunate) and the Meiji Reign. The research team of Jean-Pascal Bassino,

Stephen Broadberry, Kyoji Fukao, Bishnupriya Gupta, and Masanori Takashima (2015) has
estimated Japan’s real and nominal GDP for benchmark years extending from 725 to 1874,
that is, for much of the pre-Edo and Edo periods. Like Broadberry and co-authors for

Britain, they build GDP by sectors, combining information on labor force and productivity
by sector, plus urban population shares, while also applying some likely consumer

expenditure elasticities. Sectors are aggregated into real GDP by expressing all values in

9

terms of koku of rice, a common numeraire. Given this conversion to rice units, we can
back out the nominal value of GDP in terms of silver using the silver price of rice.

For the years from 1600 on, the nominal GDP numerator can then be divided by the

cost of a subsistence bundle, using the separate urban price series for each good. In order

to compare the price of such goods with their price in Britain, one must first deal with the
disconnect between Asian and European dietary habits. European diets featured wheat

bread, rye bread, and oatmeal. None of these was a staple in Asian diets, except for breadlike products in North China and North India. Comparing the consumption bundles of

Japan and Britain requires that we develop some equivalency between rice and something
based on wheat or oats. The economist’s usual answer of simply using relative prices

would not work: Rice had a high price in Britain because it was an imported luxury not

consumed by ordinary folk, and there was no reliable price series for wheat flour, wheat

bread, or oatmeal in Japan, where these products were essentially unknown. Robert Allen
(2001) introduced a procedure that we follow here. Compare separate daily diets in the
two countries that would deliver a subsistence level of about 1,942 (kilo-) calories, with

the subsidiary goal of delivering about 80 grams of protein. For each country find a set of

staples that would deliver this modest daily nutrition at the lowest cost, given local prices.
Given that societies typically consume diets that minimize the cost of a given level of

nutrition, cost minimization will tend to favor the grain that actually prevails in local diets.
Thus in Table 1, the 365-day diet for Japan delivers most of its calories from rice, while

allowing smaller amounts of some other products that were commonly consumed and for
which we have price series (soybeans, buckwheat, barley, fish, etc.). For Britain the

corresponding diet features oats, beans/peas, and meat.

In setting the two diets, it is important to choose foods that are at similar levels of

preparation, while at the same time yielding historical price data. It would not do to

compare highly prepared foods in one country with unprocessed ingredients in the other,
since this would impose the costs of preparation on only one of the two countries. We

may think of this problem as avoiding the “let them eat bread” trap. In many European

settings one has price data both for bread and for raw grains. Yet in Asian settings we are
usually given data only on the prices of raw grains, such as rice or buckwheat, without

allowing for the fuel, utensils, labor, and other costs of delivering table food. Accordingly,

10

Table 1 gives the European consumer only oats (cheaper than wheat), rather than

prepared bread or oatmeal, to avoid marking up the European relative cost by providing a
more useful product. Again, it is important to stick to comparing consumer bundles that
supply similar hedonic final products in the two countries. 14

Applying available prices to these separate subsistence bundles yields the bundle

costs for Japan and Britain in 1750, displayed in Table 1. 15 Repeating this calculation for
other benchmark years traces a history of Japan’s and Britain’s abilities to buy the same

bundle over the sweep of the Edo period and the Meiji reign, in Figure 2 and Tables 2 and

3. Even at the start, around 1602, Britain’s ability to buy the basics was already well ahead
of stagnant Japan, and the lead widened across the eighteenth century. As historians have
long known, Japan’s incomes improved across the Meiji reign, here represented by the

transition from our 1870 benchmark to that for 1912. Less familiar in appearance is the
seeming acceleration of British purchasing power over that same 1870-1912 era. One

reason for this improvement seems to be that the new cheapness of grains and other foods
from abroad delivered an egalitarian twist to the first globalization era, as we shall note

again later. Overall, Japan fell further behind Britain in the Edo period, and then kept pace
in the Meiji era.

How do these comparisons of bare-bones purchasing power match up against the

Japan/Britain contrasts already provided by Angus Maddison? Both accounts agree that
Japan fell further behind Britain over the whole stretch of the seventeenth through
nineteenth centuries. Yet, as Table 2 quantifies and Figure 3 summarizes, the new
comparisons imply that Japan was always further behind Britain than Maddison’s

projections implied. So far, the America/Britain and Britain/Japan gaps look wider in
the new data than in the back projections: While the new calculations suggest that

Maddison may have missed America’s lead over Britain in the eighteenth and nineteenth

centuries, they also suggest that he understated Britain’s advantage over Japan. To see if
Alternatively, where the data permit, one could give the European consumers the same
calorie content in the form of flour instead of raw grain, for the comparison with rice.
15 As shown in the notes to the tables, the prices are averaged over a number of years
around the benchmark year, to smooth out short-run price variation. The number of years
depended on data availability, though a five-year centered average was preferred.
14

11

there are larger patterns here, let us explore other nations and years, with the help of
Figure 3 and Table 3.

B. China 1840 and 1885

The contrast between China and Europe was, of course, the one that most ignited

the “Great Divergence” debate. Kenneth Pomeranz’s (2000) landmark book suggested

that in the eighteenth century, the early Qing era, Chinese material living standards were

still nearly on a par with those of Europe, and the Lower Yangzi region could have been as
well off as Britain and the Netherlands. If that were true, then the Great Divergence came
after 1800, and especially after the Opium Wars, with the further implication that foreign
aggression was what dragged down a China that could have continued to be competitive.
Although Pomeranz later modified his stance somewhat, the challenge remained and the
debate continued. 16 One result of the subsequent work has been to emphasize the great

probability that China’s average incomes were as high as those in Europe and Japan way

back in the Song and Yuan (Mongol) eras, i.e. from 960 to 1368. 17 Angus Maddison, for his

part, continued to agree with David Landes (1999) and others who argued that Europe
was well ahead of China and East Asia since the Middle Ages or earlier.

For China, the present procedure of dividing nominal incomes per capita by the

costs of a barebones consumption bundle is not yet possible for the eighteenth century, a
crucial period in the Great Divergence debate. Work must continue on China’s national
product, since estimates are quite shaky so far. 18 For the moment, we have only two

nineteenth-century benchmarks, at 1840 and “the 1880s,” which we may label 1885. For

1840 the research team of Stephen Broadberry, Hanhui Guan, and David Daokui Li (2014)
has ventured to estimate China’s nominal national product using the currently favored

practice of combining labor force and productivity by sector, urban population shares, and
some assumed consumer expenditure elasticities. For the 1880s, Chang-li Chang (1962,
appendices) built an estimate of China’s GDP to use as a denominator for his detailed

Pomeranz (2005, 2011), Prados (2000), Maddison (2001, pp. 47-48), De Vries (2011).
See Liu (2015).
18 For stern warnings about the existing estimates of GDP for imperial China, see Deng and
O’Brien (2016).
16
17

12

estimates of gentry incomes at the top of society. Dividing both years’ nominal GDP by the
cost of a barebones bundle in Beijing yields the two estimates of purchasing power per
capita that are shown in Table 3 and Figure 3.

For China, more than for Japan, the nineteenth-century estimates support

Maddison’s view of relative purchasing power. The match in guesstimates is quite good
for 1840, even though very different sources and procedures were used. For 1885 the
new estimates imply that GDP per capita bought the common man less than Maddison

implied. Yet the Chang estimate of GDP in the 1880s may have been too low. He struggled
to limit the frequent suspicions that his official sources had underestimated the area

under cultivation, and his estimates seem to miss miscellaneous manufactures and many
private services. If the true GDP for the 1880s was significantly higher than Chang said,

then again for the 1880s, as Albert Feuerwerker has implied, the new procedures seem to
support the Maddison guesstimates about the ratio of Chinese to British incomes. 19 Yet

until one can reach back into the eighteenth century or earlier with credible estimates of
China’s nominal GDP per capita and costs of common consumer goods, such direct
current-price comparisons cannot help resolve the Great Divergence debate.
C. India 1595 and 1870

The same question has arisen for India: Was it far behind the West even before the

early modern era, in this case meaning before the British incursions? With India as with
the rest of Asia, Maddison sided with those who felt that Asia had been far behind for

centuries. And with India as well, scholars in this century have suggested revisions in this
view. Using available evidence from the scanty quantitative history of two Indian regions,
Prasannan Parthasarathi argued that “in the eighteenth century standards of living,

calculated in terms of grain wages, were comparable between Britain and South India and
Bengal” (2005, p. 106). His emphasis on “grain wages” has since been echoed by the
subsequent literature, which draws on wage rates and the prices of staple goods,

Feuerwerker (1969) has argued that China’s real national product in the mid-1880s was
20.0 percent higher than Chang’s figured imply when converted into 1933 yuan. Angus
Maddison (1995, p. 144) cautions that Feuerwerker’s figures adjust Chang’s figures
“somewhat cavalierly,” even though Feuerwerker’s figures would raise the new estimates
to a China/Britain ratio close to that implied by Maddison.
19

13

especially foods. Yet few others feel that Indian living standards were “comparable” to
British or European standards as late as 1800. The current split seems to be between
those who feel that back in 1600 Indian real wages were already only about a fifth of

British hence no subsequent Great Divergence (e.g. Broadberry and Gupta 2006 (silver
wage comparison); Allen 2007; Roy 2010, and Studer 2015, pp. 145-67, 172-78), and

those who feel that in the Mughal apogee around 1600 Indian incomes were 60-70 percent
of the British. This latter view believes in a Great Divergence with the arrival of the East
India Company and the Crown, down to an agreed-on level of Indian poverty in the late

nineteenth century.

Fortunately, this wage-based literature has now been supplemented by rough

measures of nominal income per capita, for the Mughal benchmark 1595 (or c1600) and

for 1860 and beyond. Here, and in Figure 3 and Table 3, we use only the 1595 benchmark
and an 1870 benchmark, for comparison with Maddison’s figures and with the recent

findings of Broadberry, Custodis, and Gupta (2015). 20 For India, as for the rest of Asia,

Maddison implied that average purchasing power fell further behind that of Britain, from
an India/Britain ratio of over half (0.565) around 1600 to only one-sixth (0.167) in 1870.
The new current-price comparisons will agree on the long relative decline, yet at lower

initial and final levels. The mystery deepens when we compare the new estimates with

those of Broadberry, Custodis, and Gupta (BCG). They offer two different results for 16001870 using different deflators. The estimates from the Broadberry-Gupta 2010 study

implied an India/Britain ratio 0.145 in 1870 – a slightly more severe impoverishment than
Maddison guessed for 1870. Then, using a silver conversion between rupees and pounds,
BCG find that back around 1600 India’s share of the British average was already only

0.145 – so no divergence, just persistent deep relative poverty for India. Alternatively,
with a grain deflator (wheat price), BCG find that Mughal India had fully 0.712 of the

British average purchasing power around 1600, before dropping to that 0.145 by 1870.

Thus far, for India from 1600 to 1870, we have two suggestions of a great fall relative to

For 1595, I use the Mughal “national” product from Shireen Moosvi 2008, pp. 2-3,
implying 562.2 million rupees. Her estimates build on Moosvi (1987). Broadberry,
Custodis, and Gupta (2015, p. 70) give a similar number, 559.68 million rupees, for “circa
1600.” For 1870, I use Goldsmith (1983, p. 5), averaging the GDP estimates for 18681872.
20

14

Britain – Maddison’s suggestion about GDP per capita, and the BCG grain wage – plus one
suggestion of no change at all, namely that BCG silver wage ratio of 0.145 at both dates. 21

Better price evidence is available for comparing India with Britain in both 1600 and

1870. Bob Allen and Roman Studer have amassed a long and detailed history of prices
(and wages) for four regions of India from the late sixteenth century to the early

twentieth. These make it possible to compare the ability of GNP per capita to buy

hedonically-equivalent bundles of ten Indian products and nine British products. 22 These
new comparisons, richer in prices, find India further behind Britain around 1600 than

either the Maddison guess or the BCG wheat wage had implied. Yet for 1870, the different
estimates do not disagree so much. Specifically, the new estimates have India falling

behind in relative purchasing power from 0.289 around 1600 to 0.156 in 1870. Figure 3
and Table 3 re-state this result for India. We shall return to the task of interpreting this
revision, after looking at new clues for other countries.

For India and Japan, then, the tentative new results illuminate a new Divergence

currently being posed by the authors of a pioneering study of Japan’s national product,
who suggest that there was

“a ‘Little Divergence’ within Asia. In contrast to Japan’s persistent growth path
which avoided significant growth reversals, Chinese per capita GDP was on a
downward trajectory from its high point during the Northern Song dynasty …. On
these estimates, Japan overtook China only during the eighteenth century. Like
China, India experienced declining GDP per capita from the Mughal peak under
Akbar, circa 1600 …. Again, Japan only pulled decisively ahead of India during the
eighteenth century.” (Bassino et al. 2015, p. 22)
In an earlier article, Broadberry and Gupta (2006, pp. 14-18) offer a plausible
reconciliation of the silver-wage stability and the grain-wage decline, in terms of the
advancing development of the British economy.
22 For the data, at http://gpih.ucdavis.edu, download the file “India prices and wages
1595-1930 (Allen and Studer).” For a fuller presentation and interpretation, see Allen
(2007) and the India-related passages of Studer (2015). In my calculations, for both dates,
the Indian bundle consisted of millet, rice, gram, meat, ghee, soap, cloth, candles, fuel, and
sugar, and the British bundle consisted of oats, beans, meat, butter, and again soap, cloth,
candles, fuel, and sugar. Food calories and BTU of heating fuel were held the same in both
countries.
21

15

The new direct comparisons agree, by re-affirming that India fell behind Japan sometime
between 1600 and 1870.

What of other Asian countries? Did they also fall behind Japan at this time? We

turn next to an Asian country that fell behind Japan dramatically, but not until the midnineteenth century.
D. Java 1820-1910

Thanks to recent efforts by Pim de Zwart and Jan Luiten van Zanden (2015, and

Van Zanden 2003), we can now compare Javanese purchasing power with that of Britain
during the nineteenth century, using the same barebones deflation of nominal GDP per
capita as in other countries.

Starting with the most recent benchmark, that for 1910, we see a Java that fits the

general patterns of relative purchasing power and its relationship to Maddison’s guesses.

As Table 3 and Figure 3 show, crowded Java was far behind Britain (or the Netherlands) in
average purchasing power, and even farther behind than Maddison had conjectured. Yet a
very different perspective emerges from Java’s earlier experience. Back in 1820 or 1830,
Java’s average ability to consumer staples was fully 44-45 percent of the British level,

according to the new estimates. And in that early era, Java’s relative income was well

above what Maddison had implied. As Figure 3 shows, this outcome contrasts with the
results for India, China, and especially Japan.

What could have made Java sink so far in relative purchasing power between 1820

and 1910? While Van Zanden (2003) has explored the possible roles of changes in Dutch
rule and other shocks, it seems likely that the explanation should start with a striking
basic fact about nineteenth-century Java: It had unusually rapid population growth.

Whereas India’s population grew only by 36 percent from 1820 to 1900, Java filled up

with about 5.6 times as many people in 1900 as in 1820, a population growth rate of about
2.2 percent a year (Peper 1970, p. 72). Such crowding presumably raised the relative
price of rice, while the globalization of rice markets remained incomplete, thereby
depressing Java’s relative purchasing power.
E. Western Europe 1500-1910

16

Western Europe was richer than Asia in Maddison’s estimation. The new estimates

confirm and magnify this inequality. The same technique of dividing nominal income by a
subsistence-bundle price deflator yields results for Italy since the sixteenth century and
for France and Netherlands from 1820 to 1910 (Table 3 and Figure 3 again). These

countries again appear to have been better off than the four Asian countries, and for

France and Netherlands, our estimates do not fall below those of Maddison, but instead
tend to agree.

Relative purchasing power in Western Europe is brought into even clearer focus by

Ward and Devereux (2016). Figures 4 and 5 report their comparisons of some developed

countries in 1872 and 1910. Their procedure is different from that of Robert Allen, which
we have followed thus far. Ward and Devereux, like most economists, prefer a blended

“superlative” index like the Fisher ideal index. The Fisher index geometric averages the
two countries’ indices, unlike Allen’s use of a separately fixed bundles supplying about
1,942 calories. Ward and Devereux could avoid the Allen approach because their

comparisons were restricted to Western countries with similar diets. I slightly prefer

Allen’s approach, on the grounds that it makes the subsistence bundle something fixed and
more understandable for non-specialists. Nonetheless, let us now add the informative
Ward-Devereux results in Figures 4 and 5. 23

The main revision suggested by Ward and Devereux is to demote British and Swiss

relative purchasing power relative to other advanced countries. On their telling (2006,

2016), America was even further ahead of Britain in the nineteenth and early twentieth
centuries than Prados had conjectured, though not as far ahead as in the Lindert-

Williamson view (2016). Ward and Devereux also reject the common belief that average
purchasing power was higher in Switzerland than elsewhere in Western Europe.

F. Elsewhere

Finally, we can add benchmark observations for five other settings: Poland 1578,

Mexico and Peru 1800, Australia 1868, and Cape Colony 1861. Most of these have

Ward and Devereux presented indices comparing other countries with the United
States. Taking advantage of the transitivity feature of their indices, we have converted to
comparisons with Britain, for better comparability with the results in Figure 3.
23

17

additional limitations. The study of Poland in 1578, in which Mikoilaj Malinowski and Jan

Luiten van Zanden (forthcoming 2017) extrapolate from the Voivodship of Krakow, lacks a
Maddison estimate for comparison. So do the benchmark data from Peru around 1800.

For Mexico 1800 and Australia 1868, we can only compare staple food costs, without the
basic non-foods included in the other estimates. Still, these five scattered extra
observations do expand the summary testing.
G. Patterns in the disparities before 1914

This tour of some historical benchmarks for directly comparing countries’ real

purchasing power reveals some broad patterns. The first is a limited affirmation of

Maddison’s original guesses. As one would hope, his estimates are positively correlated

with those presented here. Yet we find serious deviations from his estimates of the ratios

comparing other places to Britain. Among the more advanced countries in the nineteenth
century, the new departures from Maddison tend to revise his view in the same direction
as the earlier conjectures by Leandro Prados (2000) and the alternative estimates of
Marianne Ward and John Devereux (2003, 2006, 2016).

The revisions away from Maddison’s implied ratios were caused by differences in

concept and in basics of economic geography. As we saw in Table 3 and Figures 3-5, some
rich countries’ purchasing powers were better, relative to Britain’s, than Maddison

implied. The countries favored by the new estimates are land-abundant rich settler

countries (USA and Australia) and Northern European countries (Belgium, Denmark,

Germany, Norway, and Sweden). The countries disfavored relative to Britain were mostly
countries with lower real incomes by anybody’s measure (India, Italy, and Japan). The

exception was Switzerland’s new downward revision, which Ward and Devereux (2016)
attribute to simple errors in the Swiss data used by Maddison. Countries for which the

comparisons with Britain look much the same as in Maddison’s tables were France and
Netherlands, and perhaps China and Java.
H. And since 1914?

For the period since 1914, with its higher average incomes, expanded global trade,

and better data, the world has changed greatly in ways that call for a different kind of

18

measure. The obsolete early-modern barebones bundle, dominated by grains, must be set
aside in favor of bundles involving less essential foods and housing rents, and these

updated bundles in turn must be compared with nominal incomes per capita.

For the early twentieth century, the bundle-pricing steps in this advance have

already been taken. In particular, Jeffrey Williamson (1995, appendices) has compared
food and housing costs for nine countries in 1905-1914, and for seventeen countries in

1927. Gone are the nineteenth-century contrasts between the land-rich settler economies

and Britain. In the early twentieth century the United States, Canada, and Australia began
to have higher food costs for a given bundle than did Britain. On the other hand, the

Continental European countries continued to have lower food and rent costs than Britain.
For the years since 1950, the data take the form of economy-wide prices, incomes,

and exchange rates, as developed by the International Comparisons Project (ICP) and the

Penn World Tables. The ICP became Angus Maddison’s base point. Again, his procedure

was to take the ICP detailed price and income comparisons for 1990, and back-project this
international contrast back into history using the nations’ separate real GDP accounts. As
we have seen, this led his estimates to stray from what one would get from direct
historical comparisons.

In fact, the index number difficulties caused by shifting product mixes are not just a

challenge faced by economic historians. The same challenge faces non-so-historical
economists today, with their attempts to compare countries in the richer data

environment since 1950. Maddison, in choosing the long-span approach to illuminate

international differences in the deep past from a comparison of 1990 purchasing power

parities in “1990 international Geary-Khamis dollars”, was applying a technique that the
Penn World Tables project used to derive the widely-used numbers for the world since

1950. Just as Maddison fixed his historical backcasting to a very recent 1990 comparison
of prices and nominal incomes, so too the Penn World Tables have based comparisons
back to 1950 on the latest price comparisons, most recently the international price

comparisons of 2011. Thus Maddison’s technique has reflected the state of the art among
economists. Yet the underlying problem of inconsistent historical comparisons has not
gone away, either for the economic historians or for the larger economics community.

19

As it happens, the “new generation” of the Penn World Tables project, which has

now shifted to the University of California – Davis and to the University of Groningen, has
just launched an important reformulation of its data displays, partly in order to quantify
the biases that one gets from choosing the less appropriate comparison procedure.
Starting with Penn World Tables version 8.1, its organizers explain,

[W]e distinguish whether real GDP is intended to measure the standard of living
across countries or to measure productive capacity…. [Furthermore,] to hold prices
constant over time, past versions of PWT relied upon real GDP growth from the
national accounts for each country. That is, the level of real GDP across countries
was constructed for the most recent ICP [International Comparisons Project, for
comparing prices] benchmark and then projected backwards and forwards in time
by using national accounts growth rates for each country. That approach meant
that past years of ICP data were discarded. In PWT 8 we likewise include a variable
that uses real GDP growth from the national accounts, but we further introduce
measures of real GDP that correct for changing prices over time and use ICP [price]
benchmarks from multiple years. 24

The shifts in price structure make a big difference, even within the half-century covered by
the Penn World Tables. From 1952 to the 2005 baseline, average living standards, using
the international price comparisons from multiple years, improved faster than

productivity growth in most countries. Among all 60 data-supplying countries, the two
measures differed by an average absolute gap of 23 percent in 1952, whereas they are
defined as equal in the base year 2005. 25 So even over the last half-century or so, the

growth of purchasing power, the direct historical comparisons featured in the Divergence
debates, has been quite different from the gaps implied by the growth rates of GDP per

Feenstra et al. (2015). Emphasis in the original. In terms of the terminology in the newgeneration Penn World Table 8.1, the first sentence quoted here refers to the difference
between cgdpe and rgdpo, whereas the rest of the quoted passage refers to the difference
between rgdpe featured here and rgdpna (that’s na for “national accounts”), the type of
measure Maddison used, which followed the countries’ separate real national product
indices over time.
The new generation of Penn World Tables emerged in the wake of an extensive
debate over the merits of the new international price comparisons for 2005, which
dramatically re-shuffled nations in terms of real GDP per capita. See Johnson et al. (2009),
Milanovic (2009), and Deaton and Heston (2010).
25 This 1952 measure refers to gaps between rgdpe and rgdpna.
24

20

capita, or relative productivity growth, using national accounts. 26 It seems to follow that
merely updating the base year, say from Maddison’s 1990 to 2011, fails to address the

basic problem: Price structures change, and so do shares of non-tradables in the economy,
and such shifts make the historically relevant direct comparisons yield different results
from back projections.

IV. How did subsistence cost ratios
relate to purchasing power ratios?

There is a striking pattern in the relative hard-currency costs of those subsistence

bundles used in the comparisons with Britain – a pattern that can be explained by

combining some theory and history. The relative bundle costs, graphed in Figure 6 and

listed in Table 4, showed a remarkably consistent pattern up to 1870, a pattern that was
then washed away in the globalization wave of 1870-1914. From the early 1500s up

through about 1870, most other countries had lower bundle costs than did Britain, in

terms of silver or the gold-standard pound sterling. The only exceptions, with higher silver
costs of the subsistence bundle than in Britain, were Spain in the sixteenth and

seventeenth centuries, and Italy in the sixteenth. In both exceptional cases a plausible
initial explanation was that they were initial recipients of New World silver, famously

raising the prices of basic goods in terms of silver. With those exceptions, the bundle costs
were lower in all data-supplying countries other than Britain – and then this pattern

vanished between 1870 and 1914, as can be seen in Figure 6. Thus Adam Smith’s thinking
that the “cost of subsistence” was lower in China than in Europe can now be expanded:

In 1952, the first year of widespread data, Britain was near the bottom of the OECD
ranks in its relative purchasing power. To be more exact, of the usual 21 core OECD
industrialized countries, Britain ranked 16th in how much higher its purchasing power
proved to be in the direct comparison at 1952 prices than in a Maddison-type backprojection from the 2011 price structure. Only Germany, Italy, Greece, Ireland and
Norway were less favored than Britain by using the 1952 data in a direct comparison.
26

21

Subsistence was cheaper in most of the Eastern Hemisphere than it was in Northwest
Europe. 27 This remarkable prewar cost history needs to be explained.

Why would subsistence goods be cheaper in most other places than in Britain

before about 1870? And why would that pattern then be washed away? The answers lie
both in a changing historical reality and in a mechanism noticed by economists in the

postwar era. The changing historical reality is that goods essential to subsistence were

not traded goods before the mid-nineteenth century, and then became traded goods. As
long as they were not traded over long distances, their prices reflected only their local

context. And as long as they were not traded over long distances, something called the

Balassa-Samuelson effect made them cheaper in poorer countries than in richer countries
like Britain. Let us first turn to that postwar Balassa-Samuelson effect, and then return to
how the underlying realities changed its applicability before 1914.

The Balassa-Samuelson theory predicts that non-tradables are relatively cheaper in

countries with lower overall labor productivity. A key (and realistic) assumption is that labor
is mobile between the traded-goods and non-traded-goods sectors. Richer countries, with
their faster advances in productivity concentrated in the traded-good sectors, bid up the

labor wage rate. This draws labor from the non-traded sector, and raises relative costs and

prices in this sector, where productivity is not going up. Result: In the richer country, prices
of non-traded goods go up relative to traded-good prices. In the poorer countries, where

productivity is more stagnant, non-traded goods can remain cheaper than in the richer
countries.

Postwar data support this prediction. 28 The story rightly features differences in

sectoral productivities. The reason why non-tradables appear to be cheaper in poorer

countries than in richer countries, relative to traded goods, is that differences in capital

accumulation and technology have kept productivity lower in traded goods, relative to nontraded goods, in those poorer countries that missed out on industrialization.

Adam Smith’s assertion that “rice in China is much cheaper than wheat is anywhere in
Europe” was cited in Allen et al. (2011, pp. 22-23).
28 For the theory itself, see Balassa (1964), Samuelson (1964, 1994), Feenstra et al. (2015).
An example of empirical confirmation on postwar data is Heston et al. (1994).
27

22

For the pre-1870 era, the staple goods essential to subsistence were not traded

between continents, so they played the role of non-tradables in the Balassa-Samuelson

model. Indeed, in the earlier low-income settings, staples were a large share of the non-

traded sectors. Not surprisingly, the differential-productivity explanation for the BalassaSamuelson effect does fit the pre-1870 global pattern revealed in by the prices of staple

goods in Figure 6, with one noteworthy amendment. Although firm numbers are lacking,

narrative histories suggest that high labor productivity and involvement in international

trade did indeed occur in the same leading sectors and the same leading countries, leading to
the relative-cost results in Figure 6. 29

The one amendment relates to the Anglo-American contrast. Like the other countries

being compared with Britain in this paper, and like China as observed by Adam Smith and by
Allen et al (2011, p. 25), the American colonies and the United States had cheaper

subsistence bundles than did Britain before 1870. The conventional interpretation of the

Balassa-Samuelson effect says that this means that Industrial Revolution Britain had higher
relative productivity in export sectors. So far, that interpretation fits the results. Yet the
amendment is that we still need to allow for the possibility that both sides had absolute

productivity advantages – the land-rich American economy in relatively non-traded staple

goods and Britain in traded manufactures. Absolute productivity advantages on both sides
would more easily fit the purchasing-power results we saw in Part II.

If thinking about relative sectoral productivities fits the pre-1870 relative cost pattern

so well, how is one to explain the disappearance of that relative cost pattern after 1870? Did
the labor productivities of tradable and non-tradable sectors converge all over the world?
That seems less likely than a more straightforward explanation in terms of rising trade

shares. All across the nineteenth century, an increasing share of world product involved
international trade. While part of this trend reflects the rising productivity in the

manufacturing sector of Northwest Europe, part of it reflects the famous decline in longdistance trading costs across the second half of the nineteenth century. 30

Implicit here is that traded-good prices tended to be equal when converted to a common
currency.
30 The global rise of trade’s share is noted in Maddison (1995, p. 38); Estevadeordal,
Frantz, and Taylor (2003); and Federico and Tena (2016, pp. 4-7, 32-34). The splitting of
29

23

A reminder of this familiar pattern, and its relationship to the relative prices of the

staples in the barebones bundles, appears in Figure 7’s history of the price of wheat in

England relative to different American cities. Before the 1850s the English price was usually
much higher than in America, and the ratio between the two gyrated, as is common in

separate markets. True, both countries traded internationally in wheat, but only separately
on the two sides of the Atlantic. Thus wheat, like other staple goods, was a non-tradable in
the context of intercontinental trade before mid-century, although it was, of course, traded

between local hinterlands and urban centers. After 1850, and after 1870 and the ending of
the US Civil War, British and American wheat prices converged and stabilized. The more

visible change here is not some convergence of sectoral productivities around the world, but
rather the switching of staple goods like wheat from having separate continental markets to
having an integrated market. This is one reason why the prices of the barebones bundles in
Figure 6 converged so visibly after about 1870.

V. Adding non-staple prices still leaves greater Eurasian inequalities
It is time to address the suspicion that the new measures of purchasing power are

biased because they use a narrow set of staple-good prices to deflator all of nominal GDP.
Perhaps all of the departures from Maddison estimates are due to incomplete price

coverage in the new estimates? Why not use a full GDP price deflator, including luxury

consumer goods, capital goods, government services, and exports? Such an extension has
not been performed in the past because of severe data constraints – yet we now have

sufficient data on non-staple goods’ prices to establish that using the narrow subsistence
price deflator has probably not overstated the true Eurasian gaps in purchasing power.

its explanation between productivity growth and transport costs is documented by Jacks,
Meissner, and Novy (2010) and by Jacks and Pendukar (2010). The text is emphasizing the
decline of trade costs more than the global spread of productivity gains, because the
present focus is on the tradability of staple grains more than on the rise of trade in all
goods. On the earlier gradual convergence of Eurasian prices in non-subsistence goods,
see De Zwart (2016) and the sources cited there. On the eighteenth-century partial
globalization of grain markets, see Dobado-Gonzalez et al. (2012, 2015).

24

The daunting heterogeneity of luxury consumer goods and capital goods has been

the main barrier to comparing prices, or for that matter output volumes, over long reaches
of time or space. Luxury consumer goods are heterogeneous by design, especially where
the goods are meant to convey superior status, ethnic distinctions, or the latest fashions.

Most capital goods have also eluded reliable price series. Scholars have tried, laudably but
unpersuasively, to solve the problem of pricing capital goods with a few input-price
proxies, such as a mixture of wages plus iron bars. Such proxies could only be in

proportion to the prices of the produced capital goods if productivity were fixed in the
capital goods sector. 31

Yet history has left us enough circumstantial evidence to suggest, for Northwest

Europe versus Asia from the sixteenth century through the nineteenth, that the true gaps

in average purchasing power for all goods were no less than our measures have shown
using the narrow subsistence bundle costs. The main kind of circumstantial evidence
consists of a few price series for true luxury or investment goods, ones of sufficiently

uniform quality to yield comparable data across centuries and across oceans. Figures 8A

and 8B show relative prices of a ream of paper, a kilogram of bar iron, and a medium-sized

nail, all relative to the price of wheat, a subsistence good, and all indexed to a late-year

base. By the sixteenth century, paper (Figure 8A) had become cheaper in England, relative
to wheat. Then, from the sixteenth century to 1910, it remained cheaper – or, reciprocally,
wheat remained more expensive – in England than in the scattered observations from
China, India, Moscow, Warsaw, Sopron, or Peru. Only in Barcelona do the data show

cheaper paper (more expensive wheat) than in England. So if we accept that wheat prices

moved in step with the prices of the entire grain-dominated subsistence bundle, then the
ability to purchase paper was even more unequal between Europe and Asia than was the
ability to purchase staple foods.

A similar contrast shows for the wheat prices of nails or of bar iron, in Figure 8B.

For the available years, nails were cheaper, relative to wheat, in England than in China,

Collins and Williamson (2001, pp. 85-86) note this. They nonetheless conclude that even
in pre-war data, 1870-1913, the relative price of equipment is negatively correlated with
GDP per capita (2001, p. 75). Nuxoll (1994) found a similar negative correlation in
postwar data.

31

25

India, Moscow, or Istanbul. Only for nineteenth-century Pennsylvania do we know they
were as cheap as in England. And in one nineteenth-century benchmark for China, iron

was also cheaper in England than in China. Philip Hoffman has found that muskets (guns)

were also cheaper, per grain calorie, in England than in China in the 1620s (Hoffman 2011,
p. 52). The implication, again, is that expanding the price deflator to include such nonstaple goods would show the English had at least as great an advantage in purchasing
power over their Asian contemporaries as we were able to see using the prices of

subsistence goods only. And the comparisons using subsistence-good prices alone have
already found wider Eurasian gaps in purchasing power than Maddison suggested.

VI. Gerschenkron effects over the centuries

Why would the new estimates show wider Eurasian divergences than the

Maddison estimates? And why were those discrepancies bigger before 1914?

There is in fact a systematic reason for these discrepancies, one that has been

hiding in plain sight since the 1950s. The most likely source of bias is the long-familiar

Gerschenkron effect, or Gerschenkron inequality, caused by the inevitable relevance of

substitution in responses to changes in relative prices. The OECD and World Bank define
the Gerschenkron effect thus:

“Gerschenkron effect. An effect applicable only to aggregation methods that use
either a reference price structure (i.e., each country’s quantities are valued by a
uniform set of prices) or a reference volume structure (i.e., each country’s prices
are used to value a uniform set of quantities) to compare countries. For methods
employing a reference price structure, a country’s share of total GDP (i.e., the total
for the group of countries being compared) will [seem to] rise as the reference
price structure becomes less characteristic of its own price structure. For methods
employing a reference volume structure, a country’s share of total GDP will [seem
to] fall as the reference volume structure becomes less characteristic of its own
volume structure. The Gerschenkron effect arises because of the negative
correlation between prices and volumes …. The Geary-Khamis and Iklé -DikhanovBalk methods are subject to this effect.” 32

For the original statement of the effect, see Gerschenkron (1947, 1951). For the
international agencies’ definition quoted here, see
32

26

What does the Gerschenkron effect imply about the difference between back-

projection à la Maddison and a direct comparison of relative purchasing power per capita
in, say, 1700? Mdddison’s present-day (1990) international price comparisons

unavoidably attach heavier weights to cheap modern goods than would a price

comparison from the past. By itself, this kind of Gerschenkron effect understates earlier
divergences between more developed and less developed economies.

Bakcward projection is also likely to cause a downward bias in the national growth

rates whenever the weights are chosen from later years. The further back we want to

reach in history, the greater this likelihood. 33 A straightforward reason is the modernist

bias in data availability. To qualify as a weight-base period, a year has to supply detail not
only on quantities produced or purchased, but also on either prices or value added. Our

measures of historical movements are thus pushed toward anchoring them in more recent
times, when the faster-growing sectors were lower in price. Hence lower growth rates in
any country, rich or poor, whenever prices are used as weights.

The push toward more recent weight bases inevitably affected Maddison’s work as

well. Recall that he had to shut off his backward projections from national accounts in the

mid- or late nineteenth century, settling for acknowledged “conjectures” back to 1820 and
earlier years, on the basis of assumptions and his reading of a sketchy and qualitative

literature. For example, his careful use of national accounts covered Britain only from

1830 on; Italy only from 1861 on; Japan only from 1885 on; China only for 1885, 1933,
and post-1950; and India only from 1870 on. He was forced to use weights that

understated both the earlier Eurasian divergences and the growth rates of modernizing

economies. Maddison deserves credit for using national sources in a way that included as
much splicing of weights as possible, to capture the history of structural changes. Still, a

Gerschenkron effect is evident in his base-year 1990 international comparisons in Gearyhttp://siteresources.worldbank.org/ICPINT/Resources/2700561255977254560/6483625-1291755426408/7604122-1363984715044/27_Glossary.pdf.
Emphasis added here.
33 See Nuxoll (1994) for this growth-rate side of the Gerschenkron effect, with postwar
evidence. I am indebted to John Devereux for this reference.

27

Khamis prices. 34 The weighting here clearly rests on a reference price structure, and one

that is far from (“less characteristic” of) the pre-1914 world. Furthermore, the poorer the
country being compared with Britain in, say, 1700, the farther still were its consumers

from facing the 1990s choices between different countries’ prices of modern foods, home
electricity, and automobile use, and the like. Britain in 1700 was less distant from this

1990 world by virtue of its higher incomes and Engel effects, and by virtue of its advances
in traded-sector productivity. Thus the Gerschenkron effect may have biased upward his
estimation of poor countries’ incomes in a year like 1700 relative to his estimation of
British incomes.

What role would a Gerschenkron effect play in the fact that Americans and

Australians were more prosperous relative to industrialized Britain than Maddison had
estimated? Would using, say, British price weights consistently cancel the purchasing

power advantage of the Americans and Australians? Only a tentative, and mixed, answer is
ventured here. Suppose that non-staples had all been cheaper in Industrial Revolution

Britain, as was true of iron, cotton textiles, stockings, shoes, and boots before the 1830s.
On the one hand, using such British price weights for a product-side estimate of GDP

would actually raise the relative purchasing power of Americans and Australians relative
to Britain, by attaching lower price weights to the quantities of industrial goods that

Britain produced more. On the other, using British sectoral price weights in a cost-ofliving deflator of nominal GDP would tip the advantage toward Britain. Add to this

ambiguity the fact that some non-staples were cheaper in North America in the eighteenth
and nineteenth century, such as timber, paper, and of course land. 35 So far, the

circumstantial evidence suggests no clear change in the qualitative conclusion that

America and Australia had great purchasing power in the nineteenth century. The exact
Maddison made no mention of the Gerschenkron effect. It can nonetheless be found
hiding in his calculations of the Laspeyres (USA weighted), Paasche (other country’s
weights), and Geary-Khamis comparisons of GDP per capita. A less developed country’s
standing was closest to that of the US using US weights, and farthest using its own weights,
with the Geary-Khamis results in between, except for Hungary and Yugoslavia (Maddison
1995, pp. 170-76).
35 For the available price data on non-staples on both sides of the Atlantic in the
eighteenth and nineteenth centuries, see Lindert and Williamson (2016, Appendix D).
34

28

accounting, with greater weights for non-staples, must await a fuller set of pre-1914 prices
on both sides of the ocean.

Why were most disparities greater before 1914? The answer seems to lie in two

facts about the pre-1914 era. First, Engel effects (budget weight differences) had more
impact then. Poor countries spent more than half of their GDP on staple foods or

agricultural products, whereas the shares of these for Britain had already dropped below
one-third in the late seventeenth century. Pushed by Engel’s Law, these food-related

shares converged and shrank. The share of food consumption in GDP is now below one-

fifth even in many lower-income countries, such as Guinea or Kyrgyzstan, in today’s richer
world. No longer do countries differ so much in their staple-consumption shares as they

did before 1914. Second, as emphasized earlier, Balassa-Samuelson effects (relative price
gaps enhanced by high non-tradable shares of national product) had greater impacts on

relative purchasing power back when countries traded so little over long distances. The
waves of globalization have shrunken the non-tradable sectors’ shares of GDP, and the

range of products with large international price gaps, down to just such services as

housing and haircuts. While the International Comparison Project and the Penn World

Tables still reveal purchasing power disparities, they cannot be as wide as they were in
the nineteenth century and earlier.

VII. A take-away menu

This paper’s introduction of new international comparisons of purchasing power,

from six continents and over about four hundred years, suggests six take-away inferences
for research and interpretation. The verb is “suggests,” not “shows,” because the new

estimates need scrutiny as well as extension to other settings. That is, to borrow a deft
phrase recently used by Stephen Broadberry and his co-authors, it is hoped that “... the

results … while inviting refinement, are credible.” 36

36

Broadberry et al. (2015, p. 364), discussing their sectoral productivity estimates.

29

The six “take-aways” underline how the historical geography of purchasing power

may be expanded, and the sixth suggests an interpretation of the departures from the
Maddison estimates for the sixteenth through nineteenth centuries.

(1) The now-greater Eurasian Divergence. Now that the Eurasian contrasts suggest

a wider divergence back to about 1600 than the Maddison approach, further progress will
depend on better quantification for the country at the center of the Great Divergence

debate: Imperial China. Thus far the present direct-comparison approach is handicapped
by insufficient Chinese population data, income data, and prices other than the rice price.

(2) Frontiers, food-rich and otherwise. Given that the dramatic revisions regarding

North America relate to its cheapness of grains and other staple foods before the 1870s, it
would be well to continue extending such direct comparisons to other early modern

frontiers, particularly grain-rich Thailand, Cochin China, and the Philippines in Asia and to
Poland, Russia, and Ukraine in Eastern Europe. There is also a case for deeper probing of

GDP and prices in geographically varied Latin America and Africa. These frontiers differed
greatly in their geography and relative staple-food scarcities.

(3) Luxury and capital-good prices. The history of purchasing-power inequalities,

both international and intra-national, is increasingly constrained by the lack of prices, or

shadow prices, of luxury goods and capital goods. This research frontier, well introduced
in the intra-national context by Hoffman et al. (2002), needs a renewed push.

(4) Heating prices. Despite some comparisons of the costs of fuels in terms of

millions of BTUs, especially by Robert Allen and his co-authors, we lack a systematic and
downloadable documentation of the BTUs delivered by different kinds of firewood and
other fuels from around the world. Scholars must also continue to quantify the

dependence of heating costs on climate, given that warmer climates supply part of the
needed warmth for free.

(5) Dating the rise and fall of purchasing power disparities. How will we put dates

on the rise and fall of Gerschenkron inequalities, and the departures of direct historical

comparisons from back-projection estimates? Were such disparities smaller in the less

urbanized and industrialized world before, say, 1300? And when did they shrink again?

Clearly, this paper’s use of the “1914” shorthand cannot mean a sharp break in that year.
30

The convergence of index-number estimates happened sometime since the midnineteenth century, but when?

(6) Separate roles for the two approaches. The main take-away, of course, is to

come to terms with the disparities between direct historical comparisons and Maddison’s
back projections.

The task of comparing aggregates is never free from the index number problem. If

one really wants to compare purchasing powers in 1700 the way an observer should have
seen them then, one should replace the 1990 price comparisons with 1700 price

comparisons. Even then, of course, one would have to make an arbitrary choice. For Japan
versus Britain, one can choose Japanese weights, British weights, or Allen’s common

hedonic price weights. Still, the preferred way to compare people’s fortunes in the past is

to use direct comparisons from exactly the historical settings they lived in – if our

reconstructions of nominal national product and prices from their time are sufficiently
reliable. On the other hand, the task of supplying and updating a global record of the
growth of real national product and productivity will always be one for which the

Maddison Project can accumulate, revise, and compare real national-account growth rates.
This is a task that the benchmark direct comparisons, with their changing weights, cannot
perform as well. Different questions call for different approaches.

31

References
Allen, Robert C. 2000. “Economic Structure and Agricultural Productivity in Europe, 13001800.” European Review of Economic History 4, 1 (February): 1-25.
Allen, Robert C. 2001. “The Great Divergence in European Wages and Prices from the
Middle Ages to the First World War.” Explorations in Economic History 38, 4
(October): 411–447. [Consumer bundle, p. 421.]
Allen, Robert C. 2005. “Real Wages in Europe and Asia: A First Look at the Long-Term
Patterns.” In Robert C. Allen, Tommy Bengtsson, and Martin Dribe (eds.), Living
Standards in the Past: New Perspectives on Well-Being in Asia and Europe. Oxford:
Oxford University Press, pp. 111-130.
Allen, Robert C. 2007. “India in the Great Divergence.” In Timothy J. Hatton, Kevin H.
O'Rourke, and Alan M. Taylor, eds., The New Comparative Economic History: Essays
in Honor of Jeffery G. Williamson. Cambridge, MA, MIT Press, pp. 9-32.
Allen, Robert C. 2013. Prices and wages for London and Southern England, 1200s-1914, at
http://gpih.ucdavis.edu.
Allen, Robert C., Jean-Pascal Bassino, Debin Ma, Christine Moll-Murata, and Jan Luiten van
Zanden. 2011. “Wages, Prices, and Living Standards in China, 1739-1925: in
comparison with Europe, Japan, and India” Economic History Review 64, S1
(January): 8-38.
Allen, Robert C., Tommy E. Murphy, and Eric B. Schneider. 2012. “The Colonial Origins of
Divergence in the Americas: A Labor Market Approach”. Journal of Economic History
72, 4 (December): 863-94 and supplementary materials.
Arroyo Abad, Leticia, Elwyn Davies, and Jan Luiten van Zanden. 2012. “Between Conquest
and Independence: Real Wages and Demographic Change in Spanish America,
1530-1820.” Explorations in Economic History 49, 2 (April): 149-66.
Balassa, Bela. 1964. "The Purchasing Power Parity Doctrine: A Reappraisal", Journal of
Political Economy 72, 6 (December): 584–96.
Bassino, Jean-Pascal, data file posted on http://gpih.ucdavis.edu in 2006, expanding on the
estimates by Bassino and Ma.
Bassino, Jean-Pascal and Ma, Debin. 2005. “Japanese Unskilled Wages in International
Perspective, 1741-1913.” Research in Economic History 23: 229-48.
Bassino, Jean-Pascal, Stephen Broadberry, Kyoji Fukao, Bishnupriya Gupta, and Masanori
Takashima. 2015. “Japan and the Great Divergence, 725-1874.” CEPR Discussion
Paper 10569.http://www.cepr.org/active/publications
/discussion_papers/dp.php?dpno=10569.
Bolt, Jutta and Jan Luiten van Zanden, 2013. The Maddison-Project,
http://www.ggdc.net/maddison/maddison-project/home.htm, 2013 version.
Bolt, Jutta and Jan Luiten van Zanden, 2014. “The Maddison Project: collaborative research
on historical national accounts.” Economic History Review 67, 3: 627–651.
Broadberry, Stephen. 2003. “Relative per Capita Income Levels in the United Kingdom and
the United States since 1870: Reconciling Time-Series Projections and DirectBenchmark Estimates”. Journal of Economic History 63, 3 (September): 852-63.
Broadberry, Stephen, Bruce Campbell, Alexander Klein, Mark Overton, and Bas van
Leeuwen. 2015. British Economic Growth, 1270-1870. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
32

Broadberry, Stephen, Johann Custodis, and Bishnupriya Gupta. 2015. “India and the Great
Divergence: An Anglo-Indian Comparison of GDP per capita, 1600–1871.”
Explorations in Economic History 55: 58–75.
Broadberry, Stephen, Hanhui Guan, and David Daokui Li. 2016. “China, Europe, and the
Great Divergence: A Study in Historical National Accounting, 980-1850.” (24 June).
Broadberry, Stephen and Bishnupriya Gupta. 2006. “The Early Modern Great Divergence:
Wages, Prices and Economic Development in Europe and Asia, 1500–1800.”
Economic History Review 59, 1 (February): 2–31.
Butlin, Noel G. 1962. Australian Domestic Product, Investment and Foreign Borrowing 18611938/39. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Chang, Chang-li [Zhang, Zhong-li]. 1962. The Income of the Chinese Gentry. Seattle:
University of Washington Press.
Clark, Gregory. 2006. “England 1209-1914” [prices and wage rates]. Excel file
downloadable from http://gpih.ucdavis.edu.
Coatsworth, John H. 1978. “Obstacles to Economic Development in Nineteenth-Century
Mexico,” American Historical Review 83, 1 (February): 80-100.
Coatsworth , John H. 1989. “The Decline of the Mexican Economy, 1800-1860,” in R. Liehr
(ed.), América Latina en la época de Simón Bolívar. La formación de las economías
nacionales y los intereses económicos europeos, 1800-1850. Berlin: Colloquium
Verlag.
Collins, William J. and Jeffrey G. Williamson. 2001. “Capital-Goods Prices and Investment,
1870-1950.” Journal of Economic History 61, 1 (March): 59-94.
Deaton, Angus and Alan Heston. 2010. “Understanding PPPs and PPP-Based National
Accounts”. American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 2, 4: 1–35.
Deng, Kent, and Patrick O’Brien. 2016. “China’s GDP Per Capita from the Han Dynasty to
Communist Times.” World Economics 17, 2 (April-June): 79-123.
De Vries, Jan. 2011. “The Great Divergence after Ten Years: Justly Celebrated Yet Hard to
Believe.” Historically Speaking 12, 4 (September): 13-15.
De Zwart, Pim. 2016. “Globalization in the Early Modern Era: New Evidence from the
Dutch-Asiatic Trade, c. 1600-1800.” Journal of Economic History 76, 2 (June): 52058.
De Zwart, Pim and Jan Luiten van Zanden. 2015. “Labor, Wages, and Living Standards in
Java, 1680-1914.” European Review of Economic History 19, 3 (August): 215-34.
Divekar, V.D. 1989. Prices and Wages in Pune Region in a Period of Transition, 1805-1830
AD. Pune: Gokhale Institute of Politics and Economics, 1989.
Dobado-Gonzalez, Rafael, Alfredo Garcia-Hiernaux, and David E. Guerrero. 2012. “The
Integration of Grain Markets in the Eighteenth Century: Early Rise of Globalization
in the West.” Journal of Economic History 72, 3 (September): 671-707.
Dobado-Gonzalez, Rafael, Alfredo Garcia-Hiernaux, and David E. Guerrero. 2015. “West
versus Far East: Early Globalization and the Great Divergence.” Cliometrica 9, 2
(May): 235-64.
Estevadeordal, Antoni, Brian Frantz, and Alan M. Taylor. 2003. “The Rise and Fall of World
Trade, 1870-1939.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 118, 2 (May): 359-407.
Federico, Giovanni and Antonio Tena-Junguito. 2016. “World Trade, 1800-1938: A New
Data-set" EHES Working Papers in Economic History, no. 93, appendix.
http://www.ehes.org/working_papers.html.

33

Feenstra, Robert C., Robert Inklaar and Marcel P. Timmer. 2015. “The Next Generation of
the Penn World Table.” American Economic Review 105, 10 (October): 3150–82.
Feuerwerker, Albert. 1969. “The Chinese Economy, ca. 1871-1911.” Michigan Papers in
Chinese Studies, no. 5.
Geloso, Vincent. 2015a. “Living Standards in New France on the Eve of Conquest”.
Unpublished manuscript, London School of Economics and Political Science.
Geloso, Vincent. 2015b. “The Seeds of Divergence: The Economy of French America, 1688
to 1760”. PhD thesis, London School of Economics and Political Science, September.
Gerschenkron, Alexander. 1947. “The Soviet Indices of Industrial Production,” Review of
Economics and Statistics 29, 4:217-26.
Gerschenkron, Alexander. 1951. “A Dollar Index of Soviet Machinery Output, 1927–28 to
1937.” Report R-197. Santa Monica: Rand Corporation.
Goldsmith, Raymond W. 1983. Financial Development of India: 1860-1977. New Haven:
Yale University Press.
Greyling, Lorraine and Grietjie Verhoef. 2015. “Slow growth, supply shocks and structural
change: the GDP of the Cape Colony in the late nineteenth century.” Economic
History of Developing Regions 30: 23–43.
Heston, Alan, Daniel A. Nuxoll, and Robert Samuelson. 1994. “The Differential-Productivity
Hypothesis and Purchasing-Power Parities: Some New Evidence.” Review of
International Economics 2, 3 (October): 227-43.
Hoffman, Philip T. 2011. “Prices, the Military Revolution, and Western Europe’s
Comparative Advantage in Violence.” Economic History Review 64 (S1): 39-59.
Hoffman, Philip T., David S. Jacks, Patricia Levin, and Peter H. Lindert. 2002. “Real
Inequality in Western Europe since 1500,” Journal of Economic History 62, 2 (June):
322-55.
http://gpih = The current data supplying internet site http://gpih.ucdavis.edu.
Jacks, David S., Christopher M. Meissner and Dennis Novy. 2010. “Trade Costs in the First
Wave of Globalization.” Explorations in Economic History 47, 2: 127-41.
Jacks, David S. and Krishna Pendakur. 2010. “Global Trade and the Maritime Transport
Revolution.” Review of Economics and Statistics 92, 4 (October): 745-55.
Johnson, Simon, William Larson, Chris Papageorgiou, and Arvind Subramanian. 2009. “Is
Newer Better? Penn World Table Revisions and their Impact on Growth Estimates”.
NBER Working Paper 15455 (October).
Kimura, Masahiro. 1987. La Revolución de los precios en la cuenca del pacífico, 1600-1650.
Ciudad de México: Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México, Facultad de
Economía.
Landes, David. 1999. The Wealth and Poverty of Nations: Why Some are So Rich and Some
So Poor. New York: W.W. Norton.
Lindert, Peter H. and Jeffrey G. Williamson. 2016. Unequal Gains: American Growth and
Inequality since 1700. Princeton NJ: Princeton University Press.
Liu, William Guanglin. 2015. The Chinese Market Economy, 1000–1500. Albany NY: SUNY
Press.
Maddison, Angus. 1995. Monitoring the World Economy 1820-1992. Paris, France: OECD.
Maddison, Angus. 2001. The World Economy: A Millennial Perspective. Paris, France:
OECD, Development Centre Studies.
34

Maddison, Angus. 2010. www.ggdc.net/maddison/Historical_Statistics/horizontalfile_02-2010.xls.
Maddison Project site. 2013. The Maddison-Project,
http://www.ggdc.net/maddison/maddison-project/home.htm, 2013 version.
Accessed 1 June 2013.
Malanima, Paolo. 2010. “The long decline of a leading economy: GDP in central and
northern Italy, 1300–1913.” European Review of Economic History 15 (November):
169–219.
Malanima, Paolo. 2012. Consumer Price Indices and Wages in Central-Northern Italy and
Southern England, 1300-1850: Statistical Appendix.
http://www.paolomalanima.it/default_file/Italian%20Economy/StatisticalAppend
ix.pdf, accessed 21jan2016.
Malinowski, Mikołaj and Jan Luiten van Zanden. Forthcoming, 2017. “Income and Its
Distribution in Preindustrial Poland.” Cliometrica (September).
Milanovic, Branko. 2009. Global Inequality Recalculated: The effect of new 2005 PPP
Estimates on Global Inequality”. World Bank, Research Department (August).
Mitchell, Brian R. 1988. British Historical Statistics. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.
Mitsui, Bunko. 1989. Trends of Major Prices in Early Modern Japan. Tokyo: University of
Tokyo Press.
Moosvi, Shireen. 1987. The Economy of the Mughal Empire c. 1595: A Statistical Study.
Delhi: Oxford University Press. DS461 .M66 1987
Moosvi, Shireen. 2008. People, Taxation and Trade in Mughal India. Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Nuxoll, Daniel A. 1994. “Differences in Relative Prices and International Differences in
Growth Rates.” American Economic Review 84, 5 (December): 1423-36.
O’Brien, Patrick and Çağlar Keyder. 1978. Economic Growth in Britain and France, 17801914: Two Paths to the Twentieth Century. London: G. Allen & Unwin.
Parthasarathi, Prasannan. 2005. “Agriculture, Labour, and the Standard of Living in
Eighteenth-Century India.” In Robert C. Allen, Tommy Bengtsson, and Martin Dribe
(eds.), Living Standards in the Past: New Perspectives on Well-Being in Asia and
Europe. Oxford: Oxford University Press, pp. 99-110.
Peper, Bram. 1970. “Java’s Population Growth in the 19th Century: A New Interpretation.”
Population Studies 24, 1 (March): 71-84.
Prados de la Escosura, Leandro. 2000. “International Comparisons of Real Product, 18201990.” Explorations in Economic History 37, 1 January): 1-41.
Prados de la Escosura, Leandro. 2016. “Mismeasuring Long-run Growth: The Bias from
Splicing National Accounts—the Case of Spain.” Cliometrica 10, 3 (September): 25175.
Pomeranz, Kenneth. 2000. The Great Divergence: China, Europe, and the Making of the
Modern World Economy. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Pomeranz, Kenneth. 2005. “Standards of Living in Eighteenth-Century China: Regional
Differences, Temporal Trends, and Incomplete Evidence.” In Robert C. Allen,
Tommy Bengtsson, and Martin Dribe (eds.), Living Standards in the Past: New
Perspectives on Well-Being in Asia and Europe. Oxford: Oxford University Press, pp.
23-54.

35

Pomeranz, Kenneth. 2011. “Ten Years After: Responses and Reconsiderations”, Historically
Speaking, 12(4), 20-25. Project Muse,
https://muse.jhu.edu/login?auth=0&type=summary&url=/journals/historically_sp
eaking/v012/12.4.coclanis.html.
Roy, Tirthankar. 2010. “Economic Conditions in Early Modern Bengal: A Contribution to
the Divergence Debate.” Journal of Economic History 70, 1 (March): 179–94.
Saito, Osamu and Masanori Takashima. 2016. “Estimating the shares of secondary- and
tertiary-sector outputs in the age of early modern growth: the case of Japan, 16001874.” European Review of Economic History 20: 368-86.
Samuelson, Paul A. 1964. “Theoretical Notes on Trade Problems.” Review of Economics and
Statistics 46, 2: 145–54.
Samuelson, Paul A. 1994. “Facets of Balassa-Samuelson Thirty Years Later.” Review of
International Economics 2, 3 (October): 201–26.
Seminario De Marzi, Luis Bruno. 2013. Las Cuentas Nacionales Del Perú, 1700-2012 Del
Perú, 1700-2012 (Book manuscript, December).
Studer, Roman. 2015. The Great Divergence Reconsidered: Europe, India, and the Rise to
Global Economic Power. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Van Zanden, Jan Luiten. 2003. “Rich and Poor before the Industrial Revolution: a
comparison between Java and the Netherlands at the beginning of the 19th
Century.” Explorations in Economic History 40, 1 (January): 1-23.
Ward, Marianne and John Devereux. 2003. “Measuring British Decline: Direct Versus LongSpan Income Measures”. Journal of Economic History 63:3 (September): 826-51.
Ward, Marianne and John Devereux. 2004. “Relative UK/US Output Reconsidered: A Reply
to Broadberry”. Journal of Economic History 64, 3 (September): 879-91.
Ward, Marianne and John Devereux. 2006. “Relative British and American Income Levels
during the First Industrial Revolution”. Research in Economic History 23: 249-86.
Ward, Marianne and John Devereux. 2016. “New Perspectives on Productivity and Living
Standards for the Late 19th Century.” Draft, 10 August.
Williamson, Jeffrey G. 1995. “The Evolution of Global Labor Markets since 1830:
Background Evidence and Hypotheses”. Explorations in Economic History 32: 14196.

36

Table 1. Comparing Consumer Purchasing Powers of Nominal GDP per Capita,
Japan versus Britain, 1750
The two consumer bundles, designed to have similar food calories, are:
(A.) "Japan A" basket (Bassino and Ma 2005), with a liter of sake added, for special
occasions, yielding 1,942 daily calories and 82 grams of daily protein; and
(B.) The British “bare bones” bundle (Broadberry et al., 2015), with sugar added, yielding
1,942 daily calories and 83 grams of daily protein.
barley
oats
buckwheat
rice
soybeans
beans/peas
meat
fish
sake
edible oil
butter
sugar
linen
lamp oil

Units per person-year
units (A.) Japan
(B.) Britain

kg
kg
kg
kg
kg
liters
kg
kg
liters
liters
kg
kg
m
liters

10
0
16
113.6
52
4
0
3.5
1
1
0
0
5
2.6

0
166
0
0
0
21
5
0
0
0
3
2.1
5
2.6

Prices, in grams of silver (gAg)
(A.) Japan
(B.) Britain
0.18

0.29
0.54

0.61
0.36
0.36
0.22

3.02
0.34
0.34
3.10

2.18
0.46
1.35
1.17
1.35

The total bundle costs, and aggregate results for 1750 are:
total cost of bundle (gAg)
real GDP, 1000 koku
nominal GDP, mill. £
nominal GDP, million gAg
population, in millions
GDP / cap (gAg)
GDP / cap, in bundles

(A.) Japan
90.4
86,905
4,654
30.9
150.6
1.666

(B.) Britain
208.2
91.06
9,707
7.2
1,344.3
6.456

6.89
5.88
6.64
10.79
3.17

Ratios
0.434
0.112
0.258

Sources and notes for Tables 1-2 and Figure 2: See notes to Table 3.

37

Table 2. Purchasing Power per Capita: Japan as Percent of Britain, 1600-1912
Maddison's
file 2010
1600 53.4
1650
1700 45.6
1713
1750
1800
1820 39.2
1850 29.1
1870 23.1
1880 24.8
1888 23.4
1900 26.3
1912 28.2

Maddison
project 2016
53.0
60.4
41.6

This paper's "bare-bones”
purchasing power per capita
34.4 (1602)
42.1 (1648)

29.2
23.1
24.8
23.4
26.3
29.1

25.0
19.3

35.3
30.6

28.3
24.6
21.4
19.6
21.0

38

Table 3. Direct Comparisons of non-British with
British Purchasing Power per Capita, 1525-1912
(Nominal GDP per capita, divided by cost of 1-man barebones bundle)
(Note: Britain values are specific to the comparison bundles for each country.)

Japan vs. Britain
1602 1.7
4.6
1648 1.8
4.0
1713 1.6
5.3
1750 1.7
6.9
1800 2.0
8.8
1850 2.3
8.8
1870 2.5
12.5
1888 3.3
16.9
1912 4.3
20.6

Java vs. Britain
1820 3.8
8.6
1830 5.0
11.1
1840 3.4
9.8
1850 2.4
10.9
1870 2.3
12.8
1890 3.2
25.1
1910 2.2
26.1

America vs. Britain
1700 10.0 7.3
1725 9.7
6.3
1750 9.8
6.6
1774 8.4
6.6
1800 6.5
7.1
1850 13.6 9.7
1860 14.5 9.7
1870 11.9 11.5

North-Central Italy vs. Britain
1525
5.7
5.8
1575
4.7
4.9
1625
3.9
4.3
1675
3.6
5.3
1725
4.5
7.0
1775
4.2
7.5
1820
4.7
8.4
1870
3.8
10.1
1910
7.5
19.4

China vs. Britain
1840 2.5
9.6
1885 1.4* 12.9

India vs. Britain
1595 1.3
5.0
1870 1.8
12.4

France vs. Britain
1820 4.7
8.4
1870 6.6
10.1
1910 14.4 19.4

1820
1870
1910

Poland vs. Britain
1578 2.9
4.2

Mexico vs. Britain
1800 3.9** 10.9**

Netherlands vs.
7.8
7.7
12.6

Britain
8.4
10.1
19.4

Peru vs. Britain
1800 1.5**
8.8**

Australia vs. Britain
1870 8.3**
6.9**

Cape Colony vs. Britain
1861 1.37
8.98

39

Sources and notes for Table 3 and Figure 3:
* See the text, noting the suspicion that Chang’s GNP estimate is too low.
** Food basket only
As of November 2016, underlying calculations will be detailed further in a new set
of files at gpih.ucdavis.edu.
Calorie and protein contents per metric unit are from Allen et al. (2011), Appendix
Table II, with a few exceptions. Unlike the studies (co-)authored by Bob Allen, this paper
omits fuel from the bundles, due to uncertainties about the conversion of fuel inputs (e.g.
coal, firewood) into millions of BTU.
Britain: For Britain’s nominal domestic product and population, I have used
Broadberry et al. (2015) up through 1870, then splicing numbers from Mitchell (1988)
onto the Broadberry et al. base. Broadberry et al. are also the source for the British barebones consumer bundle. Britain = England before 1700, Great Britain for 1700-1870, then
United Kingdom. For British prices, the main source is Gregory Clark’s collection of English
price time series (gpih.ucdavis.edu). Where these series stop before 1914, the remaining
years were spliced from the London series of Federico and Tena (2016).
(1) Japan (Tables 3-4 and Figure 2): The estimates of Japanese national product
and population relied at first on Bassino et al. (2015), then with a revised estimates
underlying Saito and Takashima (2016). I am indebted to Masanori Takashima for the
revised GDP figures in millions of koku, 1600-1874.
Their estimates of real national product draw on a wide range of clues about
sectoral value added, productivity, urbanization, demand patterns, and other indicators.
Their real value added estimates are all converted into rice (koku) equivalents, implicitly
using relative prices in a base period. I have converted their resulting real products into
nominal product in grams of silver, using the price of rice in Masahiro Kimura (1987),
Mitsui Bunko (1989), and the file "Japan 1885-1926," downloadable from
http://gpih.ucdavis.edu. I am indebted to Jean-Pascal Bassino for supplying the Mitsui
Bunko series, and to David Jacks for supplying the 1886-1926 file, to gpih.ucdavis.edu.
These sources are also used for the Osaka prices in 1600-1604 (“1602” here), Kyoto prices
for 1711-1715 (“1713”) through 1866-1874 (“1870”), and Edo prices for 1886-1914.
There are uncertainties about the silver content of prices expressed in monme, as
the sources note. My estimate of the silver content of the monme comes from the Bank of
Japan's research center (http://www.imes.boj.or.jp/cm/english_htmls/feature_gra19.htm (1 August 2006)). The assumed rates are: for the 1600-1690's, 3 grams of silver per
monme; for 1690's–1706, 1.875 grams of silver per monme; and for 1713-1870, 0.75
grams of silver per monme.
The Japanese consumer bundle is the “Japan A” basket of Bassino and Ma (2005),
with slight adjustments.
On rice production and overall GDP, with comparisons to Maddison, see also Fukao
et al. (2015, Appendix A).
(2) China 1840 and 1885:
(3) India 1595 and 1870: The Mughal GDP in millions of rupees for 1595 is from
Moosvi 2008, pp. 2-3. For the population, I use Broadberry et al. (2015, p. 70). Habib's
(1982a, p. 166) estimate of 107-115 million is based on 1941 census shares of British
India, which seems risky. The 1870 GDP is from Goldsmith (1983).
40

The prices and consumer bundles are from the Allen and Studer data set at
gpih.ucdavis.edu.
Silver content of rupee prices: The silver value of the rupee is set by Allen and
Studer at 10.78 grams of silver in the current estimates. For alternative exchange rates of
the rupee from 1823 on, see the Excel file "Indian rupee exchange rate values, 1823-1899,
at http://gpih.ucdavis.edu. The choice of silver content does not affect any relative real
wages, of course, though it threatens to affect relative prices and relative real GDP per
capita if the exchange rates are inconsistent.
Broadberry and Gupta (2012) used 8.0 rupees per £ for circa 1600. This implies
14.62 gAg per rupee. They cite Chaudhuri (1978, p. 471), who gives that Rs 8.0 per £ for
years from 1760 on. Habib (3rd ed, 2014, p. 433) says that "The weights of the [silver]
rupee and the [gold] muhr remained practically unchanged through our period [15561707]." So Rs 8 = £1 even in 1595. Using the Broadberry-Gupta rate for 1600 thus would
raise all silver prices, and income, in India 1595-1600 by more than a third (36.26%).
(4) The American estimates of real purchasing power per capita: As in Table 1, the
source is Lindert and Williamson (2016, Chapters 2, 5, and 10, and Appendix D).
(5) – (7) Continental Western Europe 1525-1910: Nominal GDP figures are
centered nine-year averages, except that Italy 1910 = that one year's value.
On North-Central Italy, 1525-1910, see Paolo Malanima (2010) and his (2012)
“Consumer Price Indices and Wages in Central-Northern Italy and Southern England,
1300-1850: Statistical Appendix.”
http://www.paolomalanima.it/default_file/Italian%20Economy/StatisticalAppendix.pdf,
accessed 21jan2016. Also available at gpih.ucdavis.edu, Nominal GDP Historical Series.
On France and Netherlands, 1820-1910, the nominal GDPs are available, with
source citations, at gpih.ucdavis.edu. The bare-bones consumer basket costs for Paris and
Amsterdam are from Robert Allen’s (2001, p. 426) half-century averages, 1500-1549
through 1850-1899, and 1900-1913
Exchange rates up to mid-19th-century are based on the silver contents of the national
currencies. Exchange rates for the 1870 and 1910 benchmarks are from Federico Giovanni
and Antonio Tena-Junguito, (2016), "World trade, 1800-1938: a new data-set" WP 93.
Web reference http://www.ehes.org/working_papers.html. I am indebted to Chris
Meissner for this reference.
(8) Poland, 1578: All the estimates in this case are from a single secondary source.
Malinowski and Van Zanden (forthcoming 2017, p. 28) have estimated Poland’s nominal
income, its subsistence basket cost for an average “individual” (adult income recipient?),
and the ratio of these in both Poland and Britain for 1578. Their comparison is with
England, not Great Britain. The comparison is not graphed in Figure 3 for lack of any
competing Maddison estimate for sixteenth-century Poland.
(9) Peru, 1800: Nominal GDP was estimated by Seminario (2013 book ms., pp.
536-37) as 48,385,750 pesos fuertes of 1795. I have inflated this to an average for 17961804 of 51,424,823 pesos fuertes, or 1.247 million grams of silver, using his price ind3x
from the same pages. The population of 1,268,848 is from also from Seminario, p. 278.
The prices are from the gpih data file underlying Arroyo Abad, Davies, and Van Zanden
(2012).
(10) Mexico 1800: Nominal GDP for 1800 is from Coatsworth (1978, 1989).
41

Population from Seminario (2013 book ms., p. 278). The exchange rate of 24.248 gAg per
peso, or 3.031 gAg per real, is from the gpih data file underlying Arroyo Abad, Davies, and
Van Zanden (2012). For Mexico, I have switched from the Arroyo-Davies-Van Zanden use
of 165 kilos of maize to a wheat-maize mix that conserved the 1,943 calories while
utilizing the availability of the wheat price series.
Maddison (2001) gives a Mexico/UK ratio of 0.447 for real GDP per capita.
However, here I have used the Maddison Project’s current Mexico/UK ratio of 0.399,
yielding a smaller discrepancy between estimated ratios.
(11) Australia 1868: All figures other than population are averages over 18661870. Nominal GDP is from Butlin (1962, Table 2, p. 10/11). The interpolated population
for 1868 is 1.495 million, from the Palgrave International Historical Statistics series. The
consumer bundle consists of only six food products, with Sydney prices: bread, potatoes,
tea, butter, cheese, and sugar.
The Maddison Project estimated ratio of real GDP per capita, 1866-1870 = 1.0148,
versus the 1.205 ratio implied here.
(12) Cape Colony 1861: British nominal GDP and both places’ bundle costs are
based on five-year averages for 1859-1863. The British nominal GDP’s are, again, those
for Great Britain, based on Broadberry et al. (2015). The Cape GDP and population are
those given for 1861 by Greyling and Verhoef (2015, Tables 2 and 3). The Cape Colony
prices and the consumer bundle are those supplied in the Pim de Zwart data series on
Cape Colony prices 1653-1913, at gpih.ucdavis.edu. I have adjusted the wheat
consumptions of the De Zwart bundle to equal 193.5 kilograms, in order to scale the daily
calories up to 1,942. The Cape/Britain ratio of purchasing powers per capita, equaling
0.151 for 1861, contrasts with the 0.247 ratio for the same five-year period (1859-1863)
by the Maddison Project.
Table 4. How relative subsistence costs correlated with purchasing power, 1925-1912
Each country’s level as a share of British level

Comparison Benchmark
country
year
China
France
France
India
India
Japan
Japan
Japan
Japan

Subsistence Maddison
This paper’s
bundle
Project
purchasing
cost ratio
income/cap power / capita

Eurasia up to 1870 -1840
0.60
1820
0.84
1870
1.10
1595
0.43
1870
0.53
1602
0.54
1648
0.63
1713
0.69
1750
0.44

0.27
0.58
0.62
0.73
0.17
0.53
0.60
0.40
0.35

0.26
0.56
0.66
0.26
0.15
0.37
0.44
0.29
0.24

42

Japan
Japan
Java
Java
Java
Java
Java
NC Ital y
NC Italy
NC Italy
NC Italy
NC Italy
NC Italy
NC Italy
NC Italy
Netherlands
Netherlands

1800
1850
1820
1830
1840
1850
1870
1525
1575
1625
1675
1725
1775
1820
1870
1820
1870

0.29
0.42
0.38
0.31
0.36
0.53
0.49
1.47
1.32
1.04
0.80
0.71
0.72
0.65
0.98
0.65
0.88

Outer continents up to 1870 -Australia
1868
1.13
Cape Colony 1861
1.45
Mexico
1800
1.04
USA
1725
0.72
USA
1772/4
0.76
USA
1800
0.70
USA
1850
0.82
USA
1860
0.77
1.08
USA
1870
After 1870 -China
1885
France
1910
Japan
1888
Japan
1912
Java
1890
Java
1910
NC Italy
1910
Netherlands 1910
USA
1900
USA
1912

0.59
1.12
0.93
1.56
0.68
0.71
1.07
0.89
0.83
1.08

0.31
0.29
0.26
0.24
0.23
0.19
0.16
1.40
1.33
1.38
1.21
0.94
0.80
0.72
0.47
0.90
0.85

0.23
0.26
0.44
0.45
0.35
0.22
0.18
0.99
0.95
0.90
0.69
0.64
0.56
0.56
0.38
0.93
0.76

1.03
0.25
0.40
0.53
0.68
0.62
0.79
0.79
0.77

1.21
0.15
0.36
1.55
1.27
0.92
1.41
1.50
1.03

0.14
0.68
0.23
0.29
0.14
0.14
0.46
0.80
0.91
1.09

0.11
0.74
0.20
0.21
0.13
0.08
0.39
0.65
1.31
1.18

Notes to Table 4:
The price and purchasing power results are derived as described in the notes to Table 3
and Figure 3. The preferred source for the Maddison Project income per capita is its
internet site (Bolt and Van Zanden 2013), explained in Bolt and Van Zander (2014).
43

Three observations from Table 3 were omitted here. Peru 1800 and USA 1750
were omitted for lack of any Maddison Project estimates. Japan 1870, at the dawn of the
Meiji restoration, was omitted because its new currency units gave questionable results,
as evident in Figure 6.

Figure 1. American Real Income per Capita, Relative to Britain, 1700-2011
Direct Current-Price comparisons versus Maddison Back-projections

Sources and notes to Figure 1:
* The 1700 estimate is from Maddison (2001), rather that from the Maddison Project site.
The sources are Maddison (1995, 2001, 2010); Maddison Project site (2013); Ward and
Devereux (2003, 2004, 2006); and Lindert and Williamson (2016). For 1700-1872 the
Lindert-Williamson series combines our own new estimates of nominal incomes with
Robert Allen’s barebones consumer price deflators for Philadelphia, Massachusetts, and
the Chesapeake, along with his corresponding price series for England, and the
Broadberry et al. (2015) estimates of the nominal income of Great Britain up to 1870. For
44

1950-2010 we use the expenditure-based income measure (cgdpe) per capita from Penn
World Tables 8.1, and our ratios refer to the United Kingdom, not Great Britain.
The sources and assumptions for Figure 1 are described at length in Lindert and
Williamson (2016, Chapters 2, 3, 5, 6, and 10 and Appendix D).
Figure 2. The Bare-bones Purchasing Power of GDP per capita,
Asian Countries Compared with Britain, 1595-1912

45

Figure 3. Comparing Current-Price Measures of Relative Purchasing Power per Capita
with Maddison’s GDP per capita, Several Countries Relative to Britain, 1525 – 1912

46

Figure 4. Comparing Current-Price Measures of Relative Purchasing Power per Capita
with Maddison’s GDP per capita, Several Countries Relative to Britain, 1872 and 1910
(Based on Ward-Devereux 2016.)

47

Figure 5. Comparing Current-Price Measures of Relative Purchasing Power per Capita
with Maddison’s GDP per capita, Several Countries Relative to Britain, 1872 and 1910
(Based on Ward-Devereux 2016. For each country, the upper dot refers to 1910.)

48

Figure 6. Relative Costs of Barebones Consumer Bundles in Hard Currency, 1525-1912
(Costs relative to Britain = 1.000)

Sources and notes to Figure 6:
The sources are the same as those described in the notes to Table 3 and Figure 3.
The compositions of the bundles vary from one country’s time series to another’s, though
all bundles’ foods deliver about 1,942 kilocalories.
Hard currency here means either grams of silver or the pound sterling, both for Britain
and for the indicated other country.

49

Figure 7. English / American Price Ratios for Wheat, 1786-1936

50

Figures 8. The Wheat Price of Lesser Luxuries, 1215-1912

Figure 8A. The Wheat Price of Paper, England and Elsewhere, 1355-1912

51

Figure 8B. The Wheat Price of Nails and Iron, England and Elsewhere, 1220-1912

52

Sources and notes to Figure 7:
The English price series are from Clark in gpih.ucdavis.edu, with values for 1914-1938
spliced on from the series given in Federico and Tena (2016).
The American price series are from Carter et al. (2006, series Cc205-Cc209. For 1881-90
the "Chicago" series is spliced onto the 1890-1913 Chicago "Spring and winter" series.
For 1914-38 the BLS series is spliced onto the Chicago spring and winter series.
The exchange rate is from Federico and Tena (2016).
The prices are centered five-year averages.
Sources and notes to Figures 8A and 8B:

The English series are from the corresponding files in gpih.ucdavis.edu, with a few
exceptions. The figures comparing China with England in 1840 are from Broadberry,
Guan, and Li (2016, Table 3).

The figures are generally quinquennial averages centered on the stated years, indexed to
the base of England, 1910-14 (except for indexing nail prices to 1866-1870). Those for
England are from Clark’s 1209-1914 price file at gpih.ucdavis.edu, converted to
logarithms. Those for other places are ratios of the log form ln (Other place / England),
with the England denominator not necessarily coming from the Clark series.

The index 100-base years are the end-years of the series, namely 1910 for paper and iron
and 1870 for nails.
These log-ratios of departure from the England price ratio in the same benchmark year
are, as follows:

Figure 8A, paper: Arequipa (Peru), year 1600 = 1.62, 1650 = 1.94, and 1700 = 1.74.
Barcelona, 1500 = -0.97, 1550 = -1.19, 1600 = -0.62, 1700 = -0.75, 1750 = -0.70, and 1790
= -0.56. Sopron, Hungary, 1550 = 0.60, 1600 = 1.21, 1650 = 0.98, 1700 = 0.95, 1750 = 0.67.
Warsaw, 1650 = 1.81, 1700 = 1.08, 1750 = 0.72, and 1790 = 0.94. Moscow, 1600 = 1.47,
1650 = 2.00, 1700 = 0.84, 1750 = 1.51, and 1790 = 1.19. Canton 1700 = 2.32. Pune, India
1820 = 0.72.
The Clark-based English wheat price indices for paper, to which these log-departures are
added, are England 1500 = 0.90, 1550 = 0.54, 1600 = -0.25, 1650 = -0.22, 1700 = 0.42,
1750 = 0.48, 1790 = 0.00, and 1820 = 0.31 (all in logs).

Figure 8B, ln (other country/GB) for nails: Castile (average of New and Old), 1500 = -0.85,
1550 = -0.16, 1600 = 0.18, and 1650 = 0.66. Istanbul, 1600 = 0.16, 1700 = 0.97, 1750 =
0.34, and 1790 = 0.60. Moscow, 1600 = 2.22, 1650 = 1.43, 1700 = 0.87, 1750 = 0.22, and
1790 = 0.82. Canton 1700 = 2.36. Pune, India 1819 (1817-21 average), for British mediumsized nails, from Divekar (1989).
The Pennsylvania nail price series (PA) is from the file "Pennsylvania 1720-1896, spliced"
at gpih.ucdavis.edu.
It is based on the data supplied by Anne Bezanson and collaborators.
53

The Clark-based English wheat price indices for nails (based in 1866-70, and logged), to
which these log-departures are added, are 1500 = 2.27, 1550 = 1.58, 1600 = 0.86, 1650 =
0.59, 1700 = 0.58, 1750 = 0.60, 1790 = 0.27, 1820 = 0.06, and 1840 = 0.18.
Figure 7B, ln (other country/GB) for manufactured iron shapes: Canton 1840 = 2.36.
Pune, India 1819 = 0.74.
The Clark-based English wheat price indices for manufactured iron (based in 1906-1910,
and logged), to which these log-departures are added, are 1820 = -0.13 and 1840 = -0.22.
In figure 7B, the wheat price of iron is not graphed for Pune, India 1819, because it is too
close to the relative wheat price of nails for the same date.

54

