NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

CLIMATE RISKS AND MARKET EFFICIENCY
Harrison Hong
Frank Weikai Li
Jiangmin Xu
Working Paper 22890
http://www.nber.org/papers/w22890

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2016

We thank Stefano Giglio, Robert Engle, and seminar participants at the 2016 NBER Summer
Institute Forecasting and Empirical Methods, the 2016 Symposium on Financial Engineering and
Risk Management, the 2016 Research in Behavioral Finance Conference, the Volatility Institute
at NYU, and the 2016 NBER Asset Pricing Meetings. The views expressed herein are those of
the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2016 by Harrison Hong, Frank Weikai Li, and Jiangmin Xu. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that
full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Climate Risks and Market Efficiency
Harrison Hong, Frank Weikai Li, and Jiangmin Xu
NBER Working Paper No. 22890
December 2016
JEL No. G0,G02,G12,Q0,Q5,Q54
ABSTRACT
We investigate whether stock markets efficiently price risks brought on or exacerbated by climate
change. We focus on drought, the most damaging natural disaster for crops and food-company cash
flows. We show that prolonged drought in a country, measured by the Palmer Drought Severity Index
(PDSI) from climate studies, forecasts both declines in profitability ratios and poor stock returns for
food companies in that country. A portfolio short food stocks of countries in drought and long those
of countries not in drought generates a 9.2% annualized return from 1985 to 2015. This excess predictability
is larger in countries having little history of droughts prior to the 1980s. Our findings support regulatory
concerns of markets inexperienced with climate change underreacting to such risks.

Harrison Hong
Department of Economics
Columbia University
1022 International Affairs Building
Mail Code 3308
420 West 118th Street
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
hh2679@columbia.edu

Jiangmin Xu
Department of Finance
Guanghua School of Management
Peking University
jiangminxu@gsm.pku.edu.cn

Frank Weikai Li
Department of Finance
Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
Clear Water Bay, Kowloon, Hong Kong
wliaj@ust.hk

1

Introduction

Regulators are increasingly worried about the extent to which stock markets efficiently price
climate change risks. Most notably, Mark Carney, the head of the Bank of England, recently
linked these risks to financial stability (Carney (2015)). Such risks include energy corporations’
exposure to carbon assets, which might be affected by future carbon prices or taxes. This
so-called “stranded asset issue” has attracted the most discussion in regulatory and market
circles at this point.1 But climate change risks need not be so narrowly confined to carbon
exposures. Vulnerability of corporations’ production processes to natural disasters such as
prolonged drought, which is likely to be amplified by climate change and the focus of our paper,
is also important and can impose significant damage to corporate profits (see, e.g., Trenberth,
Dai, van der Schrier, Jones, Barichivich, Briffa, and Sheffield (2014)).2 In particular, regulators
are concerned that markets have had little experience in dealing with such risks and might
not pay enough attention and underreact to them as a result. Various regulatory bodies are
promoting both voluntary and mandatory disclosures of corporations’ climate risk exposures to
address this issue.3 However, there is little systematic research on the topic of climate risks and
market efficiency up to this point.
We tackle this important question by focusing on the efficiency with which the stock prices
of food companies respond to information about drought. Our focus on drought has a few
different motivations. First, among the natural disasters that might be amplified by climate
change, including drought, heat waves, floods, and cold spells, drought is considered one of the
most devastating for economic production. A recent study (Lesk, Rowhani, and Ramankutty
(2016)) looks at 2,800 weather disasters along with data on 16 different cereals grown in over 100
countries. They found that droughts cut a country’s crop production by ten percent, heat waves
1

See, e.g., “The elephant in the atmosphere,” Economist July 19th, 2014.
Another recent study by Williams, Seager, Abatzoglou, Cook, Smerdon, and Cook (2015) argues that global
warming caused by human emissions has most likely intensified the drought in California by 15 to 20 percent.
3
Examples of the more prominent voluntary disclosure initiatives include the Carbon Standards Disclosure
Board, Integrated Reporting, the Carbon Disclosure Project, and the UN Principles for Responsible Investment.
2

1

by nine percent, but floods and cold spells had no effects on agricultural production levels.4
Second, a number of water engineering studies find that the food industry is the most
reliant on water and hence the most sensitive to drought risk (Blackhurst, Hendrickson, and
Vidal (2010)).5 Indeed, there are an increasing number of reports of dramatic short-falls in
earnings and compressed profitability ratios or margins due to drought for agribusinesses such
as Cargill, Tyson Foods, and Campbell Soup.6 For instance, Tyson Foods, a large multinational
food processor, suffered steep profit drops due to the 2012 droughts in the main US agricultural
states.7
Third, drought is easy to quantify by using the Palmer Drought Severity Index (PDSI), a
widely used monthly metric in climate studies (Palmer (1965)). PDSI combines information
such as temperature and the amount of moisture in the soil to create an index that does an
accurate job of measuring drought intensity. Less positive values of PDSI are associated with
more drought-like conditions. While not perfect, it is by far the most widely used in climate
studies and the most readily available (Alley (1984)). Globally, it is available at the country
level and goes back to the 1870s. This data is available in the US by state going back to the
1890s.
We study the relationship between climate risks and stock markets in an international sample
of countries. The time series of stock markets for most countries are much shorter than that
of the US. The earliest start date is 1975 and much of our sample only begins in the early
1990s.8 We consider a sample of around 30 countries (including the US) with at least 10 food
4

This is distinct from whether a warming climate is good or bad for crop yields (Mendelsohn, Nordhaus,
and Shaw (1994)).
5
The other major industry perhaps comparable to food companies in terms of water use is the power industry,
but utilities are regulated and their profitability is largely unaffected by drought. The only other industry that
also consumes a significant amount of water in its production process is the automative industry but its reliance
on water is much less than that of the food industry.
6
See “Feeding Ourselves Thirsty: How the Food Sector is Managing Global Water Risks”, A Ceres Report,
May 2015.
7
See, e.g., “Meat Stocks Fall Tyson 8% As Drought Hits Earnings”, Investor’s Business Daily August 6,
2012. Grain price is the main input cost for raising livestocks. The higher grain prices squeezed profit margins.
Additionally, extreme reductions in output can also hurt food businesses relying on turnover as well as margins.
8
However, the data for international markets includes 2015 in contrast to the US data which is only available

2

companies during the entire period. In other words, our sample of countries are those with
significant agricultural sectors. In robustness checks, we also separately analyze the US time
series going back to 1927.
Our dependent variable of interests are the change in profitability ratios and the returns
of the FOOD industry of each country.9 FOOD combines food processing and agricultural
companies. We focus on this aggregated industry portfolio as opposed to the finer industry
classifications, which separate FOOD into smaller components. The reason is that drought is
likely to have a direct impact on the profits of both food processing and agricultural companies.10
First, we show that from roughly 1900 to now, when global temperatures exhibit a prominent
increasing trend (see Figure 4), there is an increasing trend toward droughts across the countries
in our sample. Climate studies typically focus on all places in the world, while we focus on just
the countries that have large enough food industries. While not the focus of our paper, we
provide evidence consistent with previous climate studies that suggest an association between
global warming and droughts. It supports the premise behind our paper that drought is a
channel through which a warming climate might impact the global economies and stock markets.
Second, we then show that droughts are problematic for food industry profitability, consistent
with the anecdotes described earlier. Droughts are considered economically worrisome should
the PDSI be elevated for a prolonged period. For short durations, drought has a negligible effect
as production can adjust. It might even be helpful depending on when it occurs (before or after
a harvest). But long periods of drought, running into years have negative consequences. Our
main predictor variable will be a moving average of these PDSI series, averaged over horizons
of anywhere from 12 months to 36 months (PDSI12m to PDSI36m). As our baseline, we focus
on a 36-month moving average (PDSI36m). We pool together all the countries to run our
up to 2014.
9
We use Datastream industry classifications for the international sample excluding the US. For the US, we
use the Fama and French (1997) 17-industry classification.
10
Drought also creates water shortages which impact agricultural companies. While some of these cost increases can be temporarily passed onto consumers, prolonged drought ultimately also severely impacts agriculture
as well.

3

regressions and control for country fixed effects. We find that this moving average of the PDSI
index strongly predicts changes in FOOD industry profitability ratios, as measured by industry
net income over assets: low or negative values of PDSI for the previous 36 months are correlated
with low or negative changes in food industry profitability ratios over the next 12 months.
Third, we then examine the relationship between this moving-average PDSI and food industry expected returns. Under the efficient market null hypothesis, we expect the coefficient
on our independent variable of interest, the moving-average PDSI, to be zero (assuming there
is no risk premium for drought) or negative (if there is a risk premium for drought).11 Yet to
the extent that the market is underreacting to drought risk, as hypothesized by regulators, we
expect the coefficient on the moving-average PDSI to be positive.
To see which is the case, we can construct a portfolio strategy that conditions on the PDSI
information and consider the returns associated with this strategy. A strategy that longs the
food industry portfolios of countries with high PDSI and shorts those with low PDSI in any given
month and holds for one year generates an excess return of 0.77% per month with a t-statistic
of 2.74. The Sharpe Ratio is 0.50.12 The results are similar whether we adjust the return spread
using the global Sharpe (1964) CAPM, Fama and French (1993) three factor or Carhart (1997)
four factor model as our long/short portfolio has little exposure to these common factors. These
results support that there is underreaction in international markets since markets with drought
do worst in the future than markets without drought. This underreaction is also symmetric
with respect to negative and positive values of PDSI across countries.13
Another way to get at this same result is to use excess return predictability regressions. The
portfolio results make clear that the predictability concerns food industry specific profitability
and returns. As such, we extract the food industry specific returns in two ways. The first is that
11

A lower PDSI level is associated with more uncertainty regarding future cash flows and hence should
compensate investors with higher expected returns.
12
Our portfolio analysis in contrast to our international sample regressions includes the US food stocks for
purposes of investability.
13
Our study assumes that even if the PDSI metric is not widely used until the 1970s producers and investors
have always had access to temperature and other related information to form expectations of drought severity.

4

we control in our predictive regressions, where the dependent variable is the FOOD portfolio
return net of the risk-free rate, for a host of variables that are known to predict aggregate
market returns. The second is that we can calculate the market portfolio net of FOOD stocks
and then subtract from the FOOD returns the returns of the market portfolio purged of the
FOOD sector. International cross-country regressions with country fixed effects yield a similar
conclusion as our cross-country portfolio strategy.
Fourth, we can exploit exogenous variation in historical PDSI across countries to get at the
experience mechanism behind regulatory concerns about market underreaction to climate change
risks. Some countries in our sample have low PDSI scores in the past, while others have very
high PDSI scores and little history with droughts. The main reason why regulators are worried
that markets might be underreacting to climate change risks is that climate change represents
a new phenomenon that markets do not have experience with. This scenario corresponds to the
countries in our sample with high past PDSI scores. We find that the degree of underreaction
for this subset of countries is more than twice that of other countries, consistent with regulatory
concerns. Moreover, this underreaction is particularly strong for droughts or dry climate among
these high past PDSI score countries.
We also conduct a series of robustness exercises, including separately analyzing the US
sample where we have a long time series from 1927 to 2014 and where we have more detailed
data on droughts. We can construct a measure of drought for the US by aggregating state-level
drought measures for the top agricultural producing states. We find similar results as when
we use a coarser measure of PDSI for the US, providing comfort that our international results
are sensible. We also consider a number of extensions and robustness checks of our baseline
specification, including (1) looking at short-horizon return predictability (1-month, 3-month and
6-month), and (2) seeing if our t-statistics are inflated due to persistent predictor variables since
our PDSI measure is highly persistent (close to a random walk) by implementing the Campbell
and Yogo (2006) test. We also show that our results are specific to the FOOD industry and this

5

excess predictability is not apparent across other industries in the US.
Our findings are similar in spirit to the recent literature on attention and return predictability
(see, e.g., Hong, Torous, and Valkanov (2007), DellaVigna and Pollet (2007), Cohen and Frazzini
(2008)), whereby the market underreacts to many types of value relevant information such as
industry news, demographic shifts, and upstream-downstream relationships. Even for these
types of obviously relevant news, the market can be inattentive. Our analysis points to a
similar underreaction to information on climate risks and suggests the value of exploring the
corporate disclosure of exposure risk (Hirshleifer and Teoh (2003)).
Climate risk variables can be quantified and have been used successfully in the pricing of
weather derivatives.14 However, the broader question of the extent to which information on
such risks is appropriately discounted in stock markets has not received much attention to date.
Our study of climate risks and market efficiency helps characterize the nature of the potential
inefficiencies, which might inform regulatory responses and be useful for practitioners interested
in the construction of quantitative risk-management models (Shiller (1994)).
There is a large literature on the economic analysis of how to design government policies
to deal with climate change (see, e.g., Stern (2007), Nordhaus (1994)), be it through emissions
trading (Montgomery (1972)) or taxes (Golosov, Hassler, Krusell, and Tsyvinski (2014)). In
contrast, our analysis highlights the role of markets in potentially mitigating the risks brought on
or exacerbated by climate change. Understanding the role of financial markets in pricing climate
risks is a natural one, though work is limited at this point with some notable exceptions. Bansal,
Kiku, and Ochoa (2014) argue that long-run climate risks as captured by temperature are priced
into the market. Daniel, Litterman, and Wagner (2015) and Giglio, Maggiori, Stroebel, and
Weber (2015) show how stock and real estate markets might help guide government policies
assuming markets efficiently incorporate such climate risks. Our analysis suggests that such
climate risk information, at least when it comes to natural disasters, is not efficiently priced.
14

See, e.g., Roll (1984), Campbell and Diebold (2005).

6

2

Data, Variables and Summary Statistics

2.1

International Drought Measures

Our data for the global (excluding the US) Palmer Drought Severity index comes from Dai,
Trenberth, and Qian (2004). The index is a measurement of drought intensity based on a
supply-and-demand model of soil moisture developed by Palmer (1965). The index takes into
account not only temperature and the amount of moisture in the soil, but also hard-to-calibrate
factors such as evapotranspiration and recharge rates. It is a widely used metric in climate
studies. The index grades drought and moisture conditions in the following scale: -4 and below
is extreme drought, -3.9 to -3 is severe drought, -2.9 to -2 is moderate drought, -1.9 to 1.9 is
mid-range (normal), 2 to 2.9 is moderately moist, 3 to 3.9 is very moist, 4 and above is extremely
moist. The extreme values for PDSI are -10 and 10.
The data consists of the monthly PDSI over global land areas computed using observed or
model monthly surface air temperature and precipitation. The global PDSI dataset is structured
in terms of longitude and latitude coordinates and we extract each country’s PDSI based on
that country’s geographic coordinates. The sample period of global PDSI is from January 1870
to December 2014.
We present the evolution of droughts in a number of countries from our international sample.
Figure 1 plots the time series of monthly PDSI values for several countries, including Australia,
India, Russia, Japan and Israel. The sample starts from 1927 and ends in 2014. We also
identify some of the most severe drought episodes in the history, which correspond closely to
very negative values of PDSI in the data. For example, the Millennium drought in Australia
started from 1997 and continued for more than 10 years, which is recognized as the worst on
record since settlement in Australia.
Since droughts that last for a few months are unlikely to do any harm to the food industry
(and under certain circumstances might even be helpful depending on whether it occurs before

7

or after a harvest), we consider a moving average of these monthly drought measures, where the
average is over years. As we discussed in the Introduction, prolonged droughts that last years
are likely to substantially impair food industry cashflows and hence their stock prices. The idea
is that by shortening or lengthening the window over which we do the average, we pick up more
prolonged periods of drought. We will focus on the baseline 36 months moving average of PDSI
(PDSI36m) for our countries. In robustness checks, we also consider shorter horizon moving
averages, ranging from 12 months to 30 months.
To see why smoothing over long periods makes sense, consider that the monthly Palmer
Drought Severity Index (PDSI) in month t is computed based on the following equation:
1
PDSIt = 0.897 PDSIt−1 + Zt ,
3

(2.1)

where PDSIt is the current PDSI in month t, PDSIt−1 is the PDSI in the previous month t − 1,
and Zt is called the “moisture anomaly index”, which can be thought of as the moisture “shock”
in month t.15 The initial monthly PDSI value at (t = 0) in a spell of dry or wet weather is
1
PDSI0 = Z0 .
3

(2.2)

Hence the PDSI in a month depends on both the current-month moisture anomaly Zt and the
previous-month PDSI value (PDSIt−1 ). The value of PDSIt in equation (2.1) is not a weighted
average of PDSIt−1 and Zt , since the sum of the weights 0.897 and 1/3 is strictly greater than
1.16 This means the weight (1/3) on the current moisture anomaly is too large, so that the
monthly PDSI values respond too rapidly to monthly moisture shocks. This is one reason for
why there are such large monthly fluctuations in PDSI in the graphs we showed before. As a
result, practitioners often advocate smoothing by averaging over longer periods to get a more
15

See, e.g., Alley (1984) and Karl (1986).
If the weight on Zt were 1 − 0.897 = 0.103, then (2.1) would have been an exponentially weighted moving
average model.
16

8

sensible result for a prolonged drought, which is what we do in the paper.17
Panel B of Table 2 shows the summary statistics for various drought measures in our international sample. Our main drought measure PDSI36m has a mean of -0.22 and a standard
deviation of 1.13. The mean of PDSI measured over various horizons are quite similar and as
expected, the standard deviation is smaller when PDSI is averaged over longer horizons.

2.2

International Stock Market Data

We obtain firm-level stock returns and accounting variables for a broad cross section of countries
(except for the U.S.) from Datastream and Worldscope, respectively. The sample includes live
as well as dead stocks, ensuring that the data are free of survivorship bias. We compute the
stock returns in local currency using the return index (which includes dividends) supplied by
Datastream and convert them to U.S. dollar returns using the conversion function built into
Datastream. In some of our tests, we also use price-to-book ratio which is directly available
from Worldscope database. Inflation rate for international countries is from the World Bank
database.
We apply the following sequence of filters that are derived from the extensive data investigations by Ince and Porter (2006), Griffin, Kelly, and Nardari (2010) and Hou, Karolyi, and
Kho (2011) as follows. First, we require that firms selected for each country are domestically
incorporated based on their home country information (GEOGC). A single exchange with the
largest number of listed stocks is chosen for most countries, whereas multiple exchanges are
used for China (Shanghai and Shenzhen) and Japan (Tokyo and Osaka). We eliminate noncommon stocks such as preferred stocks, warrants, REITs, and ADRs. A cross-listed stock is
included only in its home country sample. If a stock has multiple share classes, only the primary
17
Another reason for smoothing is that the PDSI is not a real time measure but potentially delayed by a
month or two so depending on whether climate models can accurately verify that a drought has ended or began.
In practice, there is little difference between different versions of PDSI (which is available for the US and called
PDMI).

9

class is included. For example, we include only A-shares in the Chinese stock market and only
bearer-shares in the Swiss stock market.
To filter out suspicious stock returns, we set returns to missing for stocks that rises by
300% or more within a month and drops by 50% or more in the following month (or falls
and subsequently rises). We also treat returns as missing for stocks that rise by more than
1,000% within a month. Finally, in each month for each country, we winsorize returns at the
1st and the 99th percentiles, to reduce the impact of outliers on our results (McLean, Pontiff,
and Watanabe (2009)). Datastream classifies industries according to Industrial Classification
Benchmark (ICB). The food portfolio includes stocks in the food & beverage supersector.18
Food portfolio returns are individual stock returns weighted by lagged market capitalization. In
addition, to meaningfully identify the drought impact in our international sample, we further
exclude countries with less than 10 stocks in the food portfolio in its entire time series. The final
sample includes 30 countries, among which 15 are developed countries and 15 are developing
countries.
Table 1 Panel A reports the summary statistics of our international sample. The average
number of stocks in the food industry varies considerably across countries, from 7 in Finland to
108 in India. We also report the median firm market capitalization in the food industry within
each country as of the end of 2013 in millions of U.S. dollars, as well as the mean and standard
deviation of the monthly PDSI values for each country.
As we can also see from Panel A, the time series of stock returns for international countries are
much shorter than for the US. As a result, we cannot conduct an individual time series exercise
for each country. Instead, we will pool together all the international monthly observations and
run a pooled regression. We control for country fixed effects to isolate the time series return
predictability of lagged PDSI from the cross-country effect.
18

ICB Supersector Level classifies industries as follows: Oil & Gas, Chemicals, Basic Resources, Construction
& Materials, Industrial Goods & Services, Automobiles & Parts, Food & Beverage, Personal & Household
Goods, Health Care, Retail, Media, Travel & Leisure, Telecommunications, Utilities, Banks, Insurance, Real
Estate, Financial Services, Equity/Non-Equity Investment Instruments, and Technology.

10

Panel B of Table 1 reports the summary statistics for the control variables. The market
predictor variables we have for the international sample include the lagged 12-month returns of
the market (MRET12), the lagged inflation rate of the country (INF12), the dividend-to-price
ratio of the country market index (DP12) and the market volatility (MVOL12). Food industryspecific controls include the price-to-book ratio of the food industry stocks (FOODPB12) and
the 12-month food industry return (FOODRET12m). The mean annual market return is 7.98%
with a standard deviation of 30.03%. The mean annual inflation rate is 7.32%, annual dividendto-price ratio is 2.98% and the mean annual market volatility is 23.12%. The mean price-to-book
ratio for the food stocks is 2.56.
Finally, we report the summary statistics for the international FOOD industry portfolios
return in Panel C of Table 1. The mean 12-month food industry return is 12.86% with a
standard deviation of 41.30%. We also report the change in the food industry profitability
ratio in Panel C. The change in the food industry profitability ratio in year t is defined as
CPt = N It /At − N It−1 /At−1 , where N I is the food industry net income and A is the food
industry total asset. The food industry net income and total asset are obtained respectively
by aggregating the net income and the total asset of individual firms within the food industry.
The cashflow variable CP has a median of -.01% and a standard deviation of 3.34%.

2.3

US Drought Measures

Our PDSI data for the US comes from the National Centers for Environmental Information
(NCEI) of the US National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA). The PDSI is
updated monthly on the NOAA’s website, and the index value extends back to January 1895.
We obtain the monthly PDSI data of all 48 contiguous states in the US (excluding Alaska and
Hawaii because there is no data) from January 1927 to December 2014 as well as the aggregated
US drought measure produced by US NOAA (PDSIUSA). PDSIUSA is essentially a land-area
weighted average of the PDSI values from all climate divisions in the US.
11

Figure 2 illustrates the historical evolution of this drought measure from January 1927 to
December 2014, with its value shown on the vertical axis. The PDSIUSA measure identifies some
of the most recognizable droughts in the US history. For example, we can see the infamous “Dust
Bowl” period of prolonged droughts in the 1930s, and an extended period of severe droughts
in the 1950s, with the PDSI value falling frequently below -2 and even breaking -8. From
the 1960s to the 1980s, the US experienced several spells of relatively shorter yet significant
droughts. Since the turn of the 21st century, the US has been bombarded by various droughts
that include the current ongoing drought in California. This might suggest that the climate
risk due to global warming has intensified, as the droughts in the 1930s and 1950s could be (at
least) partly attributed to bad soil management and exploitative farming techniques.
Because not every state in the US has significant croplands or an agricultural sector, we
construct our own aggregated measures of drought for the US. The first one, PDSIWA, is
the weighted average of the PDSI values from the top 10 food-producing states (in terms of
gross cash income of the state’s farm sector), using cropland area as weight. Data for both
the cropland area and the gross cash income of the farm sector in each state are obtainable
from the US Department of Agriculture. The top 10 food-producing states are (in alphabetic
order): California, Illinois, Indiana, Iowa, Kansas, Minnesota, North Carolina, Nebraska, Texas,
Wisconsin. This is our main drought measure in our robustness checks section.
Our second aggregate measure (PDSIASWA) is the weighted average of the PDSI values
from all 48 contiguous states based on cropland area. We focus on the top 10 food producing
states but a number of states have some croplands, and so we also consider this measure. Our
third aggregate measure is PDSIASCAWA, which is simply the weighted average PDSI of the
48 states using gross cash income of the farm sector as weights.
For our main baseline measure PDSIWA, using the top 10 states, we consider moving averages from 12 months to 36 months (e.g. PDSIWA12m to PDSIWA36m). For our other three
drought measures, we will just consider a 36-month moving average. In theory, we could average

12

over much longer periods of time. The trade-off is that we then lose time series variation in our
drought measure. As such, we consider 36-month (a 3 year drought) as a reasonable length to
focus on and assess the sensitivity of our findings to differing lengths.
Panel A of Table 2 shows the summary statistics for our various drought measures. Our
main drought measure PDSIWA36m has a mean of 0.17 and a standard deviation of 1.26.
Moreover, the four drought measures are all positively correlated, as demonstrated in Panel D
of Table 2. The PDSIUSA36m measure is less correlated not surprisingly with our other three
measures since it weighs by land mass as opposed to cropland. Nonetheless, the correlation
of PDSIUSA36m with PDSIWA36m is 0.88. As such we expect our baseline measure to be a
better predictor of food stock returns than the PDSIUSA36m measure but this standard NOAA
measure ought to still have information about food stock returns.

2.4

US Stock Market Data

Our second set of data comes from Kenneth French’s website.19 It contains the monthly valueweighted returns for the Fama-French 17 industry portfolios from January 1927 to December
2014.20 Our interest is in the FOOD industry, which includes agriculture firms, food products
and food processing firms, candy and soda-producing firms, beer and liquor-producing firms, as
well as related wholesale firms.
We take the raw continuously compounded monthly industry returns and net them off the
one-month T-bill return to obtain the monthly excess returns for all industries. We denote
the food industry excess return by FOODRET. We then take the FOODRET at 1-month, 3month, 6-month, and 12-month frequencies. Panel B of Table 2 shows the summary statistics
19

http://mba.tuck.dartmouth.edu/pages/faculty/ken.french/data_library.html
The 17 industries are: (1) Food, (2) Mining and Minerals, (3) Oil and Petroleum Products, (4) Textiles,
Apparel and Footware, (5) Consumer Durables, (6) Chemicals, (7) Drugs, Soap, Perfumes, Tobacco, (8) Construction and Construction Materials, (9) Steel Works, (10) Fabricated Products, (11) Machinery and Business
Equipment, (12) Automobiles, (13) Transportation, (14) Utilities, (15) Retail Stores, (16) Banks, Insurance
Companies and Other Financials, (17) Other.
20

13

for FOODRET. Our baseline dependent variable of interest, FOODRET12m, has a mean of
7.16% and a standard deviation of 17.45%.
In addition to FOODRET12m, we create a FOOD industry return that nets the market
portfolio. The problem is that the FOOD industry is also a big part of the market. As such, we
create a market portfolio excluding the food stocks and then subtract the returns of this alternate
market portfolio from the FOOD industry returns. We call this variable FOODXMRET12m.
It has a mean of 1% and a standard deviation of 11.75%. The cashflow variable CP has a mean
of -0.03% and a standard deviation of 0.77%.
Our second data set also has the value-weighted average book-to-market ratio for each of
the industries observed at annual frequency. We take the log value for all the industry book-tomarket ratios, and we denote this value for the food industry by FOODBM. Moreover, it has
the monthly market excess returns (the CRSP value-weighted market portfolio excess return
over the Treasury-bill), and we denote this variable by MRET.
Our third set of data comes from Amit Goyal’s website.21 It contains the monthly data
for all other market predictor variables that we will use. It includes the following variables:
the inflation rate (INF), the log value of the dividend-price ratio of the S&P 500 index (DP),
the volatility of the S&P 500 index (MVOL), the net equity expansion of the NYSE stocks
(NTIS), the difference between BAA and AAA-rated corporate bond yields (DSPR), and the
difference between the long term yield on government bonds and the Treasury-bill (TSPR).
Panel C of Table 2 provides the summary statistics for all of our predictor variables (annualized
and hence the appending of 12 (denoting 12-month) to the variable names) as well MRET12
and FOODBM12. We can see that the summary statistics of our variables are consistent with
those in the literature. For instance, our market excess return MRET12 has a mean of 6%
and a standard deviation of 20% (see, e.g., Fama and French (2015)). Moreover, our annual
inflation is 2.94% that is in line with the long-run inflation rate in the US. Panel D reports the
21

http://www.hec.unil.ch/agoyal/docs/PredictorData2014.xlsx

14

correlation matrix for these variables.
In Figure 3, we plot the time series of our independent variable of interest (PDSIWA36m)
along with one of our dependent variable of interest (the future 12-month return of the food
industry net of the market return, i.e. FOODXMRET12m). To the extent that the market is not
efficiently pricing in the information about prolonged droughts, we expect a positive correlation
between these two time series. This is indeed what we see. We have marked some of the main
droughts in US history. Prolonged drought episodes are typically periods when future returns
to the food portfolio is low. Similarly, periods when there is plentiful water (i.e. positive values
of PDSI) are associated with higher than average returns to the food industry portfolio. As we
will show in various ways below, the relationship between these two time series is positive and
statistically significant.

2.5

Climate Change and Droughts

While not the focus of our paper, we briefly show here that for our sample of large FOOD
producing countries, a warming climate since 1900 (see Figure 4) is associated with an increasing
trend toward droughts. Let the PDSI variable in question be P DSIvar. The PDSI variable can
be the monthly median PDSI value of the international countries (including the US), the lower
quartile (25th percentile) value, or the upper quartile (75th percentile) value. We can estimate
the trend in drought, along with allowing for potential changes in this trend during the latter
part of our sample, by estimating the following regression:

P DSIvart = α0 + β0 t + β1 (t − τ )D(t ≥ τ ) + εt ,

(2.3)

where D(t ≥ τ ) is a dummy variable that equals 1 if time t is greater than or equal to January
1980 (198001), the break point. We choose 1980 as a natural breakpoint in trend because the
global annual temperature anomaly measures (from Figure 4) typically take the 1950-1980 as

15

the thirty-year average against which the anomaly in other time periods is measured. The
coefficient β1 captures the effect from the structural break in the time trend, i.e. the PDSI
variable is trending at the speed of β0 before 1980 but the speed rises to β0 +β1 after 1980.22 We
estimate this equation by allowing the error term ε to be serially correlated and heteroskedastic,
and in doing so we adjust the standard errors of the estimates by using Newey-West (1992) HAC
standard errors.
The estimation results are reported in Table 3. In Panel A, we first estimate the trend
without allowing for a break. We can see that the coefficient β0 is negative for all three measures
of PDSI. It is statistically significant for the 25th and 50th percentile PDSI. Panel B of Figure
5 plots the series of the 50th percentile PDSI and the fitted trend line. We can see a prominent
downward trend in the median PDSI. In Panel B, we allow for a break in trend. We can see that
the coefficient β1 , the effect from the structural break in the time trend, is negative for all of the
PDSI variables but only statistically significant for the 25th percentile PDSI. To visualize this
structural break in trend for the 25th percentile PDSI after 1980, we plot in Panel A of Figure
5 the time-series of monthly lower quartile of PDSI value of the international countries and the
the fitted trend line that allows for a break after 1980. Overall, we provide evidence consistent
with earlier climate studies that droughts have become worst over time, especially after 1980.
22

However, we need to be careful before carrying out this structural break test for the deterministic time
trend in P DSIvar because potentially, P DSIvar could be a unit root process. In other words, P DSIvar could
be a random walk with drift
P DSIvart = θ + P DSIvart−1 + t

(difference stationary),

(2.4)

instead of the trend stationary process that we specified above. If this is the case, then our structural break
test for the time trend would be invalid. Therefore, we need to rule out the possibility that P DSIvar is a unit
root process. To this end, we invoke the unit-root test of Zivot and Andrews (1992) that allows for a potential
structural break in the intercept (constant) and/or the trend. This test is more appropriate than the traditional
augmented Dicky-Fuller test (Dickey and Fuller (1979)) for unit root since potentially there can be a structural
break, which would invalidate the augmented Dick-Fuller test. The null hypothesis of a unit root is rejected for
all the PDSI variables at the 1% significance level. These results are available from the authors. Thus we can
proceed with our time-trend structural break test.

16

3

Droughts and Food Industry Profitability

We show how our drought measures impact the future profitability of the FOOD industry
following the methodology set out in Fama and French (2000). The dependent variable is the
future 1-year change in the food industry profitability ratio (CP) in each country. The key
explanatory variable is the 36-month moving average of country-level PDSI values (PDSI36m).
We specify this PDSI-food return relation for a given country i as the linear regression

CPi,t = αi + βi PDSI36mi,t−1 + γi0 Xi,t−1 + ei,t ,

(3.1)

where CPi,t is the future change in the food industry profitability over the next 12 months for
country i, PDSI36mi,t−1 is the moving average of PDSI over the previous 36 months and Xi,t−1
is a set of lagged predictors from the country’s stock market.
To increase the power of our inferences in equation (3.1), we pool all countries together and
estimate a panel regression that imposes the restriction

β1 = β2 = ... = β

(3.2)

γ1 = γ2 = ... = γ

(3.3)

across all countries, so that β reflects only the contribution of within-country time variation in
PDSI36m. The αi in equation (3.1) corresponds to country fixed effects when the restrictions
in (3.2) and (3.3) are imposed across all countries. When we combine equation (3.1), (3.2) and
(3.3), the regression is a panel regression with country fixed effects

CPi,t = αi + βPDSI36mi,t−1 + γ 0 Xi,t−1 + ei,t .

(3.4)

Given country fixed effects, the OLS estimate β̂ from this panel regression reflects only time-

17

series variations in PDSI36m and food sector change in profitatbility. β̂ is a weighted-average of
the slope estimates from pure time-series regressions (Pastor, Stambaugh, and Taylor (2014)).
This weighting scheme places larger weights on the time-series slopes of countries with more
observations as well as countries whose PDSI fluctuates more over time. Following Petersen
(2009), we cluster the standard errors at both the country and month dimensions.
Our hypothesis is that low PDSI would predict low future change in profitability within each
country, so it is essentially a time-series relation between lagged PDSI and future food industry
profitability. The result is reported in Table 4. In column (1), we report the coefficients for the
market control variables, including MRET12, DP12, INF12, and MVOL12. MVOL12 comes
in with a statistically significant coefficient. In column (2), we also add as control variables
the lagged CP measure, FOODRET12m, and FOODPB12. These are industry specific controls
from the literature. In column (2), we find that high lagged CP measure forecasts decreasing
food industry profitability over the next year.
The coefficient of interest is in column (3) where we find that PDSI36m attracts a coefficient
of 0.14 with a t-statistic of 1.8. Drought is associated with a decline in the food industry
profitability over the next year. A one standard deviation move in our drought measure results
in a 0.16% fall in CP (the standard deviation of PDSI36m is 1.13). This is 5% of the standard
deviation of CP, which is a substantial decrease.
In Figure 6, we show the scatterplot of the residual of CP generated from the predictive
regression in column (2) and our drought measure. The univariate regression through the
scatterplot has a coefficient of 0.08 with a t-statistic of 1.7. In sum, our global markets result
provides additional evidence that climate risks, such as prolonged droughts, could negatively
impact the profitability of the food and agricultural sector.

18

4

Cross-Country Portfolio Strategy Based on PDSI

In this section, we conduct a portfolio strategy test of market efficiency. We want to see if global
markets are efficiently responding to drought information. To this end, we construct a trading
strategy that is long the food portfolio in countries with high PDSI and short the food portfolio
in countries with low PDSI in any given month. We expect this strategy to generate abnormal
returns if markets indeed underreact to drought contained in the PDSI.
Our trading strategy is constructed as follows. To make the level of PDSI36m comparable
across countries, we first standardize the PDSI36m by subtracting its mean and dividing by its
standard deviation. We use the past 70 years of PDSI data to calculate a rolling mean and standard deviation of PDSI36m. This standardization uses only lagged drought information since
we have long time series of drought for all countries. Every month, we sort the food-industry
portfolios across all countries into quintiles based on the standardized PDSI36m (denoted as
PDSI36m*) at the previous month. We then hold each portfolio for K months (where K can
range anywhere from 1 month to 12 months) and returns are equally-weighted within each quintile portfolio. We follow Jegadeesh and Titman (1993) to construct the overlapping portfolios.
For each quintile portfolio at month t, we have K portfolios formed from month t − 1 to t − K.
Returns on the K portfolios are then equally-weighted to get the average return for each quintile
portfolio at month t. The quintile portfolios are rebalanced monthly as we replace 1/K fraction
of the portfolio that have reached the end of its holding horizons. In addition to the mean
portfolio returns, we also report portfolio alphas adjusted using global factor models.23 Our
sample starts from January 1985 when we have at least 10 countries to do the sorting exercise.
The result is reported in Table 5.
In Panel A, we report the monthly mean excess returns and factor-adjusted alphas for quintile
portfolios with a holding horizon of K = 12 months. The middle three portfolios are grouped
23

The global market, size, book-to-market and momentum factors are the weighted average of the respective
country-specific factors, where the weight is the lagged total market capitalization in that country.

19

together by equal weighting their respective returns. In the first column, we report the mean
standardized PDSI36m for each quintile portfolio. By construction, mean PDSI36m* increases
monotonically from low to high PDSI36m* countries. Interestingly, we see from column (2) that
portfolio returns also increase from low to high PDSI36m* countries. The mean excess return
for countries in the bottom quintile of PDSI36m* is 0.38% per month, and for countries in the
top quintile, the number is 1.15%. The return spread for the long/short strategy is 0.77% per
month and significant at 1% level (t=2.74). The row ”Middle - Low” shows that the bottom
portfolio underperform the middle portfolio by 0.33%, while the row ”High - Middle” shows
that the top quintile portfolio outperforms the middle by 0.44%. The difference between these
two numbers is not significant (t=0.1). In the last column, we also report the portfolio alphas
adjusted using a global Carhart (1997) four factor model. Our results are not affected as the
long/short strategy generates a monthly alpha of 0.83% (t=2.87). In untabulated tables, we
show that a value-weighted long/short portfolio using the lagged total market capitalization of
the food sector in that country as weight generates a monthly excess return of 0.72% (t=1.95)
and a four-factor alpha of 0.68% (t=1.82).24
In Panel B, we report the return spread as well as factor-adjusted alphas on this long/short
portfolio with holding horizons varying from K = 1 month to K = 12 months. The mean
excess returns are positive and significant across all holding horizons. Consistent with our
time-series return predictability result, the return spread becomes more pronounced when we
increase the holding horizon, indicating that it takes time for market to fully incorporate the
information about drought into stock prices. For example, the mean monthly excess return on
this long/short strategy for the 12-month holding horizon is 0.77%, with an annualized Sharpe
ratio of 0.50. The return decreases to 0.74% when we only hold the portfolio for three months,
and further decreases to 0.57% when the holding horizon is 1 month. The results are similar
whether we adjust the return spread using a global Sharpe (1964) CAPM, Fama and French
24

Such a value-weighted portfolio is dominated by the food sector from the US since the total market capitalization of the food industry is much larger in the US than in other countries.

20

(1993) three factor or Carhart (1997) four factor model as our long/short portfolio has little
exposure to these common factors.

5

Droughts and Food Industry Excess Return Predictability

We now conduct an excess return predictability regression analog of our portfolio strategy above.
We examine whether droughts forecast food stock returns in international markets.25 In Table
6, we consider how PDSI averaged over 36 months predict future food industry returns. To
increase the power of our test, we pool all countries together, and run a panel regression by
including a country fixed effect. We specify this PDSI-food return relation for a given country
i as the linear regression

FOODRET12mi,t = αi + βPDSI36mi,t−1 + γ 0 Xi,t−1 + ei,t .

(5.1)

Given country fixed effects, the OLS estimate β̂ from this panel regression again reflects only
time-series variations in PDSI36m and food sector returns. β̂ is a weighted-average of the slope
estimates from pure time-series regressions.
In column (1), the coefficient on MRET12 is statistically insignificant. The coefficient on
INF12 is positive. A higher dividend-price ratio forecasts lower returns. Over this sample period,
this variable is highly statistically significant. Lagged market volatility attracts a positive sign.
The R2 of this time series regression is 16.7%. As such, we believe that this expected return
model for the market does an adequate job of explaining the systematic component of FOOD
industry returns.
25
For the international return predictability regressions, we include the US in the international sample. We
will also do the return predictability for the US separately as we have a much longer US time-series sample of
the return starting from 1927. But removing the US from the international sample does not change the main
conclusion at all. This result is available from the authors.

21

In column (2), we add in two FOOD industry specific variables in the form of the lagged past
12-month FOOD industry returns (FOODRET12m) and the book-to-market ratio of the FOOD
industry portfolio (FOOBM12). These FOOD industry specific return predictors are motivated
by momentum or positive serial correlation in industry portfolios (Moskowitz and Grinblatt
(1999), Hong, Torous, and Valkanov (2007)) and the potential conditioning information in the
cost of equity by industries (Fama and French (1997)). Both variables come in with the expected
signs. They increase the R2 from 16.7% in column (1) to 19.5% in column (2).
In column (3), we then add in our variable of interest PDSI36m and find that it has significant incremental forecasting power for the future returns of the food portfolio. The coefficient
estimate of PDSI36m is 3.48 with a t-statistic of 2.26, which is significant at the 5% statistical significance level. It increases the R2 from 19.5% in column (2) to 21.3% in column (3).
Moreover, notice that the coefficients in front of the previous market and industry predictor
variables from columns (1) and (2) are largely unchanged. This is to be expected from our discussion regarding the contemporaneous correlations of the PDSI36m with the standard market
and industry predictor variables. Our variable of interest is not significantly correlated with
these predictors. As a result, adding our variable of interest has little effect on the coefficients
in columns (1) and (2). Hence we can be assured that our drought variable is not picking up
the traditional market predictors nor is it priced into the book-to-market ratio of the FOOD
industry. If the information in drought were priced in, we might expect it to be captured by
the FOOD past returns and book-to-market ratio in column (2).
To the extent markets are efficient, we would expect zero excess return forecastability on
the moving average of PDSI36m for the food portfolio. However, our baseline result of strong
forecastability suggests that markets are under-reacting to climate risks from droughts. Moreover, the sign on the coefficient of interest suggests that this is not a risk premium mechanism
at work. If it were risk, we would expect that more intense drought results in higher as opposed
to lower expected returns. Moreover, we might expect that if markets were efficient in pricing

22

drought, the information in drought would be captured by the FOOD industry book-to-market
ratio introduced in column (2).
The implied economic significance of our PDSI variable is large. The mean return of this
portfolio is 12.86%. Hence the decrease in returns associated with a one standard deviation
increase in drought is roughly 31% of the mean. The economic magnitude from our international
sample is large. Another way to gauge the economic significance of our drought variable is to
compare it to the predictive power of the traditional market predictors. In column (3), the two
most powerful predictors are the FOODPB12 and DP12. Our drought effect is about 60% of
that of the FOODPB12 and 40% of that of the DP12.
To visualize the regression results in Table 6, we produce a scatterplot in Figure 7 of the
FOOD returns residualized from the predictive model given in column (2) against our PDSI36m
measure. That is, we are plotting the FOOD returns in excess of the expected returns as
captured by the traditional market predictor and industry predictor variables with our drought
measure. We then run a simple univariate regression on these residuals. The coefficient is 2.16
with a t-statistic of 3.69. The coefficient is not identical to column (3) since there are non-zero
covariances between PDSI36m and the other variables. But since these covariances are not
too large, the coefficients are similar in magnitude. Furthermore, the appealing aspect of this
scatterplot analysis is that we can see that our drought effect is coming from both negative
values of PDSI as well as positive values of PDSI. That is, since PDSI measures the combined
moisture in soil and temperature, we expect that when there is less drought (i.e. more moist
conditions), we also get higher returns or more profits for the FOOD industry. This difference
in the mean FOOD industry returns across drought conditions is visible in the scatterplot.
Our focus on 12-month horizon returns for FOOD brings up the usual worries of longhorizon excess return predictability (Valkanov (2003)). These worries are alleviated somewhat
in our setting since our t-statistic is around 2 and the scatterplot analysis points to a pronounced
decline in expected returns with drought. Nonetheless, to fully address such concerns, we repeat

23

our analysis (column (3) of the previous table) but now using short (1 month) to intermediate
horizon returns (3 and 6 months).
In Table 7, we examine the excess return predictability at shorter horizons from 1 month to
6 months. In column (1), we consider the 1-month return results. Our FOODPB12, MRET12
and MVOL12 are economically and statistically significant. Our coefficient of interest is 0.175
with a t-statistic of 2.0. A one standard deviation increase in PDSI36m (1.13) leads to a higher
expected return of .20% next month. The mean 1-month return is 1.04%. This is nearly 19%
of the mean.
In columns (2) and (3), we consider intermediate horizon returns of 3 months and 6 months.
In column (2), the coefficient of interest is .597 with a t-statistic of 2.38. A one standard
deviation decrease in PDSI36m leads to a decline of .67% in next quarter returns, which is
around 21% of the mean FOOD return. Among the traditional predictors, only FOODPB12
are more significant than our variable.
In column (3), the coefficient of interest is 1.30 with a t-statistic of 2.12. The implied
economic effect for drought as a fraction of the mean return of FOOD is similar but as a
fraction of the standard deviation of FOOD returns, it is smaller than the 12-month case (at
around 6%). Overall, we conclude that the economic significance of our drought variable is there
at short, intermediate and long horizons.
In Table 8, we use a FOOD industry portfolio return that is net of the market portfolio of
that country. The market portfolio for each country is calculated, as in the case of the US,
by excluding food industry stocks. In column (1), we show the monthly return results. The
coefficient is 0.136 with a t-statistic of 1.83. All the specifications as we go further out in horizon
are economically significant. The columns that are not statistically significant are the 3- and
6-month horizon results. The coefficients are sizeable but only attracts a t-statistic of 1.44 and
1.43, respectively.
In Appendix Table 1, we explore the extent to which different horizons of our baseline PDSI

24

(from 12-month moving average to 30-month moving average) forecast food portfolio returns
over the next 12 months. We always use the specification with the full list of control variables
from column (3) of Table 6.
In columns (1) and (2), we use a moving average of 12 months and 18 months. We can think
of this short-horizon moving average as capturing shorter episodes of drought. The coefficients
are positive but marginally insignificant. It is in column (3), at the 24-month moving average
horizon, that we see a statistically significant result. The coefficient of interest is 2.58 with a
t-statistic of 1.74. Similarly, in column (4), the coefficient is even larger and significant at the
5% level of significance. Overall, the predictability of FOOD returns by drought information
increases the more prolonged the drought is.

6

How Excess Predictability Varies Across Countries Depending on Experience with Droughts

Up to now, our goal has been to establish that stock markets underreact to the implications
of drought for future food industry profitability. In this section, we want to address more
directly regulatory concerns. The main reason why regulators are worried that markets might
be underreacting to climate risks is that climate change represents a new phenomenon that
markets do not have experience with. There is a literature in behavioral economics and finance
which supports a related idea, namely that investors might pay limited or not enough attention
to information that is not salient (see, e.g., Klibanoff, Lamont, and Wizman (1998)).
To this end, we exploit exogenous variation in PDSI across countries. The key for us is that
some countries in our sample have very high PDSI scores in the past, while others have very low
PDSI scores. As such, we expect that investors in countries with previously temperate climates
would underreact more to drought information in the 1975 onward sample than investors in
countries with previous experience with drought. This would be a way of testing the regula25

tory hypothesis that markets are underreacting to climate change risks that they do not have
experience with.
We take our sample of international countries with PDSI monthly values going back to
the 1900s. We can see from Panel A of Table 9 that there is significant dispersion in PDSI
(mean PDSI36m values) measured up to 1975 across countries. In Panel B of Table 9, we
then re-calculate our results from Table 6 but now split the countries into three groups: high,
medium and low past PDSI terciles (based on the past mean PDSI36m values). Recall that
our excess predictability regressions are ran from 1975 onwards. We drop the middle group
from our analysis and focus on a comparison of the high and low tercile countries. In the first
column, for the low PDSI tercile sub-sample, we see that the coefficient of PDSI36m is 2.83
and the t-statistic is 1.48. In the second column, for the high PDSI tercile sub-sample, we
find that the coefficient is 5.90 and the t-statistic is 2.54. Therefore, our findings from Table
6 on underreaction in international markets are coming from the sub-sample of countries with
previously temperate climates and little history with droughts.
In the final column, we conduct a formal statistical test of this difference by introducing an
additional covariate PDSI36m*HighPDSI, which is an interaction term involving PDSI36m and
a dummy variable HighPDSI that equals one if a country is in the highest tercile of PDSI. The
coefficient on the interaction term is 3.82 and statistically significant. In short, we find that the
degree of under-reaction for this subset of high PDSI countries is more than twice that of other
countries.
To further examine whether markets underreact more to drought in countries with previous
temperate climates, we create two dummies dry and wet when the PDSI value is below or above
certain threshold. We first demean PDSI36m by subtracting its sample mean estimated using
past 70 years of data. Dry is a dummy equals one when the demeaned PDSI36m is less than
-1, and wet is a dummy equals one when the demeaned PDSI36m is greater than +1. In Panel
C of Table 9, we show the return predictability results using the dry and wet dummy instead

26

of PDSI36m for low and high past PDSI countries separately. As we can see, the coefficient on
Dry and Wet are larger in magnitude and more significant for countries with high past PDSI
score. So there is more underreaction in general (to both Dry and Wet conditions) in previously
temperate countries. But the coefficient is particularly large for Dry conditions. The results
strongly support the idea that the degree of under-reaction to drought is related to the countries’
previous drought history.
In Figure 8, we show a scatterplot of the relationship between residualized future 12-month
FOOD returns and PDSI for the two sub-samples: the blue dots represent the observations for
the countries in the highest PDSI tercile and the red dots represent the observations for the
countries in the lowest tercile. We also draw the fitted line for these two subsamples respectively,
with the standard errors of the coefficient estimates clustered at the country level. We can see
that there is a more pronounced upward slope for the blue dots of the highest PDSI tercile
sub-sample. The coefficients are not identical to columns (1) and (2) of Panel B in Table 9
because we do not include country fixed effects for purposes of showing the fitted lines.

7

Robustness: US Time Series
In this section, we show that these conclusions from the international sample hold when we

just consider the long US time series going back to 1927. For this long US sample, we focus
on the 36-month moving average of the PDSIWA using the top 10 food producing US states
(PDSIWA36m) as our baseline drought measure.26 This stands in contrast to coarser measures
which we used in the international sample. But the results are very similar in the US regardless
of the measure we use, which is reassuring.
26
All of the predictive regressions for FOOD returns and cash flows using the US sample have been repeated
with the alternative Modified Palmer Drought Severity Index (PMDI) as the drought measure instead of the
PDSI, i.e. we use PMDIWA36m, the 36-month moving average of weighted PMDI values (PMDIWA), as the
main explanatory variable in the predictive regressions. The corresponding results are shown in Appendix Table
9, which are similar to the results using PDSIWA36m.

27

7.1

Excess Return Predicatbility

In Appendix Table 2, we use this variable to forecast FOODRET12m, the excess returns of the
FOOD industry portfolio (net of the risk-free rate) FOODRET over the next 12 months. Our
sample period is from 1927 to 2014. The empirical specification is

FOODRET12mt = α + βPDSIWA36mt−1 + γ 0 Xt−1 + εt ,

(7.1)

where FOODRET12mt denotes the future non-overlapping FOOD return over the next 12
months, PDSIWA36mt−1 is the moving average of PDSIWA over the previous 36 months, and
Xt−1 includes market and food industry specific controls.

27

In column (3), we add in our variable of interest PDSIWA36m and find that it has significant incremental forecasting power for the future returns of the food portfolio. The coefficient
estimate of PDSIWA36m is 2 with a t-statistic of 2.5, which is significant at the 5% statistical
significance level. It increases the R2 from 24% in column (2) to 26% in column (3).
The implied economic significance of our PDSI variable is large. It means that if the average
weighted PDSI value of the top 10 food-producing states over the previous 36 months falls by
1 standard deviation (about 1.26 from Table 2), the average excess return of the food industry
portfolio over the risk-free rate in the next 12 months (FOODRET12m) will decrease by about
2.5%. From Table 2, the mean FOODRET12m is 7.16% with a standard deviation of 17.45%.
Thus the implied economic effect is about 35% of the mean of the food portfolio return and
about 15% of the standard deviation of FOODRET12m, which are both economically significant
results.
27

We use the traditional market predictor variables, including the lagged 12-month aggregate market return
MRET (see, e.g., Poterba and Summers (1988)), the inflation rate INF (see, e.g., Fama and Schwert (1977)),
the log value of the dividend-price ratio of the aggregate market DP (see, e.g.,Campbell and Shiller (1988)), the
volatility of the aggregate market MVOL (see, e.g., French, Schwert, and Stambaugh (1987)), the net equity
expansion of the aggregate market NTIS (see, e.g., Baker and Wurgler (2000)), a corporate bond spread (DSPR),
and a treasury yield spread TSPR (Fama and French (1989)).All of these market predictor variables have a suffix
of 12 to denote they are annualized values over the past 12 months.

28

To visualize the regression results in Appendix Table 2, we produce a scatterplot in Appendix
Figure 1 of the FOOD returns residualized from the predictive model given in column (2) against
our PDSIWA36m measure. That is, we are plotting the FOOD returns in excess of the expected
returns as captured by the traditional market predictor and industry predictor variables with
our drought measure. We then run a simple univariate regression on these residuals. The
coefficient is 1.61 with a t-statistic of 2.
One important concern is that the t-statistics of our predictability regressions are inflated
due to persistent predictor variables since our PDSIWA36m is highly persistent (close to a
random walk). To deal with this concern, we implement the Campbell and Yogo (2006) test.
For this test in our baseline case, we do the following. First, we carry out the following two
regressions:

FOODRET12mt = α + βPDSIWA36mt−1 + et ,

(7.2)

PDSIWA36mt = γ + ρPDSIWA36mt−1 + ut ,

(7.3)

where FOODRET12mt denotes the future non-overlapping FOOD return over the next 12
months, PDSIWA36mt−1 is the moving average of PDSIWA over the previous 36 months, and
PDSIWA36mt is the one-step ahead value of PDSIWA36mt−1 (i.e. the contemporaneous value
of PDSIWA36m corresponding to FOODRET12mt ). We obtain the residuals from regressions
(7.2) and (7.3), and denote them as et and ut respectively. Then we calculate the correlation
between the residuals et and ut . The correlation turns out to be merely −0.001. As shown
in Campbell and Yogo (2006), the bias in t-statistics would be a concern if the residuals et
and ut are highly negatively correlated. This is not the case in our sample. Furthermore, as
demonstrated in their Table 4 and 5 in Campbell and Yogo (2006), when the correlation is very
close to zero as opposed to being close to −1, the confidence intervals for the standard t-test are
almost unaffected. Therefore, based on the (extremely) low correlation we find in our sample,

29

we are on safe ground in proceeding with the standard t-test in our analysis and not adjusting
the t-statistics values.

7.2

Short and Intermediate Horizon Predictability

Our focus on 12-month horizon returns for FOOD brings up the usual worries of long-horizon
excess return predictability (Valkanov (2003)). These worries are alleviated somewhat in our
setting since our t-statistic is around 2.5 and the scatterplot analysis points to a pronounced
decline in expected returns with drought. Nonetheless, to fully address such concerns, we repeat
our analysis (column (3) of Appendix Table 2) in Appendix Table 3 but now using short (1
month) to intermediate horizon returns (3 and 6 months). Our results are qualitatively similar
to the 12 month results.

7.3

Different Horizon Drought Measures

In Appendix Table 4, we explore the extent to which different horizons of our baseline PDSIWA
(from 12-month moving average to 30-month moving average) forecast food portfolio returns
over the next 12 months. We always use the specification with the full list of control variables
from column (3) of Appendix Table 2.
In columns (1) and (2), we use a moving average of 12 months and 18 months. We can think
of this short-horizon moving average as capturing shorter episodes of drought. The coefficients
are positive as before but are not statistically significant. Take the 0.673 coefficient in column
(1). A standard deviation of PDSIWA12m is 1.6, which is as expected larger than the standard
deviation of 1.26 for our baseline PDSIWA36m measure. Thus a one standard deviation increase
in this short-horizon drought measure translates to around a 1% increase in FOOD returns.
This economic magnitude is about 40% of that of our 36-month moving average measure. The
economic effect is smaller, as we hypothesized, since short duration droughts should have less
of an effect on the FOOD industry, all else equal. Indeed, if we took the view that information
30

about a prolonged 36-month drought is much more salient than a 12-month drought and ought
to be more readily priced in by the market, then the difference in the predictability generated
by the long versus the short-horizon drought measures are even more pronounced.
It is in column (3), at the 24-month moving average horizon, that we see a statistically significant result. The coefficient of interest is 1.264 with a t-statistic of 2.25. Similarly, in column
(4), the coefficient is even larger and significant at the 1% level of significance. The implied
economic magnitudes are nonetheless smaller than our 36-month moving average baseline measure. Overall, the predictability of FOOD returns by drought information increases the more
prolonged the drought is.

7.4

PDSI at Different Levels of Granularity

In Appendix Table 5, we use 36-month moving averages of alternative PDSI measures as the
predictor in our baseline regression specification to forecast 12-month FOOD returns. In column
(1), the alternative measure is the PDSI using the 48 contiguous US states weighted by cropland
area. The coefficient of interest is 2.5 with a t-statistic of 2.4. In column (2), the measure is
the PDSI aggregated across the US but weighted by the food cash receipts produced by that
state. The coefficient of interest is 2.5 with a t-statistic of 1.9. In column (3), we use the PDSI
measure produced by NOAA. The coefficient is 1.26 with a t-statistic of 1.77.
All of the alternative drought measures carry comparable statistically significant forecasting
power on food portfolio returns. The implied economic effects are also comparable to our top 10
agricultural producing states measure. It is comforting that we can find predictability results
even using a coarse PDSIUSA measure since for our international analysis below we only have
access to such a coarse measure.

31

7.5

Food Returns Net of the Market

We now use our second approach to calculate FOOD returns in excess of the market. In
Appendix Table 6, we do just this. From column (3), our estimate in front of our coefficient
of interest is 1.23 with a t-statistic of 3.01. A one standard deviation increase in PDSIWA36m
leads to a 1.55% higher return over the next 12 months for FOODXMRET. The mean of
FOODXMRET12m is 1% with a standard deviation of 11.75%. The economic significance is
comparable to our first method. The corresponding plot of this regression is in Figure 3.

7.6

US Cashflows

In Appendix Table 7, we perform the following regression of forecasting the future 1-year change
in CP:
CPt+1 = α + βPDSIWA36mt + γ 0 Xt + εt+1 ,

(7.4)

where X denotes the control variables apart from PDSIWA36m. This specification is similar to
the one used in Fama and French (2000). The one modification of our control variables is that
we include in columns (2) and (3) of Appendix Table 7 the previous 1-year change in the food
industry profitability (i.e. CPt ). Otherwise, the control variables are the same as before, which
include all of the controls as specified in column (3) of Appendix Table 2.
The coefficient of interest is in column (3) where we find that PDSIWA36m attracts a
coefficient of 0.10 with a t-statistic of 2.41. Drought is associated with a decline in the food
industry profitability over the next year. The standard deviation of CP is 0.77%. Hence, a one
standard deviation move in our drought measure results in a 0.12% fall in CP (the standard
deviation of PDSIWA36m in our regression (7.4) is 1.2). This is nearly 16% of the standard
deviation of CP, which is a substantial decrease.
In Appendix Figure 2, we show the scatterplot of the residual of CP generated from the
predictive regression in column (2) and our drought measure. The univariate regression through

32

the scatterplot has a coefficient of 0.08 with a t-statistic of 2.47. In short, we confirm that
our interpretation of the excess FOOD return predictability regressions is due to the market
underreacting to the implications of drought for FOOD industry cash flow-related news.

7.7

Other Industries

We have focused on the returns of the food industry since it is the most directly linked to crops,
agricultural production and drought. Our prior is that drought should not significantly predict
returns of other industries. To see if this is the case, we run the same predictive regression
for each industry in the Fama-French 17-industry categories. Appendix Table 8 reports the
coefficient estimates and t-statistics of PDSIWA36m for the Fama-French 17 industries and the
ranking is based on the magnitude of the t-statistics. As we can see, the Food industry is ranked
1st among all 17 industries for return horizons over future 1 to 12 months. For convenience, we
report the coefficients and t-statistics for FOOD, which are the same as those presented earlier.
Notice for the 1-month horizon returns, no other industry is significant besides FOOD. The same
is true for the 3-month horizon returns and the 6-month horizon returns. At 12 months, Steel
is significant besides FOOD but attracts a negative sign. In short, drought only significantly
predicts FOOD, consistent with our priors.
Having said this, we are working with very aggregate portfolios. It is possible that perhaps
when we consider disaggregated industry portfolios, such as the Fama-French 48 industries
categorization, we might see different results. Drought might predict some sub-industries with
a positive sign (i.e. they are hurt by drought) and others with a negative sign (i.e. they benefit
from drought).

33

8

Conclusion

We show that stock markets are inefficient with respect to information about prolonged drought,
one of the most important climate risks that are brought on or exacerbated by climate change.
Using a global dataset of the widely-used Palmer Drought Severity Index (PDSI) from climate
studies, we show that prolonged drought spells in a country, as measured by a 3-year moving
average of PDSI, forecast poor returns for a portfolio comprised of food stocks in that country.
This predictability is stronger in countries with previously temperate climates and little history
of droughts.
Our findings have a number of implications for policymakers and practitioners. First, our
findings confirm regulatory worries about markets underreacting to climate risks and suggest
further exploration of the value of corporate disclosure of exposure risk. Second, our findings
show that PDSI might be a very useful metric of drought to form portfolios and manage risks.
We leave these topics for future research.

34

References
Alley, W. M., 1984, “The Palmer drought severity index: limitations and assumptions,” Journal
of Climate and Applied Meteorology, 23(7), 1100–1109.
Baker, M., and J. Wurgler, 2000, “The equity share in new issues and aggregate stock returns,”
The Journal of Finance, 55(5), 2219–2257.
Bansal, R., D. Kiku, and M. Ochoa, 2014, “Climate change and growth risks,” working paper,
Duke University.
Blackhurst, B. M., C. Hendrickson, and J. S. i. Vidal, 2010, “Direct and indirect water withdrawals for US industrial sectors,” Environmental Science & Technology, 44(6), 2126–2130.
Campbell, J. Y., and R. J. Shiller, 1988, “The dividend-price ratio and expectations of future
dividends and discount factors,” Review of Financial Studies, 1(3), 195–228.
Campbell, J. Y., and M. Yogo, 2006, “Efficient tests of stock return predictability,” Journal of
Financial Economics, 81(1), 27–60.
Campbell, S. D., and F. X. Diebold, 2005, “Weather Forecasting for Weather Derivatives,”
Journal of the American Statistical Association, pp. 6–16.
Carhart, M. M., 1997, “On persistence in mutual fund performance,” The Journal of Finance,
52(1), 57–82.
Carney, M., 2015, “Breaking the Tragedy of the Horizon–Climate Change and Financial Stability,” Speech given at Lloyd’s of London (29 September).
Cohen, L., and A. Frazzini, 2008, “Economic links and predictable returns,” The Journal of
Finance, 63(4), 1977–2011.

35

Dai, A., K. E. Trenberth, and T. Qian, 2004, “A global dataset of Palmer Drought Severity
Index for 1870-2002: Relationship with soil moisture and effects of surface warming,” Journal
of Hydrometeorology, 5(6), 1117–1130.
Daniel, K., R. B. Litterman, and G. Wagner, 2015, “Applying asset pricing theory to calibrate
the price of climate risk,” working paper, Mimeo.
DellaVigna, S., and J. M. Pollet, 2007, “Demographics and industry returns,” The American
Economic Review, pp. 1667–1702.
Dickey, D. A., and W. A. Fuller, 1979, “Distribution of the Estimators for Autoregressive Time
Series With a Unit Root,” Journal of the American Statistical Association, 74(366), 427–431.
Fama, E. F., and K. R. French, 1989, “Business conditions and expected returns on stocks and
bonds,” Journal of Financial Economics, 25(1), 23–49.
, 1993, “Common risk factors in the returns on stocks and bonds,” Journal of Financial
Economics, 33(1), 3–56.
, 1997, “Industry costs of equity,” Journal of Financial Economics, 43(2), 153–193.
, 2000, “Forecasting Profitability and Earnings,” The Journal of Business, 73(2), 161–
175.
Fama, E. F., and K. R. French, 2015, “A five-factor asset pricing model,” Journal of Financial
Economics, 116(1), 1–22.
Fama, E. F., and G. W. Schwert, 1977, “Asset returns and inflation,” Journal of Financial
Economics, 5(2), 115–146.
French, K. R., G. W. Schwert, and R. F. Stambaugh, 1987, “Expected stock returns and
volatility,” Journal of Financial Economics, 19(1), 3–29.
36

Giglio, S., M. Maggiori, J. Stroebel, and A. Weber, 2015, “Climate change and long-run discount
rates: Evidence from real estate,” working paper, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Golosov, M., J. Hassler, P. Krusell, and A. Tsyvinski, 2014, “Optimal taxes on fossil fuel in
general equilibrium,” Econometrica, 82(1), 41–88.
Griffin, J. M., P. J. Kelly, and F. Nardari, 2010, “Do Market Efficiency Measures Yield Correct
Inferences? A Comparison of Developed and Emerging Markets,” Review of Financial Studies,
pp. 3225–3277.
Hirshleifer, D., and S. H. Teoh, 2003, “Limited attention, information disclosure, and financial
reporting,” Journal of Accounting and Economics, 36(1), 337–386.
Hong, H., W. Torous, and R. Valkanov, 2007, “Do industries lead stock markets?,” Journal of
Financial Economics, 83(2), 367–396.
Hou, K., G. A. Karolyi, and B.-C. Kho, 2011, “What factors drive global stock returns?,” Review
of Financial Studies, 24(8), 2527–2574.
Ince, O. S., and R. B. Porter, 2006, “Individual equity return data from Thomson Datastream:
Handle with care!,” Journal of Financial Research, 29(4), 463–479.
Jegadeesh, N., and S. Titman, 1993, “Returns to buying winners and selling losers: Implications
for stock market efficiency,” The Journal of Finance, 48(1), 65–91.
Klibanoff, P., O. Lamont, and T. A. Wizman, 1998, “Investor reaction to salient news in closedend country funds,” The Journal of Finance, 53(2), 673–699.
Lesk, C., P. Rowhani, and N. Ramankutty, 2016, “Influence of extreme weather disasters on
global crop production,” Nature, 529(7584), 84–87.
McLean, R. D., J. Pontiff, and A. Watanabe, 2009, “Share issuance and cross-sectional returns:
International evidence,” Journal of Financial Economics, 94(1), 1–17.
37

Mendelsohn, R., W. D. Nordhaus, and D. Shaw, 1994, “The impact of global warming on
agriculture: a Ricardian analysis,” The American Economic Review, pp. 753–771.
Montgomery, W. D., 1972, “Markets in licenses and efficient pollution control programs,” Journal of Economic Theory, 5(3), 395–418.
Moskowitz, T. J., and M. Grinblatt, 1999, “Do industries explain momentum?,” The Journal
of Finance, 54(4), 1249–1290.
Nordhaus, W. D., 1994, Managing the global commons: the economics of climate change, vol. 31.
MIT press Cambridge, MA.
Palmer, W. C., 1965, Meteorological drought, vol. 30. US Department of Commerce, Weather
Bureau Washington, DC, USA.
Pastor, L., R. F. Stambaugh, and L. A. Taylor, 2014, “Do Funds Make More When They Trade
More?,” working paper, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Petersen, M. A., 2009, “Estimating standard errors in finance panel data sets: Comparing
approaches,” Review of Financial Studies, 22(1), 435–480.
Poterba, J. M., and L. H. Summers, 1988, “Mean reversion in stock prices: Evidence and
implications,” Journal of Financial Economics, 22(1), 27–59.
Roll, R., 1984, “Orange juice and weather,” The American Economic Review, 74(5), 861–880.
Sharpe, W. F., 1964, “Capital asset prices: A theory of market equilibrium under conditions of
risk,” The Journal of Finance, 19(3), 425–442.
Shiller, R. J., 1994, Macro markets: Creating institutions for managing society’s largest economic risks. Oxford University Press.

38

Stern, N., 2007, The economics of climate change: the Stern review. Cambridge University
Press.
Trenberth, K. E., A. Dai, G. van der Schrier, P. D. Jones, J. Barichivich, K. R. Briffa, and
J. Sheffield, 2014, “Global warming and changes in drought,” Nature Climate Change, 4(1),
17–22.
Valkanov, R., 2003, “Long-horizon regressions: theoretical results and applications,” Journal of
Financial Economics, 68(2), 201–232.
Williams, A. P., R. Seager, J. T. Abatzoglou, B. I. Cook, J. E. Smerdon, and E. R. Cook, 2015,
“Contribution of anthropogenic warming to California drought during 2012–2014,” Geophysical Research Letters, 42(16), 6819–6828.
Zivot, E., and D. W. Andrews, 1992, “Further Evidence on the Great Crash, the Oil-Price
Shock, and the Unit-Root Hypothesis,” Journal of Business and Economic Statistics, 10(3),
251–270.

39

Table 1: Summary Statistics of the International Sample
This table reports summary statistics of the sample of 30 international countries, including 15 developed
countries and 15 developing countries. We report the average number of stocks in the food industry, the median
firm market captitalization in US dollars, the mean and standard deviation of the PDSI value and the starting
date for each country. Countries with missing variables and less than 10 stocks in the food industry in the
whole sample are excluded. The overall sample runs from 1975 to 2015. Stock return data and accounting
information for international countries are taken from Datastream and Worldscope, respectively.
Panel A
Country
Average # Median Firm Size Palmer Drought Severity Index
Developed Countries of Stocks
(Million USD) Mean
Std.
Australia
Belgium
Canada
Switzerland
Germany
Denmark
Finland
France
United Kingdom
Greece
Israel
Japan
Netherlands
New Zealand
Portugal

Start
date

25
12
16
12
15
9
7
26
56
24
23
90
12
10
9

37.65
49.06
266.58
163.44
125.31
94.01
154.74
71.13
23.70
33.32
22.93
158.62
261.64
29.25
10.32

-0.98
0.16
-0.40
-0.64
-0.66
0.58
0.87
-0.58
-0.05
-0.53
0.00
-0.35
0.26
-0.94
-0.60

2.16
2.27
1.75
2.25
1.84
2.41
2.07
2.15
2.27
2.45
1.78
2.40
2.40
2.03
2.45

197501
198601
197501
197501
198410
198804
199008
197501
197501
198801
198601
197501
197501
198801
198801

14
20
54
22
108
39
9
50
19
11
22
10
32
17
15

160.94
75.68
306.79
56.50
2.86
58.96
128.17
49.64
19.67
39.99
35.22
101.14
31.10
24.74
162.98

-1.05
-0.46
-3.08
-0.41
0.94
-0.24
0.21
1.17
-1.34
0.29
-0.58
1.27
-1.23
2.21
-0.34

1.78
2.06
2.18
1.35
2.88
2.24
1.85
2.55
2.18
2.84
1.68
1.84
2.10
3.04
3.05

199001
198907
199311
199006
199001
198407
199107
198601
199112
199308
199410
200601
198701
199011
198703

Developing Countries
Brazil
Chile
China
Indonesia
India
South Korea
Mexico
Malaysia
Peru
Philippines
Poland
Russian Federation
Thailand
Turkey
South Africa

40

Summary Statistics of the International Sample, Continued
This table continues with the summary statistics for the variables in our international sample with all countries
pooled together. Panel B shows the summary statistics of our main drought measure and other control variables.
PDSI12m to PDSI36m are the 12-month to 36-month moving average of the PDSI for international countries.
MRET12, INF12, FOODPB12, DP12 and MVOL12 denote respectively the market excess return, the inflation
rate, the price-to-book ratio of the food portfolio, the dividend-to-price ratio and the market volatility over 12
months. Panel C shows the summary statistics of non-overlapping returns of the food portfolio over different
horizons. CP is the annual change in the food industry profitability ratio. FOODRET to FOODRET12m denote,
respectively, the non-overlapping return over 1 month, 3 months, 6 months and 12 months. FOODXMRET12m
is the food portfolio return net of the return of the market excluding food portfolio over 12 months.
Panel B: Drought measure and other controls

PDSI12m
PDSI18m
PDSI24m
PDSI30m
PDSI36m
MRET12 (%)
INF12 (%)
FOODPB12
DP12 (%)
MVOL12 (%)

Mean

S.D.

Median

Min

Max

-0.20
-0.20
-0.20
-0.21
-0.22
7.98
7.32
2.56
2.98
23.12

1.71
1.53
1.37
1.24
1.13
30.03
6.57
1.29
2.21
13.74

-0.26
-0.26
-0.27
-0.27
-0.26
9.14
5.13
2.28
2.35
19.74

-3.75
-3.27
-2.95
-2.72
-2.52
-70.31
1.08
0.84
0.73
6.47

3.83
3.41
3.01
2.62
2.27
83.83
26.19
5.82
9.84
82.27

Panel C: Food Portfolio Non-overlapping Returns

CP (%)
FOODRET (%)
FOODRET3m (%)
FOODRET6m (%)
FOODRET12m (%)
FOODXMRET12m (%)

Mean

S.D.

Median

Min

Max

0.00
1.04
3.22
6.42
12.86
2.93

3.34
8.74
16.93
26.16
41.30
24.04

-0.01
0.88
2.80
5.86
11.91
2.02

-14.71
-105.17
-87.83
-108.33
-132.06
-65.53

15.49
143.33
237.11
420.44
528.09
99.91

41

Table 2: Summary Statistics of the US Sample
This table reports the summary statistics for the variables in our sample. The sample is from January 1927 to December 2014
and comprises monthly observations of all variables except FOODBM which is observed annually. Panel A shows PDSIUSA, the
Palmer Drought Severity Index (PDSI) of USA produced directly by the US National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration.
PDSIUSA36m is the the 36-month moving average of the PDSIUSA. The alternative drought measure PDSIWA is the weighted
average PDSI values for the top 10 food-producing states (in terms of cash value) in the US. PDSIWA12m to PDSIWA36m denote,
respectively, the moving average of the PDSIWA values over 12 months, 18 months, 24 months, 30 months and 36 months. It also
shows the 36-month moving average of 2 other alternative drought measures: PDSIASWA is the weighted average (based on cropland
areas) of the PDSI values of all 48 contiguous US states (excluding Alaska, Hawaii, and Washington D.C. because of no data), and
PDSIASCA is the weighted average PDSI of all 48 states with the gross cash income of the farm sector in each state as weight. Panel
B shows the Fama-French 17-industry food industry portfolio non-overlapping excess returns over various horizons. FOODRET
is the monthly excess return (net of the 1-month T-bill rate), FOODRET3m to FOODRET12m denote the excess returns over 3
months, 6 months and 12 months respectively, and FOODXMRET12m is the food portfolio return net of the return of the market
excluding food (MXF) portfolio over 12 months. CP is the annual change in the food industry profitability ratio. Panel C shows
the non-overlapping values for other control variables over 12 months. FOODBM is the log value of the value-weighted average of
the book-to-market ratios of the firms in the food industry portfolio. MRET is the CRSP value-weighted market portfolio excess
return. INF is the CPI inflation rate. DP is the log value of the dividend-price ratio of the S&P 500 index. MVOL is the market
volatility (volatility of the S&P 500 index). NTIS is the net equity expansion of the NYSE stocks. DSPR is the default yield spread,
the difference between BAA and AAA-rated corporate bond yields. TSPR is the term spread, the difference between the long term
yield on government bonds and the Treasury-bill. Panel D gives the correlations among the variables of interest in Panel (A) to (C).

Panel A: Palmer Drought Severity Index (PDSI) Values
Mean
S.D.
Median
Min
PDSIUSA36m
0.17
1.96
0.33
-4.44
PDSIWA12m
0.17
1.60
0.54
-4.25
PDSIWA18m
0.16
1.55
0.51
-3.79
PDSIWA24m
0.17
1.41
0.42
-3.40
PDSIWA30m
0.16
1.36
0.29
-3.24
PDSIWA36m
0.17
1.26
0.29
-3.12
PDSIASWA36m
0.15
1.06
0.22
-2.35
PDSIASCAWA36m
0.07
0.89
0.19
-1.95
Panel B: Fama-French 17-Industry Food Portfolio Non-overlapping Returns
Mean
S.D.
Median
FOODRET (%)
0.60
4.80
0.87
FOODRET3m (%)
1.79
9.37
2.51
FOODRET6m (%)
3.58
12.78
4.51
FOODRET12m (%)
7.16
17.45
8.68
FOODXMRET12m (%)
1.01
11.75
1.37
CP (%)
-0.03
0.77
0.07

FOODBM12
MRET12 (%)
INF12 (%)
DP12
MVOL12 (%)
NTIS12 (%)
DSPR12 (%)
TSPR12 (%)

and Cashflow Measure
Min
Max
-33.35
28.61
-42.59
52.88
-42.48
54.73
-43.63
39.81
-37.19
30.87
-2.26
2.24

Panel C: Other Control Variables, Non-overlapping
Mean
S.D.
Median
Min
-0.67
0.46
-0.64
-1.77
6.02
20.07
9.87
-59.11
2.94
3.96
2.77
-10.93
-3.36
0.47
-3.34
-4.48
13.91
8.78
10.94
5.54
1.85
2.63
1.76
-4.19
1.20
0.79
0.96
0.34
1.61
1.42
1.64
-3.50

42

Max
4.11
4.10
3.64
2.99
2.83
2.53
2.07
1.77

Max
0.26
45.04
16.44
-2.29
50.43
16.35
5.10
4.53

43

(1) PDSIWA36m
(2) PDSIASWA36m
(3) PDSIASCAWA36m
(4) PDSIUSA36m
(5) FOODRET12m
(6) FOODXMRET12m
(7) FOODBM12
(8) MRET12
(9) INF12
(10) DP12
(11) MVOL12
(12) NTIS12
(13) DSPR12
(14) TSPR12

(1)
1
0.97
0.94
0.88
0.00
0.06
-0.29
-0.04
0.25
-0.21
-0.06
0.05
-0.21
0.05
1
0.98
0.94
0.01
0.00
-0.30
0.00
0.27
-0.22
-0.08
0.11
-0.27
-0.02

(2)

1
0.96
0.02
-0.02
-0.22
0.02
0.32
-0.15
-0.12
0.12
-0.26
-0.06

(3)

1
0.08
0.18
0.82
-0.03
-0.22
-0.44
-0.20
-0.28
0.16
1
-0.03
-0.49
-0.12
0.10
0.30
-0.18
0.32
0.13
1
0.18
0.04
0.81
-0.04
0.03
0.25
-0.18

Panel D: Correlations
(5)
(6)
(7)

1
0.03
-0.04
-0.15
0.05
0.31
-0.06
-0.14
0.14
-0.25
-0.06

(4)

1
0.04
-0.25
-0.55
-0.08
-0.42
0.07

(8)

Summary Statistics, Continued

1
0.02
-0.27
-0.04
-0.36
-0.29

(9)

1
0.24
0.18
0.40
-0.14

(10)

1
0.05
0.73
0.12

(11)

1
-0.18
-0.14

(12)

1
0.25

(13)

1

(14)

Table 3: Trend in Global PDSI Variables
This table shows the results for estimating a time trend in several global PDSI variables. The dependent variables,
PDSI25%ile, PDSI50%ile, and PDSI75%ile denote the monthly 25th percentile (lower quartile) PDSI value of all
international countries (including the US), the 50th percentile (median) value, and the 75th percentile (upper
quartile) value respectively. Panel A estimates the trend model P DSIvart = α0 + β0 t + εt where P DSIvar is
PDSI25%ile, PDSI50%ile, or PDSI75%ile. Panel B estimates the model P DSIvart = α0 + β0 t + β1 (t − τ )D(t ≥
τ ) + εt where we allow for a structural break in trend at time τ . The explanatory variable t denotes the time
trend. D(t ≥ τ ) is a dummy variable that equals to 1 if time t is greater than or equal to the break point
τ . The break point τ is January 1980 (198001). α0 is the constant term. The parameter in brackets after the
corresponding explanatory variable denotes the coefficient in front of that variable. t-statistics based on NeweyWest HAC standard errors are shown in parentheses, with a lag order of 12 months for all of the regressions. *,
**, *** denote statistical significance at 10%, 5%, 1% respectively. The R2 for each regression is also reported.
N is the number of observation points in each regression. The sample is from 190001 (January 1900) to 201412
(December 2014).
Panel A: Estimating a Time Trend in Global PDSI Variables
(1)
(2)
(3)
Dependent Variable
PDSI25%ile
PDSI50%ile
PDSI75%ile
t (β0 )
-0.0004***
-0.0003***
-0.0001
(-3.816)
(-2.744)
(-0.941)
α0
-1.3086***
0.0816
1.5709***
(-14.773)
(0.788)
(18.281)
R2
0.07
0.03
0.01
N
1380
1380
1380
Panel B: Allowing for a Structural Break in Trend at Jan 1980
(1)
(2)
(3)
Dependent Variable
PDSI25%ile
PDSI50%ile
PDSI75%ile
t (β0 )
-0.0000
-0.0002
-0.0000
(-0.089)
(-1.040)
(-0.248)
(t − τ ) × D(t ≥ τ ) (β1 )
-0.0004***
-0.0001
-0.0001
(-2.806)
(-0.787)
(-0.437)
α0
-1.4544***
0.0348
1.5459***
(-14.202)
(0.289)
(16.499)
R2
0.10
0.04
0.01
N
1380
1380
1380

44

Table 4: International Evidence: Predicting 1-year Food Industry Change in Profitability (CP)
with 36-month Moving Average of PDSI
This table presents the results from forecasting the future 1-year CP, the change in profitability of the food
industry over the next year, using the 36-month moving average of the PDSI values (PDSI36m). The dependent
variable (forecast) is the CP, the future change in the food industry profitability, over the next year. The key
explanatory (forecasting) variable, PDSI36m, is the moving average of the PDSI values over the previous 3
years (36 months). Other control variables, CP1y, FOODRET12m, FOODPB12, MRET12, INF12, DP12 and
MVOL12 denote, respectively, the change in the food industry profitability, the food industry portfolio return
(FOODRET), the log of the food industry price-to-book ratio (FOODPB), the market excess return (MRET),
the inflation rate (INF), the log of the market dividend price ratio (DP) and the market volatility (MVOL). We
control for country fixed effects in the regression and standard errors are double clustered along the country and
month dimensions. *, **, *** denote statistical significance at 10%, 5%, 1% respectively. The sample period is
1975 to 2015.
Dependent Variable: Future 1-year
Change in Food Industry Profitability
(1)

(2)

-0.002
(-0.404)
-0.014
(-1.303)
-0.000
(-1.526)
0.073***
(4.548)
0.019
717

-0.458***
(-13.645)
0.005
(0.646)
-0.099
(-0.475)
-0.001
(-0.137)
-0.018
(-0.844)
-0.001
(-0.819)
0.039
(1.618)
0.209
704

PDSI36m
CP1y
FOODRET12m
FOODPB12
MRET12
DP12
INF12
MVOL12
Ave. R-sq
N. of Obs.

45

(3)
0.141*
(1.812)
-0.453***
(-10.661)
0.002
(0.309)
-0.091
(-0.517)
0.001
(0.256)
-0.020
(-0.878)
-0.001
(-0.572)
0.042*
(1.808)
0.204
670

Table 5: Return to Portfolio Strategies Sorted on Standardized PDSI36m
This table presents the returns and alphas (in percentage) to country food portfolios sorted on lagged PDSI36m.
PDSI36m is first standardized by substracting its mean and dividing by its standard deviation. We estimate
the rolling mean and standard deviation of PDSI36m with past 70 years of data. Each month all country foodindustry portfolios are sorted into quintiles based on their standardized PDSI36m (denoted as PDSI36m*) from
the previous month end and held for various horizons from 1 month to 12 months. In panel A, we report the
mean PDSI36m*, excess returns and Carhart (1997) four factor alphas for quintile portfolios with a holding
period of 12 months. We group the middle three portfolios together by equal weighting their respective returns.
Row ”Middle - Low” shows the return difference between middle portfolio and lowest PDSI36m* portfolio. ”High
- Middle” and ”High - Low” follows the similar definition. Row ”DiD” shows the difference between ”High Middle” and ”Middle - Low”. In panel B, we report the long/short return spread and factor-adjusted alphas from
1 month to 12 months. The alphas are adjusted using global Sharpe (1964) CAPM, Fama and French (1993)
three factors and Carhart (1997) four factors model following the methodology of constructing local factors. The
sample period is from January 1985 to December 2015.
Panel A: Quintile Portfolios sorted on standardized PDSI36m
Portfolio

PDSI36m*

Excess Return

t-stat

4-factor alpha

t-stat

Low PDSI
Middle PDSI
High PDSI
Middle - Low
High - Middle
DiD
High - Low

-1.60
0.25
1.37
1.32
1.61
0.30
2.97

0.38
0.71
1.15
0.33
0.44
0.10
0.77

1.31
3.03
3.87
1.82
2.14
0.35
2.74

0.27
0.59
1.10
0.33
0.51
0.18
0.83

1.04
3.14
4.28
1.85
2.41
0.58
2.87

46

Table 5 Continued

Panel B: L/S Portfolios sorted on standardized PDSI36m for various holding horizons
Excess Return
Mean
t-stat
Std.Dev
Sharpe Ratio
No.of obs.

0.77
2.74
5.34
0.50
360

Excess Return
Mean
t-stat
Std.Dev
Sharpe Ratio
No.of obs.

0.74
2.49
5.68
0.45
360

Excess Return
Mean
t-stat
Std.Dev
Sharpe Ratio
No.of obs.

0.72
2.38
5.74
0.43
360

Excess Return
Mean
t-stat
Std.Dev
Sharpe Ratio
No.of obs.

0.57
1.84
5.86
0.34
360

12-month Holding Period
CAPM alpha
Three-factor alpha
0.76
2.69

0.80
2.78

6-month Holding Period
CAPM alpha
Three-factor alpha
0.73
2.45

0.75
2.46

3-month Holding Period
CAPM alpha
Three-factor alpha
0.71
2.34

0.72
2.35

1-month Holding Period
CAPM alpha
Three-factor alpha
0.56
1.81

0.56
1.79

47

Four-factor alpha
0.83
2.87

Four-factor alpha
0.81
2.63

Four-factor alpha
0.80
2.58

Four-factor alpha
0.66
2.09

Table 6: International Evidence: Predicting 12-month Non-overlapping Food Portfolio Return
This table presents the results from forecasting the food industry portfolio excess returns over future 12 months,
using the moving averages of the PDSI values over the past 36 months (PDSI36m). The regressions are run
by pooling all countries together and including a country fixed effect. The dependent variable is the food
return over the future 12 months. The returns are non-overlapping. All of the regressions include these other
forecasting variables over the past 12 months: lagged food industry return (FOODRET12m), lagged market
return (MRET12), lagged inflation rate (INF12), log of food industry price-to-book ratio (FOODPB12), the log
of the market dividend price ratio (DP12) and the market volatility (MVOL12). Standard errors are clustered at
both the country and month dimensions. *, **, *** denote statistical significance at 10%, 5%, 1% respectively.
The sample period is from January 1975 to December 2015.
Dependent Variable: Future 12-month FOODRET, Non-overlapping
(1)

(2)

0.2025
(0.85)
2.4152
(1.37)
-0.2435***
(-5.99)
1.9336**
(2.08)
0.167
624

-0.0777
(-0.74)
-12.2938**
(-2.61)
0.2351
(0.84)
2.1613
(1.35)
-0.3446***
(-12.41)
1.9493**
(2.11)
0.195
612

PDSI36m
FOODRET12m
FOODPB12
MRET12
INF12
DP12
MVOL12
Ave.R-sq
N.of Obs.

48

(3)
3.4796**
(2.26)
-0.0714
(-0.64)
-12.5436***
(-2.92)
0.2388
(0.74)
1.8519
(1.24)
-0.3512***
(-5.34)
1.9918*
(1.99)
0.213
584

Table 7: International Evidence: Predicting Food Industry Portfolio Non-overlapping Returns
over Different Horizons
This table presents the results from forecasting the food industry portfolio excess returns (FOODRETs) at
various horizons, using the moving averages of the PDSI values over the past 36 months (PDSI36m). The
regressions are run by pooling all countries together and including a country fixed effect. The dependent variable
1m is the food return over the next month, and those dependent variables of 3m to 6m are the food returns over
the next 3 months and 6 months, respectively. The returns are non-overlapping. All of the regressions include
these other forecasting variables over the past 12 months: lagged food industry return (FOODRET12m), lagged
market return (MRET12), lagged inflation rate (INF12), log of food industry price-to-book ratio (FOODPB12),
the log of the market dividend price ratio (DP12), the market volatility (MVOL12). Standard errors are
clustered at both the country and month dimensions. *, **, *** denote statistical significance at 10%, 5%, 1%
respectively. The sample period is from January 1975 to December 2015.

Dependent Variable: Future FOODRET over 1m, 3m and 6m, Non-overlapping

PDSI36m
FOODRET12m
FOODPB12
MRET12
INF12
DP12
MVOL12
Ave.R-sq
N.of Obs.

1m

3m

6m

0.1752*
(2.00)
-0.0016
(-0.31)
-0.9897***
(-3.25)
0.0375*
(1.87)
0.1239
(1.14)
-0.0106*
(-1.73)
0.1197*
(1.70)
0.055
6918

0.5970**
(2.38)
0.0078
(0.42)
-2.9013***
(-3.24)
0.0903
(1.34)
0.5134
(1.43)
-0.0288
(-1.37)
0.5046*
(1.83)
0.134
2310

1.3033**
(2.12)
0.0424
(0.98)
-4.9145**
(-2.70)
0.1260
(0.84)
0.4594
(0.69)
-0.1583***
(-3.25)
1.0844**
(2.37)
0.174
1154

49

Table 8: International Evidence: Predicting Non-overlapping Food Portfolio net of Market
Return over Different Horizons
This table presents the results from forecasting the future non-overlapping FOODXMRET, the food portfolio
return net of the return of the market excluding food (MXF) portfolio, using the 36-month moving average of
the weighted PDSI values (PDSI36m). The dependent variable (forecast) is the non-overlapping FOODXMRET,
the food portfolio return net of the return of the market excluding food (MXF) portfolio, over the next 1 months
to 12 months. The returns are non-overlapping. All of the regressions include these other forecasting variables
over the past 12 months: lagged food industry return net of market return (FOODXMRET12m), lagged market
return (MRET12), lagged inflation rate (INF12), log of food industry price-to-book ratio (FOODPB12), the log
of the market dividend price ratio (DP12) and the market volatility (MVOL12). Standard errors are clustered at
both the country and month dimensions. *, **, *** denote statistical significance at 10%, 5%, 1% respectively.
The sample period is from January 1975 to December 2015.
Dependent Variable: Future FOODXMRET over 1m, 3m, 6m and 12m, Non-overlapping

PDSI36m
FOODXMRET12m
FOODPB12
MRET12
INF12
DP12
MVOL12
Ave.R-sq
N.of Obs.

1m

3m

6m

12m

0.1360*
(1.83)
-0.0225
(-1.34)
-0.5487**
(-2.04)
-0.0039
(-0.87)
-0.0043
(-0.09)
-0.0143
(-1.18)
0.0342
(1.28)
0.009
6909

0.2882
(1.44)
-0.0180
(-0.83)
-1.2048*
(-1.81)
0.0043
(0.59)
0.1437
(1.29)
-0.0137
(-0.61)
0.1563
(1.45)
0.020
2290

0.5881
(1.43)
-0.0384
(-0.75)
-2.3425
(-1.65)
0.0082
(0.41)
-0.0100
(-0.05)
-0.0101
(-0.80)
0.0665
(0.27)
0.036
1134

1.3526**
(2.09)
0.0034
(0.05)
-4.1423
(-1.48)
0.0312*
(1.81)
-0.5649
(-1.14)
-0.0376
(-1.04)
-0.1167
(-0.31)
0.062
564

50

Table 9: International Evidence: Predicting 12-month Non-overlapping Food Portfolio Return
in subsamples based on Past Mean PDSI36m
This table presents the results from forecasting the food industry portfolio excess returns over future 12 months,
using the moving averages of the PDSI values over the past 36 months (PDSI36m). Panel A reports the mean
PDSI36m for each country using data up to 1974. Panel B reports the return predictability of PDSI36m for 3
groups of countries based on the past mean PDSI36m. Panel C reports the return predictability of Dry/Wet
dummy for low and high past PDSI countries. Dry (Wet) is a dummy equal to one when the demeand PDSI36m is
less (greater) than -1 (+1). The result for countries with mean PDSI36m in the lowest (highest) tercile is reported
under Column ”Low PDSI tercile” (”High PDSI tercile”). The regressions are run by pooling all countries within
a group together and including a country fixed effect. In column (3) of Panel B, We interact PDSI36m with
a dummy HighPDSI indicating a country is in the highest past PDSI36m tercile. We do not include countries
in the middle tercile of PDSI in Column (3). The dependent variable is the food return over the future 12
months. The returns are non-overlapping. All of the regressions include these other forecasting variables over
the past 12 months: lagged food industry return (FOODRET12m), lagged market return (MRET12), lagged
inflation rate (INF12), log of food industry price-to-book ratio (FOODPB12), the log of the market dividend
price ratio (DP12) and the market volatility (MVOL12). The sample period is from January 1975 to December
2015. Standard errors are clustered at both the country and month dimensions. *, **, *** denote statistical
significance at 10%, 5%, 1% respectively.
Panel A: Mean PDSI36m
Country

Mean PDSI36m

Israel
Peru
Chile
Thailand
Turkey
Poland
Malaysia
Finland
Netherlands
Belgium
Brazil
Japan
Greece
Philippines
Denmark
Switzerland
Germany
United Kingdom
South Africa
France
United States of America
Indonesia
Norway
Russian Federation
South Korea
India
Mexico
Canada
Portugal
China
New Zealand
Australia

3.023
0.624
0.594
0.513
0.438
0.429
0.400
0.365
0.364
0.364
0.290
0.219
0.183
0.164
0.024
0.017
0.015
-0.014
-0.107
-0.168
-0.174
-0.188
-0.195
-0.273
-0.315
-0.368
-0.697
-0.712
-0.804
-0.979
-1.000
-1.074

51

Table 9 Continued

Panel B: Subsample Return Predictability of PDSI

PDSI36m

Low PDSI tercile

High PDSI tercile

2.8261
(1.48)

5.9049**
(2.54)

0.0685
(0.62)
-10.4033*
(-2.13)
-0.2008
(-1.46)
-96.5665**
(-2.50)
-0.4874
(-0.42)
0.9775
(0.77)
0.097
159

-0.2061
(-1.13)
-15.1159*
(-2.18)
0.4941
(1.02)
1.7356
(0.60)
-0.4716**
(-2.84)
2.4168
(1.69)
0.363
198

PDSI36m*HighPDSI
FOODRET12m
FOODPB12
MRET12
INF12
DP12
MVOL12
Ave.R-sq
N.of Obs.

52

1.7059
(0.73)
3.8232*
(1.93)
-0.1088
(-0.63)
-14.0648**
(-2.47)
0.2989
(0.70)
2.0021
(0.75)
-0.4061***
(-3.46)
2.4785
(1.72)
0.260
357

Table 9 Continued

Panel C: Subsample Return Predictability of Dry/Wet Dummy

Dry
Wet
FOODRET12
FOODPB12
MRET12
INF12
DP12
MVOL12
Ave.R-sq
N.of Obs.

Low PDSI tercile

High PDSI tercile

-7.2535
(-1.02)
5.6888
(0.59)
0.0710
(0.65)
-10.2587*
(-2.13)
-0.2114
(-1.08)
-97.8097**
(-2.53)
-0.5193
(-0.41)
0.8883
(0.66)
0.100
159

-12.7872*
(-2.18)
7.5794*
(1.96)
-0.1822
(-0.84)
-14.8729*
(-1.91)
0.4767
(0.86)
1.7718
(0.59)
-0.4368*
(-2.11)
2.2851
(1.44)
0.357
198

53

-8

-7

-6

-5

-4

-3

-2

-1

0

1

2

3

4

5

6

Drought in World War II

Drought in
1982-1983

Milliennium Drought

This figure plots the time series of monthly PDSI value for Australia, India, Russia, Japan and Israel. The sample period runs from
January of 1927 to December of 2014. The PDSI value is shown on the vertical axis. The horizontal axis is time.

Figure 1: Historical PDSI for Selective Countries

PDSI of Australia

192701
192901
193101
193301
193501
193701
193901
194101
194301
194501
194701
194901
195101
195301
195501
195701
195901
196101
196301
196501
196701
196901
197101
197301
197501
197701
197901
198101
198301
198501
198701
198901
199101
199301
199501
199701
199901
200101
200301
200501
200701
200901
201101
201301

54

55

PDSI of India

Figure 1 Continued

56
-8

-7

-6

-5

-4

-3

-2

-1

0

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

192701
192901
193101
Drought in 1946

193301
193501
193701
193901
194101
194301
194501
194701
194901
195101
195301
195501
195701
195901

Drought in 1963

PDSI of Russia

Figure 1 Continued

196101
196301
196501
196701
196901
197101
197301
197501
197701
197901
198101
198301
198501
198701
198901
199101
199301
199501
199701
199901
200101
200301
200501
200701
200901
201101
201301

-9

-8

-7

-6

-5

-4

-3

-2

-1

0

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

Drought in 1939
The 1995-97 droughts

Figure 1 Continued

PDSI of Japan

192701
192901
193101
193301
193501
193701
193901
194101
194301
194501
194701
194901
195101
195301
195501
195701
195901
196101
196301
196501
196701
196901
197101
197301
197501
197701
197901
198101
198301
198501
198701
198901
199101
199301
199501
199701
199901
200101
200301
200501
200701
200901
201101
201301

57

58
-7

-6

-5

-4

-3

-2

-1

0

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

192701
192901
193101
193301
193501
193701
193901
194101
194301
194501
194701
194901
195101
195301
195501
195701
195901

PDSI of Israel

7 year Drought

Figure 1 Continued

196101
196301
196501
196701
196901
197101
197301
197501
197701
197901
198101

The 1998-2002 droughts

198301
198501
198701
198901
199101
199301
199501
199701
199901
200101
200301
200501
200701
200901
201101
201301

59

This figure illustrates the historical PDSI of the US produced directly by the US NOAA. The PDSI value is shown on the vertical
axis. The horizontal axis is time. The PDSI of the US is essentially a land-area weighted average of the PDSI values from all climate
divisions in the US.

Figure 2: Historical PDSI of the US

Figure 3: Future Non-overlapping 12-month Return of Food net of Market Portfolio and Past
36-month Moving Average of PDSIWA, Time-series Plot
This figure depicts the time-series plot of the future non-overlapping 12-month return of the food net of market
portfolio against our main predictor variable PDSIWA36m, the past 36-month moving average of the weighted
average (by cropland area) PDSI value of the top 10 food-producing states in the US. The sample period is
January 1927 to December 2014. The plot starts in December 1929 as the first 36 months are used to obtain
the first value of PDSIWA36m.

PDSIWA36m(-1) vs Future Non-overlapping FOODXMRET12m
3

40%

10%

0

0%
-10%

-1

-20%

-2

-30%
-3

-40%
-50%

PDSIWA36m(-1)

Dust Bowl in
the 1930s Severe drought
in the 1950s

2014

2009

2004

1999

1994

1989

1984

1979

1974

1969

1964

1959

1954

1949

1944

1939

1934

-4
1929

PDSIWA36m(-1)

20%
1

FOODXMRET12m_nolp

Late 1980s
drought

60

Mid 2000s
drought, e.g.,
C.A. wildfire

Current
drought,
e.g., C.A.

FOODXMRET12m_nolp

30%

2

Figure 4: Global Annual Temperature Anomaly, 1880 to 2014
This figure shows the global annual temperature anomalies from 1880 to 2014 as recorded by NASA (red line),
NOAA (green line), the Japan Meteorological Agency (purple line), and the Met Office Hadley Centre in the
UK (blue line), downloaded from NASA’s website (source: http://earthobservatory.nasa.gov/Features/
WorldOfChange/decadaltemp.php). The vertical axis is the annual temperature anomaly and the horizontal
axis is time.

61

Figure 5: Monthly Quartile PDSI Values of International Countries over Time
This figure depicts the monthly lower quartile (25th percentile) PDSI value of international countries (including
the US) over time. The vertical axis is the corresponding PDSI variable value, and the horizontal axis is time.
We also plot the best-fitted linear trend line and allow for a structural break in trend at Jan 1980. The orange
dotted line and the red dashed line in the graph are the best-fitted linear trend lines before the structural break
in trend (before Jan 1980) and after the structural break in trend (after Jan 1980) respectively. The sample
period is from 190001 (January 1900) to 201412 (December 2014).

Panel (A)
0.5

25th Percentile PDSI Value

0.0
-0.5
-1.0
-1.5
-2.0
-2.5
-3.0
-3.5
-4.0

190001
190301
190601
190901
191201
191501
191801
192101
192401
192701
193001
193301
193601
193901
194201
194501
194801
195101
195401
195701
196001
196301
196601
196901
197201
197501
197801
198101
198401
198701
199001
199301
199601
199901
200201
200501
200801
201101
201401

-4.5

Panel (B)
2.5

Median PDSI Value

2.0
1.5
1.0
0.5
0.0
-0.5
-1.0
-1.5
-2.0

190001
190301
190601
190901
191201
191501
191801
192101
192401
192701
193001
193301
193601
193901
194201
194501
194801
195101
195401
195701
196001
196301
196601
196901
197201
197501
197801
198101
198401
198701
199001
199301
199601
199901
200201
200501
200801
201101
201401

-2.5

62

Figure 6: International Evidence: Future 1-year Change in Food Industry Profitability (CP)
Residual and Past 36-month Moving Average of PDSI, Scatter Plot
This figure depicts the scatter plot of the future 1-year change in the food industry profitability (CP) residual against our main predictor variable PDSI36m, the past 36-month moving average of PDSI value, for our
international sample including the US. The sample period is from January 1975 to December 2015.

10
8

CP1y Residual (%)

6
4
2
0
-6

-4

-2

0

2

4

6

-2
-4
Univariate regression of future
CP1y residual of FOOD on
PDSI36m(-1):
coef. estimate = 0.087*
t-stat = 1.70

-6
-8
-10

PDSI36m(-1)

63

8

Figure 7: International Evidence: Future Non-overlapping 12-month Food Portfolio Return
Residual and Past 36-month Moving Average of PDSI, Scatter Plot
This figure depicts the scatter plot of the future non-overlapping 12-month food portfolio return residual against
our main predictor variable PDSI36m, the past 36-month moving average of PDSI value. The sample period is
from January 1975 to December 2015.

100
Malaysia

FOODRET12m Residual (%)

80
Philippines

60

UK
India
South Africa

40
20

Turkey

0
-6

-4

-2

0

2

4

6

-20
Thailand Japan France
Peru

South Korea
Brazil
Australia

Univariate regression of future
non-overlapping FOODRET12m
residual on PDSI36m(-1):
coef. estimate = 2.16***
t-stat = 3.69

-40
-60
-80

Poland
-100

PDSI36m(-1)

64

8

Figure 8: International Evidence: Future Non-overlapping 12-month Food Portfolio Return
Residual and Past 36-month Moving Average of PDSI, Subsamples based on Past Mean
PDSI36m
This figure depicts the scatter plot of the future non-overlapping 12-month food portfolio return residual against
our main predictor variable PDSI36m, the past 36-month moving average of PDSI value. The blue circle indicates
countries whose past mean PDSI36m values are in the highest tercile (high tercile group), while the red diamond
indicates countries whose past mean PDSI36m values are in the lowest tercile (low tercile group). The sample
period is from January 1975 to December 2015.

High tercile group:
univariate regression of future
non-overlapping FOODRET12m
residual on PDSI36m(-1):
coef. estimate = 2.86**
t-stat = 2.56

FOODRET12m Residual (%)

100

50

0

-50

Low tercile group:
univariate regression of future
non-overlapping FOODRET12m
residual on PDSI36m(-1):
coef. estimate = 1.43
t-stat = 1.03

-100

-150
-4

-2

0

2
PDSI36m(-1)

65

4

6

Internet Appendix For Online
Publication Only

66

Appendix Tables and Figures
Appendix Table 1: International Evidence: Predicting 12-month Non-overlapping Food Portfolio Return with Moving Average of PDSI at Different Frequencies
This table presents the results from forecasting the food industry portfolio excess returns over future 12 months,
using the moving averages of the PDSI values over different frequencies. The regressions are run by pooling all
countries together and including a country fixed effect. The dependent variable is the food return over the future
12 months. PDSI12m to PDSI30m are the moving average of the PDSI values over the previous 12 months, 18
months, 24 months and 30 months, respectively. The returns are non-overlapping. All of the regressions include
these other forecasting variables over the past 12 months: lagged food industry return (FOODRET12m), lagged
market return (MRET12), lagged inflation rate (INF12), log of food industry price-to-book ratio (FOODPB12),
the log of the market dividend price ratio (DP12) and the market volatility (MVOL12). Standard errors are
clustered at both the country and month dimensions. *, **, *** denote statistical significance at 10%, 5%, 1%
respectively. The sample period is from January 1975 to December 2015.
Dependent Variable: Future 12-month FOODRET, Non-overlapping
PDSI12m

(1)
1.8019
(1.42)

PDSI18m

(2)

(3)

1.9335
(1.40)

PDSI24m

2.5839*
(1.74)

PDSI30m
FOODRET12
FOODPB12
MRET12
INF12
DP12
MVOL12
Ave.R-sq
N.of Obs.

(4)

-0.0642
(-0.59)
-12.3973***
(-2.96)
0.2351
(0.76)
1.9168
(1.26)
-0.3365***
(-14.02)
2.0001**
(2.07)
0.209
584

-0.0649
(-0.59)
-12.5065***
(-2.91)
0.2340
(0.75)
1.9174
(1.26)
-0.3348***
(-12.81)
1.9964**
(2.05)
0.208
584

67

-0.0679
(-0.62)
-12.6034***
(-2.89)
0.2362
(0.76)
1.8901
(1.24)
-0.3341***
(-8.91)
2.0033**
(2.07)
0.211
584

3.1015**
(2.07)
-0.0705
(-0.64)
-12.5605***
(-2.91)
0.2393
(0.75)
1.8570
(1.22)
-0.3430***
(-6.70)
2.0032*
(2.04)
0.213
584

Appendix Table 2: Predicting 12-month Non-overlapping Food Portfolio Return with 36-month
Moving Average of PDSIWA
This table presents the results from forecasting the future non-overlapping food industry portfolio excess returns (FOODRET) at the 12-month horizon, using the 36-month moving average of the weighted PDSI values
(PDSIWA). The dependent variable (forecast) is the non-overlapping food portfolio excess return (FOODRET)
over the next 12 months. The key explanatory (forecasting) variable, PDSIWA36m, is the moving average of
the weighted PDSI values (PDSIWA) over the previous 36 months. The weighted average is over the top 10
food-producing states using cropland area as weight. Other control variables, FOODRET12m, FOODBM12,
MRET12, INF12, DP12, MVOL12, NTIS12, DSPR12 and TSPR12 denote, respectively, the FOODRET, the
log of the food industry book-to-market ratio (FOODBM), the market excess return (MRET), the inflation rate
(INF), the log of the market dividend price ratio (DP), the market volatility (MVOL), the net equity expansion
ratio (NTIS), the default spread (DSPR) and the term spreads (TSPR), all over the previous 12 months. CONST
is the constant term. t-statistics based on Newey-West HAC standard errors are shown in parentheses, with a
lag order of 36 for all of the regressions. *, **, *** denote statistical significance at 10%, 5%, 1% respectively.
The R2 for each regression is also reported. N is the number of observation points in each regression. The
sample period is January 1927 to December 2014. Estimations start in December 1929 as the first 36 months
are used to obtain the first value of PDSIWA36m.

PDSIWA36m
FOODRET12m
FOODBM12
MRET12
INF12
DP12
MVOL12
NTIS12
DSPR12
TSPR12
CONST
R2
N

Dependent Variable: Future 12-month
FOODRET, Non-overlapping
(1)
(2)
(3)
2.005**
(2.532)
0.012
-0.022
(0.118)
(-0.186)
14.709
16.899
(0.970)
(1.016)
-0.080
-0.224
-0.206
(-1.098)
(-1.125)
(-1.105)
0.189
0.199
0.031
(0.738)
(0.987)
(0.125)
7.782***
-4.707
-5.511
(6.537)
(-0.384)
(-0.411)
-0.463*
-0.343
-0.362
(-1.805)
(-1.235)
(-1.373)
-2.376***
-2.204***
-2.263***
(-6.921)
(-6.707)
(-6.990)
1.573
-0.193
0.222
(0.686)
(-0.061)
(0.083)
2.300***
2.926***
2.761***
(5.937)
(4.267)
(3.631)
37.938***
5.600
4.750
(5.768)
(0.178)
(0.137)
0.22
0.24
0.26
85
85
85

68

Appendix Table 3: Predicting Non-overlapping Food Portfolio Returns over Different Horizons
with 36-month Moving Average of PDSIWA
This table presents the results from forecasting the future non-overlapping food industry portfolio excess returns (FOODRET) over different horizons, using the 36-month moving average of the weighted PDSI values (PDSIWA). The dependent variables (forecasts) are the non-overlapping food portfolio excess returns
(FOODRET) over the next 1 month, 3 months and 6 months in columns 1m, 3m and 6m respectively. The key
explanatory (forecasting) variable, PDSIWA36m, is the moving average of the weighted PDSI values (PDSIWA)
over the previous 36 months. The weighted average is over the top 10 food-producing states using cropland area
as weight. Other control variables, FOODRET12m, FOODBM12, MRET12, INF12, DP12, MVOL12, NTIS12,
DSPR12 and TSPR12 denote, respectively, the FOODRET, the log of the food industry book-to-market ratio
(FOODBM), the market excess return (MRET), the inflation rate (INF), the log of the market dividend price
ratio (DP), the market volatility (MVOL), the net equity expansion ratio (NTIS), the default spread (DSPR)
and the term spreads (TSPR), all over the previous 12 months. CONST is the constant term. t-statistics based
on Newey-West HAC standard errors are shown in parentheses, with a lag order of 36 for all of the regressions.
*, **, *** denote statistical significance at 10%, 5%, 1% respectively. The R2 for each regression is also reported.
N is the number of observation points in each regression. The sample period is January 1927 to December 2014.

PDSIWA36m
FOODRET12m
FOODBM12
MRET12
INF12
DP12
MVOL12
NTIS12
DSPR12
TSPR12
CONST
R2
N

Dependent Variables: Future FOODRET
over 1m, 3m and 6m, Non-overlapping
1m
3m
6m
0.185*
0.558
1.062**
(1.648)
(1.620)
(2.260)
-0.001
-0.027
-0.011
(-0.038)
(-0.491)
(-0.125)
0.488
1.929
6.604
(0.716)
(0.676)
(1.171)
0.004
-0.011
-0.111
(0.235)
(-0.212)
(-1.371)
-0.058
-0.143
-0.340**
(-0.897)
(-0.856)
(-2.091)
0.428
1.135
-0.048
(0.702)
(0.475)
(-0.010)
-0.008
-0.039
-0.308***
(-0.274)
(-0.613)
(-2.791)
-0.237***
-0.877***
-1.345***
(-3.003)
(-3.837)
(-3.576)
-0.102
-0.389
-0.600
(-0.280)
(-0.458)
(-0.490)
0.139
0.456**
1.382*
(1.618)
(2.134)
(1.883)
2.856
9.138
14.329
(1.545)
(1.422)
(1.133)
0.02
0.06
0.14
1020
340
170

69

Appendix Table 4: Predicting 12-month Non-overlapping Food Portfolio Return with Moving
Averages of PDSIWA at Different Frequencies
This table shows the results from forecasting the future non-overlapping food industry portfolio excess returns
(FOODRET) at the 12-month horizon, using the moving averages of the weighted PDSI values (PDSIWA)
over different frequencies. The dependent variable (forecast) is the non-overlapping food portfolio excess return (FOODRET) over the next 12 months. The key explanatory (forecasting) variables, PDSIWA12m to
PDSIWA30m, are the moving averages of the weighted PDSI values (PDSIWA) over the previous 12 months, 18
months, 24 months and 30 months respectively. The weighted average is over the top 10 food-producing states
using cropland area as weight. Other control variables, FOODRET12m, FOODBM12, MRET12, INF12, DP12,
MVOL12, NTIS12, DSPR12 and TSPR12 denote, respectively, the FOODRET, the log of the food industry
book-to-market ratio (FOODBM), the market excess return (MRET), the inflation rate (INF), the log of the
market dividend price ratio (DP), the market volatility (MVOL), the net equity expansion ratio (NTIS), the
default spread (DSPR) and the term spreads (TSPR), all over the previous 12 months. CONST is the constant
term. t-statistics based on Newey-West HAC standard errors are shown in parentheses, with a lag order of 36
for all of the regressions. *, **, *** denote statistical significance at 10%, 5%, 1% respectively. The R2 and
the number of observations (N ) in each regression are also reported. The sample period is January 1927 to
December 2014. Estimations start in December 1929 to be consistent with our baseline Table 2.

PDSIWA12m
PDSIWA18m
PDSIWA24m
PDSIWA30m
FOODRET12m
FOODBM12
MRET12
INF12
DP12
MVOL12
NTIS12
DSPR12
TSPR12
CONST
R2
N

Dep. Var.: Future 12-month Non-overlapping FOODRET
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
0.673
(0.454)
0.752
(0.907)
1.264**
(2.245)
1.749***
(2.719)
0.003
0.002
-0.004
-0.015
(0.025)
(0.022)
(-0.040)
(-0.130)
15.681
15.719
16.154
16.651
(0.914)
(0.966)
(1.012)
(1.024)
-0.224
-0.224
-0.220
-0.209
(-1.190)
(-1.178)
(-1.172)
(-1.131)
0.110
0.099
0.051
0.018
(0.491)
(0.485)
(0.219)
(0.074)
-5.246
-5.161
-5.273
-5.370
(-0.391)
(-0.402)
(-0.412)
(-0.411)
-0.357
-0.357
-0.362
-0.355
(-1.452)
(-1.375)
(-1.351)
(-1.326)
-2.233***
-2.246***
-2.265***
-2.280***
(-6.906)
(-6.934)
(-7.040)
(-7.089)
-0.057
-0.064
0.019
0.072
(-0.021)
(-0.022)
(0.007)
(0.026)
2.840***
2.855***
2.811***
2.792***
(4.626)
(4.040)
(3.700)
(3.649)
4.882
5.224
5.279
5.200
(0.146)
(0.161)
(0.161)
(0.155)
0.25
0.25
0.25
0.26
85
85
85
85

70

Appendix Table 5: Predicting 12-month Non-overlapping Food Portfolio Return with Alternative PDSIWA Measures
This table presents the results from forecasting the future non-overlapping food industry portfolio excess returns
(FOODRET) at the 12-month horizon, using the 36-month moving averages of alternative PDSIWA measures.
The dependent variable (forecast) is the non-overlapping food portfolio excess return (FOODRET) over the next
12 months. The key explanatory (forecasting) variables in columns (1) to (3) are the 36-month moving averages
of, respectively, the weighted average (based on cropland areas) of the PDSI values of all 48 contiguous US states
(PDSIASWA), the weighted average PDSI of all 48 states with the gross cash income of the farm sector in each
state as weight (PDSIASCAWA), and the PDSI of USA produced directly by the US NOAA (PDSIUSA). Other
control variables, FOODRET12m, FOODBM12, MRET12, INF12, DP12, MVOL12, NTIS12, DSPR12 and
TSPR12 denote, respectively, the FOODRET, the log of the food industry book-to-market ratio (FOODBM),
the market excess return (MRET), the inflation rate (INF), the log of the market dividend price ratio (DP),
the market volatility (MVOL), the net equity expansion ratio (NTIS), the default spread (DSPR) and the term
spreads (TSPR), all over the previous 12 months. CONST is the constant term. t-statistics based on NeweyWest HAC standard errors are shown in parentheses, with a lag order of 36 for all of the regressions. *, **, ***
denote statistical significance at 10%, 5%, 1% respectively. The R2 for each regression is also reported. N is the
number of observation points in each regression. The sample period is January 1927 to December 2014.

PDSIASWA36m
PDSIASCAWA36m
PDSIUSA36m
FOODRET12m
FOODBM12
MRET12
INF12
DP12
MVOL12
NTIS12
DSPR12
TSPR12
CONST
R2
N

Dependent Variable: Future 12-month
FOODRET, Non-overlapping
(1)
(2)
(3)
2.510**
(2.392)
2.516*
(1.939)
1.263*
(1.774)
-0.018
-0.012
-0.015
(-0.154)
(-0.108)
(-0.131)
17.122
16.599
17.578
(1.022)
(1.006)
(1.061)
-0.217
-0.220
-0.231
(-1.198)
(-1.217)
(-1.354)
0.022
0.024
0.015
(0.086)
(0.100)
(0.063)
-5.616
-5.572
-6.923
(-0.416)
(-0.420)
(-0.525)
-0.379
-0.352
-0.337
(-1.404)
(-1.246)
(-1.196)
-2.309***
-2.310***
-2.321***
(-7.351)
(-7.385)
(-7.498)
0.404
0.062
-0.008
(0.150)
(0.022)
(-0.003)
2.875***
2.923***
2.946***
(3.611)
(3.747)
(3.503)
4.516
4.445
0.471
(0.130)
(0.130)
(0.014)
0.26
0.26
0.26
85
85
85

71

Appendix Table 6: Predicting 12-month Non-overlapping Food Portfolio net of Market Return
with 36-month Moving Average of PDSIWA
This table presents the results from forecasting the future non-overlapping FOODXMRET, the food portfolio
return net of the return of the market excluding food (MXF) portfolio, at the 12-month horizon, using the
36-month moving average of the weighted PDSI values (PDSIWA). The dependent variable (forecast) is the
non-overlapping FOODXMRET, the food portfolio return net of the return of the market excluding food (MXF)
portfolio, over the next 12 months. The key explanatory (forecasting) variable, PDSIWA36m, is the moving average of the weighted PDSI values (PDSIWA) over the previous 36 months. The weighted average is over the top 10
food-producing states using cropland area as weight. Other control variables, FOODXMRET12m, FOODBM12,
MRET12, INF12, DP12, MVOL12, NTIS12, DSPR12 and TSPR12 denote, respectively, the FOODXMRET, the
log of the food industry book-to-market ratio (FOODBM), the market excess return (MRET), the inflation rate
(INF), the log of the market dividend price ratio (DP), the market volatility (MVOL), the net equity expansion
ratio (NTIS), the default spread (DSPR) and the term spreads (TSPR), all over the previous 12 months. CONST
is the constant term. t-statistics based on Newey-West HAC standard errors are shown in parentheses, with a
lag order of 36 for all of the regressions. *, **, *** denote statistical significance at 10%, 5%, 1% respectively.
The R2 for each regression is also reported. N is the number of observation points in each regression. The
sample period is January 1927 to December 2014.

PDSIWA36m
FOODXMRET12m
FOODBM12
MRET12
INF12
DP12
MVOL12
NTIS12
DSPR12
TSPR12
CONST
R2
N

Dependent Variable: Future 12-month
FOODXMRET, Non-overlapping
(1)
(2)
(3)
1.230***
(3.013)
0.011
-0.008
(0.127)
(-0.092)
9.413***
10.737**
(2.764)
(2.601)
-0.111**
-0.194***
-0.203***
(-2.609)
(-3.068)
(-2.983)
0.097
0.105
0.001
(0.864)
(0.732)
(0.010)
-5.240
-13.237***
-13.710**
(-1.609)
(-2.669)
(-2.387)
-0.334**
-0.257*
-0.269*
(-2.166)
(-1.688)
(-1.761)
0.240
0.354
0.318
(0.241)
(0.356)
(0.319)
4.675***
3.542**
3.804***
(2.890)
(2.437)
(2.718)
-0.794
-0.397
-0.499
(-1.381)
(-0.756)
(-1.028)
-16.251
-36.973**
-37.445*
(-1.139)
(-2.007)
(-1.821)
0.07
0.09
0.10
85
85
85

72

Appendix Table 7: Predicting 1-year Food Industry Change in Profitability (CP) with 36-month
Moving Average of PDSIWA
This table presents the results from forecasting the future 1-year CP, the change in profitability of the food
industry over the next year, using the 36-month moving average of the weighted PDSI values (PDSIWA). The
dependent variable (forecast) is the CP, the future change in the food industry profitability, over the next year.
The key explanatory (forecasting) variable, PDSIWA36m, is the moving average of the weighted PDSI values
(PDSIWA) over the previous 3 years (36 months). The weighted average is over the top 10 food-producing
states using cropland area as weight. Other control variables, CP1y, FOODRET12m, FOODBM12, MRET12,
INF12, DP12, MVOL12, NTIS12, DSPR12 and TSPR12 denote, respectively, the change in the food industry
profitability, the food industry portfolio return (FOODRET), the log of the food industry book-to-market ratio
(FOODBM), the market excess return (MRET), the inflation rate (INF), the log of the market dividend price
ratio (DP), the market volatility (MVOL), the net equity expansion ratio (NTIS), the default spread (DSPR)
and the term spreads (TSPR), all over the previous year (12 months). CONST is the constant term. t-statistics
based on Newey-West HAC standard errors are shown in parentheses, with a lag order of 36 for all of the
regressions. *, **, *** denote statistical significance at 10%, 5%, 1% respectively. The R2 for each regression is
also reported. N is the number of observation points in each regression. The sample period is 1950 to 2014.

PDSIWA36m
CP1y
FOODRET12m
FOODBM12
MRET12
INF12
DP12
MVOL12
NTIS12
DSPR12
TSPR12
CONST
R2
N

Dependent Variable: Future 1-year
Change in Food Industry Profitability
(1)
(2)
(3)
0.100**
(2.412)
-0.101
-0.125
(-0.942)
(-0.969)
-0.016***
-0.017***
(-3.668)
(-4.455)
0.148
0.299
(0.714)
(1.388)
-0.003
0.008*
0.008
(-0.633)
(1.788)
(1.436)
-0.078***
-0.084***
-0.094***
(-3.101)
(-3.198)
(-3.480)
0.157
0.033
-0.068
(1.648)
(0.142)
(-0.282)
0.031***
0.027***
0.026***
(3.227)
(3.761)
(2.804)
0.119**
0.089*
0.088**
(2.518)
(1.978)
(2.018)
0.285
0.319*
0.280
(1.396)
(1.796)
(1.453)
-0.002
0.020
0.009
(-0.105)
(0.666)
(0.283)
0.026
-0.192
-0.361
(0.065)
(-0.299)
(-0.528)
0.22
0.27
0.29
63
63
63

73

74

Non-overlapping 1m Return
Non-overlapping 3m Return
Non-overlapping 6m Return
Non-overlapping 12m Return
Industry PDSIWA36m t-stat Industry PDSIWA36m t-stat Industry PDSIWA36m t-stat Industry PDSIWA36m t-stat
Food
0.185
1.648 Food
0.558
1.671
Food
1.062
2.260
Food
2.005
2.532
Rtail
0.157
1.349
Cars
0.461
1.142
Rtail
0.712
1.164
Utils
0.730
0.966
Clths
0.163
1.077
Rtail
0.429
1.124
Trans
0.840
0.972
Rtail
1.055
0.915
Other
0.124
1.075
Trans
0.440
0.874
Other
0.604
0.917
Trans
1.290
0.886
Cars
0.172
1.044
Clths
0.384
0.87
Clths
0.604
0.783
Other
0.698
0.746
Finan
0.136
0.929
Finan
0.347
0.861
Utils
0.401
0.706
Clths
1.138
0.682
Trans
0.143
0.922
Other
0.327
0.844
Mines
0.228
0.371
Cars
0.786
0.648
Cnstr
0.128
0.803
Cnstr
0.364
0.827
Cnsum
0.216
0.300
Finan
0.619
0.539
Utils
0.094
0.685
Mines
0.292
0.69
Cnstr
0.157
0.219
Cnstr
0.464
0.524
Mines
0.105
0.636
Utils
0.204
0.644
Finan
0.149
0.208
Cnsum
0.648
0.497
Cnsum
0.067
0.541
Cnsum
0.151
0.362
Oil
0.062
0.137
Chems
0.773
0.442
Chems
0.043
0.344
Chems
0.055
0.141
Cars
0.154
0.130
Oil
0.186
0.208
Machn
0.046
0.316
Oil
0.047
0.135
Machn
-0.222
-0.148
Mines
0.042
0.040
Durbl
0.049
0.286
Durbl
0.077
0.129
Durbl
-0.151
-0.171
Durbl
-0.440
-0.332
Oil
0.026
0.176
Machn
0.021
0.038
Chems
-0.368
-0.288 Machn
-0.956
-0.393
Steel
-0.101
-0.521
FabPr
-0.240
-0.611
FabPr
-0.689
-0.933
FabPr
-1.440
-1.398
FabPr
-0.067
-0.530
Steel
-0.597
-1.149
Steel
-1.679
-1.441
Steel
-4.168
-2.015

This table shows the results from forecasting the future non-overlapping industry portfolio excess returns of all Fama-French 17 industries over
different horizons, using the 36-month moving average of the weighted PDSI values (PDSIWA). The dependent variable (forecast) for each
industry is the non-overlapping industry portfolio excess return over the next 1 month (first set of 3 columns), 3 months (second set of 3
columns), 6 months (third set of 3 columns), or 12 months (last set of 3 columns). The key explanatory (forecasting) variable in each regression,
PDSIWA36m, is the moving average of the weighted PDSI values (PDSIWA) over the previous 36 months. The weighted average is over the top
10 food-producing states using cropland area as weight. All regressions include other control variables, INDUSRET12m, INDUSBM12, MRET12,
INF12, DP12, MVOL12, NTIS12, DSPR12 and TSPR12. They denote, respectively, the industry portfolio excess return (INDUSRET), the log
of the industry book-to-market ratio (INDUSBM), the market excess return (MRET), the inflation rate (INF), the log of the market dividend
price ratio (DP), the market volatility (MVOL), the net equity expansion ratio (NTIS), the default spread (DSPR) and the term spreads (TSPR),
all over the previous 12 months. For clarity, we only show the coefficient estimates and t-statistics for our main predictor variable PDSIWA36m.
t-statistics are based on Newey-West HAC standard errors with a lag order of 36 for all of the regressions. Results are ranked based on the
magnitude of the t-statistics. The sample period is January 1927 to December 2014.

Appendix Table 8: Predicting Non-overlapping Returns of Other Fama-French 17-Industry Portfolios with 36-month Moving
Average of PDSIWA

Appendix Table 9: Predicting Non-overlapping Food Portfolio Returns and Food Industry
Change in Profitability with 36-month Moving Average of PMDIWA
This table presents the results from forecasting the future non-overlapping food industry portfolio excess returns
(FOODRET) over different horizons and the future 1-year change in profitability of the food industry, using
the 36-month moving average of the weighted PMDI (Modified Palmer Drought Severity Index) values. The
dependent variables (forecasts) are the non-overlapping food portfolio excess returns (FOODRET) over the
next 1 month, 3 months, 6 months and 12 months (Future FOODRET1m to Future FOODRET12m), the
non-overlapping food portfolio return net of the return of the market excluding food (MXF) portfolio over the
next 12 months (Future FOODXMRET12m), and the future change in the food industry profitability over the
next year (Future CP1y). The key explanatory (forecasting) variable, PMDIWA36m, is the moving average
of the weighted PMDI values (PMDIWA) over the previous 36 months. The weighted average is over the
top 10 food-producing states using cropland area as weight. Other control variables, CP1y, FOODRET12m,
FOODXMRET12m, FOODBM12, MRET12, INF12, DP12, MVOL12, NTIS12, DSPR12 and TSPR12 denote,
respectively, the change in the food industry profitability (CP), the food portfolio return (FOODRET), the food
portfolio net of market return (FOODXMRET), the log of the food industry book-to-market ratio (FOODBM),
the market excess return (MRET), the inflation rate (INF), the log of the market dividend price ratio (DP),
the market volatility (MVOL), the net equity expansion ratio (NTIS), the default spread (DSPR) and the term
spreads (TSPR), all over the previous 12 months. CONST is the constant term. t-statistics based on NeweyWest HAC standard errors are shown in parentheses, with a lag order of 36 for all of the regressions. *, **, ***
denote statistical significance at 10%, 5%, 1% respectively. The R2 for each regression is also reported. N is the
number of observation points in each regression. The sample period is January 1927 to December 2014 for the
return regressions and 1950 to 2014 for the change in profitability regression.

PMDIWA36m

(1)
Future
FOODRET1m
0.188
(1.635)

(2)
Future
FOODRET3m
0.565
(1.611)

-0.000
(-0.029)

-0.026
(-0.488)

Dependent Variable
(3)
(4)
Future
Future
FOODRET6m FOODRET12m
1.122**
2.104***
(2.368)
(2.674)

(5)
Future
FOODXMRET12m
1.344***
(2.941)

CP1y
FOODRET12m

-0.011
(-0.129)

-0.021
(-0.185)

FOODXMRET12m
FOODBM12
MRET12
INF12
DP12
MVOL12
NTIS12
DSPR12
TSPR12
CONST
R2
N

0.489
(0.717)
0.004
(0.236)
-0.057
(-0.884)
0.436
(0.712)
-0.007
(-0.265)
-0.236***
(-3.016)
-0.107
(-0.293)
0.138
(1.599)
2.877
(1.557)
0.02
1020

1.935
(0.680)
-0.011
(-0.211)
-0.140
(-0.812)
1.157
(0.489)
-0.038
(-0.563)
-0.875***
(-3.756)
-0.407
(-0.463)
0.452**
(2.039)
9.201
(1.459)
0.06
340

6.672
(1.187)
-0.110
(-1.352)
-0.339**
(-2.054)
-0.032
(-0.007)
-0.307***
(-2.775)
-1.344***
(-3.584)
-0.616
(-0.508)
1.374*
(1.868)
14.426
(1.139)
0.14
170

75

17.095
(1.028)
-0.206
(-1.096)
0.032
(0.129)
-5.534
(-0.411)
-0.355
(-1.348)
-2.265***
(-6.910)
0.127
(0.048)
2.742***
(3.578)
4.797
(0.138)
0.26
85

-0.009
(-0.100)
10.917***
(2.687)
-0.203***
(-2.984)
-0.002
(-0.011)
-13.744**
(-2.386)
-0.266*
(-1.728)
0.315
(0.316)
3.754***
(2.698)
-0.515
(-1.081)
-37.436*
(-1.804)
0.11
85

(6)
Future
CP1y
0.108**
(2.380)
-0.132
(-0.990)
-0.017***
(-4.442)

0.319
(1.449)
0.007
(1.401)
-0.094***
(-3.460)
-0.083
(-0.336)
0.026***
(2.819)
0.089*
(2.005)
0.271
(1.365)
0.007
(0.229)
-0.392
(-0.565)
0.29
63

Appendix Figure 1: Future Non-overlapping 12-month Food Portfolio Return Residual and Past
36-month Moving Average of PDSIWA, Scatter Plot
This figure depicts the scatter plot of the future non-overlapping 12-month food portfolio return residual against
our main predictor variable PDSIWA36m, the past 36-month moving average of the weighted average (by
cropland area) PDSI value of the top 10 food-producing states in the US. The sample period is January 1927 to
December 2014. The plot starts in December 1929 as the first 36 months are used to obtain the first value of
PDSIWA36m.

PDSIWA36m(-1) vs Future Non-overlapping FOODRET12m Residual

FOODRET12m_nolp Residual

40.0%
30.0%
20.0%
10.0%
0.0%
-4

-3

-2

-1

0

1

2

3

-10.0%
-20.0%

Univariate regression of
future non-overlapping
FOODRET12m residual on
PDSIWA36m(-1):
coef. estimate = 1.614**
t-stat = 2.00 (w. NW lag 36)

-30.0%
-40.0%
-50.0%

76

PDSIWA36m(-1)

Appendix Figure 2: Future 1-year Change in Food Industry Profitability (CP) Residual and
Past 36-month Moving Average of PDSIWA, Scatter Plot
This figure depicts the scatter plot of the future 1-year change in the food industry profitability (CP) residual
against our main predictor variable PDSIWA36m, the past 36-month (3-year) moving average of the weighted
average (by cropland area) PDSI value of the top 10 food-producing states in the US. The sample period is 1950
to 2014.

PDSIWA36m(-1) vs Future 1-year Change in Profitability (CP) Residual
1.5%

CP Residual

1.0%
0.5%
0.0%
-4

-3

-2

-1

0

1

2

3

-0.5%
-1.0%
-1.5%
-2.0%

77

PDSIWA36m(-1)

Univariate regression of
future 1-year CP Residual
on PDSIWA36m(-1):
coef. estimate = 0.080**
t-stat = 2.47 (w. NW lag 36)

