                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




     CHARGING AHEAD: PREPAID ELECTRICITY METERING IN SOUTH AFRICA

                                        B. Kelsey Jack
                                         Grant Smith

                                      Working Paper 22895
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w22895


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                  December 2016




We thank the City of Cape Town, and the Electricity Department in particular, for their
cooperation and collaboration on this project. Kathryn McDermott provided outstanding research
assistance with all aspects of the project. We also thank Guthrie Gray-Lobe and Grant Bridgman
for their assistance with the data, and Adaiah Lilenstein, Anna Shickele, and the staff of J-PAL
Africa for project implementation. The International Growth Centre and J-PAL’s Urban Services
Initiative provided financial support. Audiences at Brown University, Harvard University, Tufts
University, University of Michigan, and UC Berkeley’s Energy Institute provided helpful
comments. This RCT was registered in the American Economic Association Registry for
randomized control trials under Trial number AEARCTR-0000582. All errors are our own. The
views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2016 by B. Kelsey Jack and Grant Smith. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Charging Ahead: Prepaid Electricity Metering in South Africa
B. Kelsey Jack and Grant Smith
NBER Working Paper No. 22895
December 2016
JEL No. H2,L94,O13,Q41

                                           ABSTRACT

The standard approach to recovering the cost of electricity provision is to bill customers monthly
for past consumption. If unable to pay, customers face disconnection, the utility loses revenue,
and the service provision model is undermined. A possible solution to this problem is prepaid
metering, in which customers buy electricity upfront and use it until the prepaid amount is
consumed. We use data from Cape Town, South Africa to examine the effects of prepaid
electricity metering on residential consumption and returns to the electric utility. Over 4,000
customers on monthly billing were involuntarily assigned to receive a prepaid electricity meter,
with exogenous variation in the timing of the meter replacement. Electricity use falls by about 13
percent as a result of the switch, a decrease that persists for the following year. This creates a
tradeoff for the utility: revenue from consumption falls but more of it is recovered on time and at
a lower cost. The benefits to the electric utility outweigh the costs, on average, though results are
very heterogeneous. Poorer customers and those with a history of delinquent payment behavior
show the greatest improvement in profitability when switched to a prepaid meter. These findings
point to an important role for metering technologies in expanding energy access for the poor.


B. Kelsey Jack
Department of Economics
Tufts University
314 Braker Hall
Medford, MA 02155
and NBER
kelsey.jack@tufts.edu

Grant Smith
Department of Economics
University of Cape Town
Cape Town, South Africa
g.smith@uct.ac.za




A Online appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w22895
1       Introduction
The use of lights measured from space to proxy for economic activity (Henderson et al.
2011) drives home the importance of electricity for development. Much of the global increase
in electricity consumption in coming decades is forecast to come from developing countries
(Wolfram et al. 2012). However, on the ground, expanding access to electrification introduces
new challenges for service providers and for households. The standard model for recovering
the costs of electricity provision is a postpaid metering system in which a customer receives a
bill for consumption over the past month. For poor, liquidity constrained customers, finding
resources to pay the bill, which is not only a substantial share of income but also varies from
month to month, presents a major challenge. If unable to pay, customers face disconnection,
the utility loses revenue, and the service provision model is undermined. To avoid this,
utilities may ration connections to poor households.1
    Prepaid electricity meters oﬀer a technological solution to the non-payment problem.
These meters, which operate on a debit basis, are increasingly common in developing coun-
ties, particularly in Africa. Market forecasts suggest that the greatest growth in electricity
metering in Sub-Saharan Africa will come from prepaid meters, which will dominate the
electricity metering market in Africa by 2020 (Northeast Group 2014). Prepaid metering
is also expanding into the water sector (Heymans et al. 2014).2 South Africa was an early
adopter of prepaid electricity metering during the phase of rapid electrification following the
end of apartheid, when electricity was rolled out to poor and rural communities (Gaunt 2005;
Bekker et al. 2008; Dinkelman 2011; van Heusden 2012).
   We partner with the municipal government in Cape Town, South Africa to generate
new evidence on the impact of prepaid metering on electricity use and utility revenue and
cost recovery. We observe monthly electricity use and payment behavior over a four and
a half year period for 4,246 customers in a mandatory meter replacement project in Cape
Town. The timing of meter replacement is randomly ordered across 27 geographic areas,
and we follow customers for over a year following the replacement. The combination of
involuntary replacement and exogenous timing allows us to recover a clean causal estimate
    1
     In practice, this is often done through connection fees, which impose an upfront cost that may be pro-
hibitively high for poor households and small businesses (Golumbeanu and Barnes 2013; Lee et al. 2016b,a).
Connection fees typically vary with distance to existing infrastructure, so utilities may also choose not to
expand transmission into areas where the customer base is not expected to be profitable.
   2
     The prepayment model has parallels in other technologies. For example, some argue that the rapid rise
of mobile phones in Africa is due in part to their reliance on prepayment, which allowed poor users with
unpredictable incomes to control their usage and avoid debt.



                                                     2
of the impacts of prepaid metering that avoids selection into metering type. Prepaid metering
aﬀects numerous aspects of consumption, which precludes a clear accounting of consumer
welfare in our setting. Our focus, instead, is on the returns to prepaid metering relative to
postpaid billing for the electric utility, which depend on customer behavior.
    We find that customers reduce their electricity use when switched from postpaid monthly
bills to prepaid electricity metering by 1.9 to 2.2 kWh per customer per day, or 12 to 15
percent. The reduction persists for the year following the switch, and is robust to a number
of alternative specifications. The largest reductions come from high consumers, but also
low property value customers and those who are frequently delinquent in their postpaid
bill payments. For more delinquent customers, the switch to prepaid metering represents a
particularly dramatic transition away from the leniency of a weakly enforced monthly bill.
On average, customers pay their postpaid bill around 100 days after consumption, or 40
days after payment is due. Mechanically, the prepaid meter forces payments to occur before
consumption, and payment arrives an average of 3 months sooner as a result of the switch
to prepaid metering.
    The estimated decrease in consumption results in a corresponding decrease in the amount
owed to the utility of around 7 USD per customer per month, and saves the utility around
3 USD in kWh supply costs.3 However, better revenue recovery, lower recovery costs, and
payments that arrives around 3 months sooner, on average, tip the balance in favor of prepaid
electricity meters. Specifically, around 2 percent of bills are never paid on postpaid monthly
billing, so the decrease in what customers owe the utility is partially oﬀset by a greater
likelihood that the amount owed is eventually recovered. In addition, the utility avoids
the costs of meter reading and bill preparation, and the high costs of enforcement through
disconnection. All together, the average net gain to the utility over a seven year period
covers the fixed costs of the prepaid meter. Ignoring customer consumption responses makes
prepaid meters look considerably more profitable.
    The outcome of the cost-benefit comparison depends on the type of customer, as well as
features of the electric utility’s cost environment. Specifically, we observe relatively greater
returns from switching lower and poorer users (based on average postpaid consumption and
property values, respectively) to prepaid meters. In addition, customers that typically paid
their postpaid bills late, carry outstanding debts or had a history of meter disconnections all
generate substantially greater returns from the switch to prepaid metering than their more
reliable counterparts. The electric utility actually loses money by switching customers who
  3
      All values are reported in 2014 real values, based on an exchange rate of 11.45 ZAR/USD.


                                                     3
usually pay their bills on time or carry no outstanding debts. We also compare returns to
prepaid metering across diﬀerent administrative costs and observe that higher marginal elec-
tricity costs (holding tariﬀs constant) increase the returns to prepaid metering, because the
reduction in consumption creates less of a loss in settings where the average kWh generates
relatively smaller net revenue. Higher interest rates also increase the advantage of prepaid
metering over postpaid billing.
   Together, these results indicate that prepaid electricity metering can help overcome rev-
enue recovery challenges, particularly for the types of customers that are least profitable to
the electric utility on a monthly billing model. While these customers benefit from lenient
enforcement of bill payment, they also generate an externality on other customers by under-
mining the revenue base necessary for infrastructure expansions and maintenance. Prepaid
metering makes substantial progress in narrowing the profitability gap between richer and
poorer customers in our sample, with implications for expanding access in other settings.
The heterogeneity we observe also suggests that prepaid metering will be relatively more
beneficial in settings with a more delinquent customer base, a smaller margin per kWh or
higher borrowing costs than Cape Town. Focusing on the City of Cape Town presents a high
hurdle for prepaid metering to show positive returns. Unlike in many developing countries,
electricity in Cape Town is well managed, with revenue in excess of costs in most years (City
of Cape Town 2016). Electricity losses are low and problems of bill payment delinquency
and non-payment are comparatively minor. Furthermore, this setting allows us to focus on
the impacts of prepaid metering in an environment free from confounds associated with new
connections or unreliable supply.
    Our results highlight the importance of considering the customer response to a change in
metering technology. We speculate that a number of mechanisms may underlie the changes in
consumption that we observe. First, prepaid meters enforce payments automatically and so
increase the experienced price of electricity relative to postpaid metering (even though tariﬀs
remain the same), particularly where enforcement is lax. Second, by forcing customers to pay
in advance, prepaid metering may aﬀect expenditure patterns. On the one hand, postpaid
billing provides a form of credit and helps smooth income. On the other hand, a high marginal
cost of savings together with variable monthly bill totals may lead to debt accumulation by
credit constrained customers. Third, the change from postpaid to prepaid metering transfers
some transaction costs from the utility (meter reading, billing) to the customer (purchasing,
monitoring consumption). Finally, a number of informational and behavioral diﬀerences
characterize the change from postpaid to prepaid metering. For example, in-home displays


                                              4
provide feedback on usage, more frequent purchases make expenditures more salient, and
the prepaid system oﬀers a form of self- and intra-household control. A clean accounting
of these mechanisms is outside the scope of this study. Instead we focus on the impact of
prepaid metering, relative to postpaid billing, on costs and benefits to the utility.
   Our findings oﬀer the first evidence on the impact of prepaid metering in a developing
country context, where they are rapidly becoming the standard technology for new electricity
connections. Existing work on the eﬀects of prepaid electricity metering is scarce, and
consists largely of descriptive studies (Tewari and Shah 2003; Baptista 2013). A recent paper
on the largest prepaid metering program in the United States, the Salt River Project, found
reductions in consumption of around 12 percent per month after customers voluntarily switch
to prepaid metering (Qiu et al. 2016). The authors rely on a matching design to compare
prepaid and postpaid customers, and do not calculate payoﬀs to the utility. We are not
aware of any other plausibly causal evidence on prepaid electricity metering impacts.4
   We also contribute to a small but growing body of literature on utility metering and
revenue recovery in developing countries. For example, in a recent paper, McRae (2015)
documents the heterogeneous impacts of metering (as opposed to a fixed monthly fee) on
household welfare and utility revenue in Colombia. In a study of water bill payment in
South Africa, Szabó and Ujhelyi (2015) show that an information intervention increases
bill payment rates. More generally, non payment of bills and taxes undermines revenue
generation in developing countries, and is often associated with challenges monitoring and
enforcing tax payments (Gordon and Li 2009; Besley and Persson 2013). A growing number of
empirical studies on taxation show that increasing information for monitoring or changing the
incentives associated with enforcement can increase revenue (Kumler et al. 2013; Carrillo et
al. 2014; Pomeranz 2015; Khan et al. 2016). Our results echo the conclusions in the taxation
literature that innovations that shift the enforcement burden onto the payee may improve
revenue even in settings where detection and enforcement might otherwise be diﬃcult.
    The paper proceeds as follows. In the next section, we provide background on prepaid
electricity meters and on the study setting. Section 3 describes the data set and the empirical
strategy, Section 4 presents the empirical results, and Section 5 calculates the costs and
benefits to the utility. The final section concludes.
   4
    Gans et al. (2013) study the eﬀect of a change in the meter interface that provides prepayment customers
in Ireland with additional feedback about real-time usage. The change in feedback occurs for customers
already on prepayment meters and therefore does not provide an independent estimate of the eﬀect of
prepayment on usage.




                                                     5
2       Background and context
We begin with a general description of prepaid electricity metering before turning to some of
the specifics of our setting, including electricity tariﬀs and billing in the City of Cape Town
and details of meter replacement program that we study.


2.1     Prepaid electricity meters
Prepaid electricity meters work on a debit basis: customers purchase electricity and load it
on to their meter. As long as the meter has a positive balance, current flows through it into
the home. Once the balance reaches zero, the current is interrupted. Prepaid meters display
the number of units (kWh) remaining on the meter, and many have features to inform the
customer when the balance is getting low, such as colored or blinking lights or an audible
alert; they are also generally located within the dwelling in a visible and easy-to-reach place.
Contrast this with what we refer to as postpaid metering. On a conventional postpaid meter,
customers consume electricity and periodically have their meter read by an employee of the
electric utility. Bills are sent based on cumulative consumption as recorded by the meter
reader and customers typically have an additional grace period before their bill is due. The
physical meters used in most postpaid systems are located outside of the home, and display
consumption in a way that is diﬃcult for the consumer to access and understand.5
    Prepaid electricity metering is attractive to the electric utility for few reasons. First,
it generates revenue in advance of consumption and cuts down on non-payment or late
payment of electricity bills. Second, it eliminates the need to send meter readers to physically
inspect meters, and therefore addresses shirking or bribery, in addition to labor costs and
safety concerns in many settings. Third, it eliminates preparing and mailing monthly bills
and processing incoming payments. These last two benefits to the utility are achieved by
transferring some of the transaction costs to the customer. The prepaid system is not without
costs to the electric utility, however. There is a substantial initial cost of developing a vending
network to track and charge customers.6 Vendors typically earn a commission on sales of
prepaid electricity, which may be passed on to the consumer or deducted from revenue to
the utility (the latter in our setting). Prepaid electricity meters may also aﬀect theft, which
    5
     Recent innovations with in-home displays and dynamic pricing have begun to change the information
feedback on some postpaid systems (e.g., Jessoe and Rapson (2014)).
   6
     How sophisticated this needs to be depends on the tariﬀ structure. Under an increasing block tariﬀ,
cumulative purchases need to be tracked over the calendar month via a centralized server. We discuss this
in the context of Cape Town’s tariﬀs below.


                                                   6
is unlikely to be an important factor in our setting.7
    Customers purchase prepaid electricity from physical or electronic vendors, including
supermarkets, small shops and kiosks, ATMs, gas stations, and online or via mobile phone.
On the vending system used in Cape Town, the customer provides a meter number and the
monetary value or number of kWh that they would like to purchase. The vending system
issues an encrypted, meter-specific code based on the kWh purchased that the customer
enters into a keypad on the physical meter. The meter itself does not communicate directly
with the grid.8 See Appendix figure A.1 for an example of receipts from Cape Town. Over
time, prepaid metering technology has improved dramatically, both for reliability and theft
prevention. The prepaid meters that we study are known as split prepaid meters, because
the actual meter is located outside the home in a locked kiosk, with only the display and
keypad inside of the home. Communication between the meter and the in-home display is by
wire or radio frequency. This design minimizes the risk of tampering and allows the utility
to perform maintenance more easily.
   Prepaid metering is expanding across Africa and South Asia. Already widespread in
Nigeria, Rwanda, Kenya, Uganda, Zambia and elsewhere, and is poised to become the dom-
inant metering technology in Africa (Northeast Group 2014). Several countries in Africa
have announced that all new connections will use prepaid electricity meters. Prepaid meters
are also found in developed countries including New Zealand, the UK and Northern Ireland.
A small number of pilot programs have been testing the introduction of prepaid metering in
the United States (see Qiu et al. (2016), for example).


2.2     Electricity in Cape Town, South Africa
In 1990, as South Africa began the transition to democracy, less than a third of South
Africans had access to electricity. By the end of that decade the figure had doubled (Bekker
et al. 2008), and by 2011 roughly 80 percent of South African households were electrified
(IEA 2013). This extremely rapid expansion of electrification was facilitated in part by
the introduction of prepaid electricity metering, which helped manage revenue recovery for
   7
     Generally, prepaid meters are used to combat theft because innovation in the technology have made it
more diﬃcult to tamper with the meter. However, theft may also increase if customers shift from nonpayment
to illegal connections.
   8
     This description covers the most common type of prepaid metering systems at this point in time. Earlier
generations of prepaid meters were coin-operated or relied on a physical card or key. The technology used
by the City of Cape Town is the STS system, developed in South Africa in the 1980s. It is currently used
for most prepaid systems around the world.



                                                     7
previously unelectrified households (Bekker et al. 2008). In the City of Cape Town, where
we focus, electrification rates in formal settlements are over 99 percent.
   The national state-owned utility, Eskom, owns and operates most generation sources, as
well as the national grid. It sells power in bulk to municipalities, including Cape Town,
which pay time of use rates that vary by time of day and month of the year. The City of
Cape Town supplies power to roughly 80 percent of residents of the city (the rest are supplied
by Eskom), around 450,000 (75 percent) of whom are on prepaid metering.
   The City of Cape Town did not charge a fixed service fee in the years we study, so the
increasing block tariﬀs are set to cover both fixed and variable costs of electricity supply.9
The tariﬀs charged on the prepaid meter are the same as on postpaid metering. On a
prepaid meter, customers move up the tariﬀ blocks based on cumulative purchases during
the calendar month; the tariﬀ resets on the first of each month. Over most of the study
years, two tariﬀs are used. Residential customers that consume below a threshold quantity
of electricity in a 12 month rolling window are on what is referred to as a “Lifeline” tariﬀ,
which provides free electricity for up to the first 60 kWh of consumption in a calendar month.
Customers not on the Lifeline tariﬀ are charged on a comparatively flat increasing block tariﬀ
(“Domestic” tariﬀ). Figure 1 shows the tariﬀs for 2014-15 in 2014 USD. Tariﬀs for the other
years in our data are shown in Appendix Figure A.2. Tariﬀs are updated each July.
   Customers of the City of Cape Town historically received individual bills for each service
(water, electricity, refuse removal, etc.) from the City. Over the last decade, customers have
been shifted to a consolidated billing model, which includes all utilities on a single bill. In our
sample, roughly two-thirds of customers received a consolidated bill prior to the switch to
prepaid metering. A sample consolidated bill is shown in Appendix Figure A.3. We discuss
the implications of consolidated billing for our results in subsequent sections.


2.3     Meter replacement program
In late 2014, the City of Cape Town initiated a program to replace postpaid meters with
prepaid meters in selected areas. Suburbs with a low penetration of postpaid meters and a low
average property value were targeted, with the idea that eliminating the final few postpaid
meters from these areas would cut out entire meter reading routes. The project consisted
of a pilot followed by two stages of implementation. Stage 1 targeted 2,251 postpaid meters
in a single suburb called Mitchell’s Plain between November 2014 and February 2015, with
   9
     In other words, the average marginal price exceeds the average marginal cost, and the diﬀerence is used
to cover maintenance, new infrastructure and other fixed operating costs.


                                                     8
successful replacement of over 90 percent of the targeted meters. Stage 2 targeted 1,995
postpaid meters spread across 14 diﬀerent parts of the City between February and April
2015. Replacement rates were lower in the 2nd stage, because compliance became voluntary
beginning in April 2015.
   The meter replacement program proceeded as follows. A contractor hired to complete the
meter replacements worked in geographically contiguous groups of customers identified by
the City of Cape Town. Based on customer addresses, the contractor first delivered notices
to targeted households informing them that they would have their postpaid meter replaced
with a prepaid meter. Customers were instructed to call to schedule an appointment. The
letter described a time window for scheduling and informed customers that if they had not
scheduled an appointment within 15 days, that their electricity would be disconnected. This
window was eventually extended for an additional 15 days. When a customer called, the
scheduling window available to them was determined by the order of their geographic group
and by contractor availability. Most meter replacements in a group occurred over a period
of a few days and involved multiple contractor teams. We discuss how this process is used
in our empirical design in Section 3.3.


2.4    Neighborhood characteristics
Our sample consists of 2,251 customers from the suburb of Mitchells Plain and 1,995 cus-
tomers from 14 other areas in Cape Town (see the map in Appendix figure A.5). We describe
the characteristics of the neighborhoods in our study, based on the 2011 South African cen-
sus.10 We begin by describing the Stage 1 sample in Mitchells Plain, a lower to middle income
neighborhood in the Cape Flats area of Cape Town. During apartheid it was designated as
a colored area, and residents were largely excluded from higher paying jobs and received less
access to education as a result of apartheid policies.11 Average monthly income is less than
300 USD for 42 percent of Mitchells Plain residents, which is close to the average for the
City of Cape Town. The median household spends 8-10 percent of its monthly income on
electricity. Unemployment rates among working age adults are around 32.5 percent, which
is higher than the City average. Electrification is nearly universal: 99 percent of the 38,403
households in the 2011 census used electricity for lighting. Nearly all households (92 percent)
 10
      Unless otherwise indicated, all figures are the authors’ own calculations from Statis-
tics South Africa’s Census 2011 Community Profile data sets (version 1 from DataFirst -
https://www.datafirst.uct.ac.za/dataportal/index.php/catalog/517/get_microdata) and the small area
layer GIS data set for this census (available, upon request, from Statistics South Africa).
   11
      “Colored” is a designation for people of mixed ethnic origin in the South African census.


                                                9
in Mitchells Plain live in formal dwellings and owner occupancy rates are high.12
   Customers in Stage 2 of the project are located in areas that are similar to Mitchells
Plain on most dimensions. The other areas are, on average, slightly poorer than Mitchells
Plain: unemployment was 35 percent, on average, in 2011, and 51 percent of households had
monthly incomes below 300 USD. Electrification rates and formal property rights are high,
like in Mitchells Plain. Overall, rates of electricity use are high in the study sample relative
to low income consumers in other developing countries. Household survey data from project
participants in Mitchells Plain indicate that the average household owns a refrigerator, an
electric hot water heater and a television, and cooks and heats using electricity.


3          Data, study design and empirical strategy
3.1          Data
We obtain data from the City of Cape Town’s billing system and prepaid vending system
under a non-disclosure agreement. Here, we summarize key features of the data. Appendix
6 contains further details on dataset and variable construction.

3.1.1         Billing data

The City of Cape Town follows a consolidated billing model for most customers (65 percent
of our sample at the time of the program), and provides a single bill that covers electricity,
water, refuse, sewerage, property taxes and debts (see Appendix Figure A.3 for a sample
bill). Bills are sent to customers approximately every 30 days and bills are due 25 days after
the posting date. Electricity charges are based on physical meter readings taken every 25 to
35 days. We use meter reading dates to construct an average daily kWh per month variable
that assumes a constant rate of consumption per day between meter readings. We then take
the average across all days in the month, some of which may have come from diﬀerent bills.
We also construct a measure of the corresponding amount owed for consumption in each
month, based on the tariﬀ schedule.
    The bill also indicates the date and value of any payments made since the last bill. We
use this information to construct measures of the days after consumption that a bill is paid
oﬀ based on cumulative payments, and an indicator for late payments. We construct three
other measures of delinquency. First, we calculate the share of all monthly bills on postpaid
    12
         Specifically, 88 percent of program participants surveyed in Mitchells Plain report owning their home.


                                                         10
metering that were paid past the due date. Second, we construct an indicator for whether
the customer had multiple outstanding bills at the end of the panel. Third, we construct
a measure of whether a customer was ever disconnected while on postpaid metering, and
include the cost to the City of disconnecting and reconnecting the customer in our benefit
cost analysis.

3.1.2   Prepaid vending data

The prepaid vending system records electricity purchases. We use transaction dates to
construct an average daily kWh variable that assumes a constant rate of consumption per
day between transactions. We then take the average across all days in the month, some of
which may have come from diﬀerent transactions. This averaging assumes that customers
are not accumulating electricity credit on their meter. As with the postpaid billing data, we
also construct a measure of the corresponding amount owed in month, based on the tariﬀ
schedule. We calculate the days between consumption and payment (which will be  0)
using the purchase date and the midpoint of the days before the next purchase.

3.1.3   Marginal costs and revenue recovery costs

We obtain data on the marginal cost of electricity supply from the City of Cape Town.
The City purchases electricity from Eskom, the national provider, at tariﬀs that vary by
time of day and month of the year. We use the city-wide monthly average price per kWh
paid to Eskom as our marginal cost of supply measure (see Appendix figure A.4). The
Electricity Department has an estimated loss rate of 11.25 percent, which includes both
technical and non-technical losses, which we assume both meter types equally. Prepaid
electricity vendors receive approximately 0.002 USD per kWh sold, which is deducted from
the revenue remitted to the City. We also gather information from the Electricity Department
on other administrative costs associated with revenue recovery on postpaid billing, including
the average per-customer meter reading and bill preparation costs.


3.2     Electricity outcomes across metering types
The billing data and prepaid vending data measure electricity in diﬀerent ways. As described
above, the billing data are used to construct a daily average between bill t and t 1, while the
prepaid dataset is used to construct a comparable measure between transaction t and t + 1.



                                              11
The constructed average daily consumption per month removes diﬀerences in the frequency
of observations across the dataset.
    Given that the prepaid metering system records transactions, rather than actual con-
sumption, the comparability of the measures across systems deserves further discussion. A
key assumption in transforming expenditures into a measure of average daily consumption
is that customers are not accumulating unused electricity on their meter. Three observa-
tions suggest that this is reasonable. First, the increasing block tariﬀ structure provides an
incentive not to accumulate unused electricity since tariﬀs reset on the first of the month
as discussed above. Second, customers tend to purchase very small amounts of electricity,
very frequently: the median purchase size is 19 kWh or around 30 ZAR (2.6 USD), and
the median purchase frequency is every 3 days. Finally, while the prepaid technology might
lead to greater smoothing if customers have a tight monthly budget constraint, we note that
the within-customer coeﬃcient of variation of our preferred constructed average daily kWh
measure is very similar for prepaid and postpaid observations (0.24 for postpaid and 0.21
for prepaid) and even more similar when the outcome is in logs (0.11 versus 0.10). The
assumption that customers are not accumulating unused electricity on their meter may be
most diﬃcult to satisfy in the month or two following the meter replacement as customers
build up a minimum balance on their meter. Our main analysis drops the month of meter
replacement. We show an event-study style analysis that shows how electricity use evolves
in the months following the meter replacement.
    More generally, the transformation of expenditure data into a measure of consumption
is a common challenge in studies of household demand. In the case of prepaid electricity, we
construct a monthly measure of consumption based on a mean (median) purchase frequency
of 12.6 (9.5) times per month. Over 95 percent of customers make at least one purchase
every month on prepaid metering. While a number of econometric methods have been
advanced for estimating latent demand based on less frequent purchases (e.g., Kay et al.
(1984); Blundell and Meghir (1987)), the high frequency of observed expenditures together
with the administrative nature of our data allows us to make the simplifying assumption
that monthly expenditures and monthly consumption converge.


3.3    Study design
We collaborated with the City of Cape Town to randomize the phase in of the meter instal-
lation program. Groups of around 150 adjacent customers were randomized in two separate


                                             12
waves, one for each of the meter replacement stages. First, in Mitchell’s Plain (stage 1),
we imposed a grid over a map of all targeted customers, and aggregated cells until around
150 adjacent customers formed a randomization group. Thirteen groups were identified and
their order was randomized. Second, targeted customers in the other suburbs (stage 2) were
aggregated in a similar process, but used pre-existing suburb definitions to assign customers
to groups. The second stage included 14 groups, which were also randomly ordered. Thus,
the final design consists of 27 groups, with separate random assignment within the first and
second groups. A map of the randomization groups is shown in Appendix figure A.5.

3.3.1   Potential confounds

Two issues associated with implementation present potential confounds. We discuss these in
turn, anticipating the robustness checks that we perform in Section 4.1.2. First, when the
City installs a new meter, it is defaulted into the Domestic tariﬀ. If the meter should be
assigned to Lifeline tariﬀ, the change has to be manually entered into the billing or vending
system. Because of the volume of meter replacements around the time of the project, there
were some delays in restoring the Lifeline tariﬀ to customers who had received it prior to the
switch. Specifically, 981 of the 1,335 customers on Lifeline in the month before the switch
were put on to the Domestic tariﬀ for at least a portion of the month following the switch.
The majority of these cases were corrected within three months of the switch, however,
some lasted considerably longer, and some may indicate a permanent tariﬀ change for the
customer. A tariﬀ change that coincides with the switch to prepaid metering presents an
obvious confound to identifying the eﬀects of the meter on electricity use. We control for
erroneous tariﬀs in all of our analyses, and drop these customers altogether in a robustness
check. Our analysis of heterogeneous treatment eﬀects show separate results for Domestic
tariﬀ customers, who were unaﬀected by the tariﬀ error.
    Second, around the same time as the meter replacement program, the City of Cape
Town implemented several months of rolling blackouts (loadshedding) to manage supply
shortages. These involuntary outages may lead to a reduction in electricity use that is
unrelated to prepaid metering. We obtain data on the hours of loadshedding and other
outages per month for each substation serving Mitchell’s Plain, where meter installations
were most likely to overlap with the period of relatively intense loadshedding. Beginning
in November 2014, substations in Mitchell’s Plain experience an average of 1 to 1.5 hours
of load shedding per month, or around 0.04 percent fewer hours of electricity supply (see
Appendix figure A.6). We construct controls for the average hours per month of outage

                                             13
across all Mitchell’s Plain substations, and control for them in a robustness check.13 We also
perform robustness checks that include comparison households outside of the project sample
who were subject to loadshedding but not meter replacements.

3.3.2    Study sample

The final sample for analysis is based on the lists of targeted customers used in the ran-
domization. Table 1 shows characteristics of the sample. We observe 4,246 customers, with
an median of 54 monthly observations per customer, 16 of which are from a prepaid meter.
On average, customers use around 16 kWh of electricity per month prior to the program,
and owe around 52 USD per month for electricity. Over half of their bills are paid late, and
it takes an average of around 100 days to pay after the date of consumption. Twenty-six
percent of customers have multiple outstanding unpaid bills at the end of the panel and 21
percent were ever disconnected as a means of enforcing bill payment. The median property
value is around 27,000 USD and 31 percent of customers are on the subsidized tariﬀ at the
time of the program.


3.4     Empirical strategy
We observe electricity and other billing outcomes for a customer i in each month-year t. To
identify the eﬀect of a switch from postpaid metering to prepaid metering on outcome yit ,
we estimate:

                            yit = ↵ + prepaidit + ⌧t + tari↵it + ⌘i + ✏it                                (1)

where prepaidit indicates the share of month t that customer i received electricity through
a prepaid meter, ⌧t are time fixed eﬀects (either month-year or separate calendar month
and billing year), tari↵it is a time varying Lifeline tariﬀ indicator, and ⌘i are customer
fixed eﬀects.14 Our main results exclude the switch month, resulting in a binary measure
of prepaid. Standard errors are clustered at the customer level. As a robustness check, we
compute t-statistics based on standard errors clustered at the randomization group level.
Under the assumption that prepaid metering is uncorrelated with ✏it , conditional on time
  13
      We do not obtain the data for the suburbs in stage 2 of the meter replacement program. The loadshedding
schedule was similar across suburbs and adhered to fairly closely.
   14
      We also add an indicator for months aﬀected by the errors updating the Lifeline tariﬀ in the months
following the meter switch.



                                                     14
and customer fixed eﬀects, identifies the causal impact of prepaid metering on outcome
yit . We also estimate the eﬀect of prepaid metering over time through an event study style
analysis that recovers a separate treatment eﬀect for each month pre- and post- receiving
the prepaid meter.
   While meter replacement was involuntary, the actual meter replacement date may not
be not exogenous to electricity consumption. First, there is a non-trivial amount of non-
compliance, particularly in stage 2 of the project. Second, the timing of replacement even
within the assigned windows may be determined by factors correlated with use, such as
customer work schedules or resistance to the replacement. In exceptional circumstances,
customers were allowed to make appointments outside of the assigned replacement window,
with replacements carried out by a single contractor team. Third, in practice, the length of
time that the contractor spent in each group was determined by the diﬃculty in scheduling
all appointments. Our primary instrument for assignment to a prepaid meter is therefore
the first date on which the contractor has more than one team working in the randomization
group, which corresponds to the start of the scheduling window. As an alternative, we also
use the date on which the first households in the group received a notification (maildrop)
about the project.
   Figure 2 summarizes the two instruments, and the actual switching patterns. The ran-
domization groups are ordered on the vertical axis, with the Mitchell’s Plain groups (stage
1) corresponding to groups 1-13. The circles indicate the timing of the first letters delivered
in the group. The squares show the first date on which the contractor was performing in-
stallations in the group, and the triangles indicate the median switch date among those who
ever switched, with the share ever switched printed on the figure. As the figure illustrates,
letter deliveries followed the random ordering of the groups very closely, particularly during
stage 1 of the program. The contractor dates are also consistent with the randomized order,
though they occasionally deviate, particularly toward the end of the program. We use the
contractor date as our main instrument since it most accurately reflects the exogenous deter-
minant of take up. We show results using the group order and mailing dates as instruments
in robustness checks. Given the higher compliance rates overall and the better adherence
to the randomization, we report our main results for Mitchells Plain alone in a robustness
check. The IV estimates estimate the local average treatment eﬀect of prepaid metering by
using the assignment variables as instruments for receiving a prepaid meter.
    Recovering the causal eﬀect of prepaid metering, either through the OLS or IV estimates,
requires that the actual order or assigned (randomized) order of meter replacements is un-


                                              15
correlated with unobserved time-varying factors that aﬀect electricity consumption. Time
invariant customer characteristics are absorbed in the customer fixed eﬀects used in all anal-
yses. Appendix table A.1 shows the correlation between pre-switch customer characteristics
(prior to November 2014) and the assigned group order (column 2), the assigned switch
date, based on the contractor instrument (column 3), the actual switch date (column 4)
and whether the customer was ever switched (column 5). The small number of groups in-
cluded in the randomization results in a lack of balance on property value (and therefore
other characteristics, presumably), which would be of greater concern if the data did not
allow for household and time fixed eﬀects. We examine pre-program residuals for “parallel
trends” after removing month-year and household fixed eﬀects from the relationship between
average daily kWh and month, prior to the program. We plot the average residual within
each randomization group for the 34 months leading up to the start of the program and ob-
serve relatively flat trends that do not diﬀer substantially across groups (see Appendix figure
A.7). Appendix figure A.8 also plots monthly average daily kWh for the project sample and
a comparison group of postpaid customers elsewhere in the City, and shows parallel trends
in the months preceding the project start.


4     Results
We start by showing the impact of switching to a prepaid meter on electricity use. Second,
we turn to heterogeneity in the treatment eﬀects by customer characteristics and behavior
prior to the replacement program. Finally, we estimate impacts on variables that inform the
benefit cost analysis, including amount owed and payment patterns.


4.1    Electricity use
Figure 3 plots the median daily average consumption in each month and the share of tar-
geted customers switched to prepaid metering. The figure clearly shows the strong seasonal
pattern of consumption, which peaks in the South African winter, when many customers use
electricity to heat their homes. The drop in usage that coincides with the prepaid metering
program is clearly visible in the figure.
    Table 2 shows the regression coeﬃcients from OLS regressions (columns 1 and 2) and
2SLS regressions using the contractor date instrument (columns 3 and 4). The outcome
in Panel A is average kWh/day and in Panel B is the log of average kWh/day. Columns


                                              16
1 and 3 show the results with separate month and year fixed eﬀects and columns 2 and 4
use month-year fixed eﬀects. The OLS coeﬃcients (columns 1 and 2) indicate that average
daily usage fell between 1.89 and 2.17 kWh (Panel A), depending on the specification. This
corresponds to a decline of between 11.9 and 15.2 percent (Panel B). The IV and OLS results
are generally similar in magnitude, with slightly smaller results from the IV in levels (Panel
A). . The first stage on the IV regressions is – unsurprisingly – very strong (F-statistic >
1000). The reduction is precisely estimated in all specifications.15

4.1.1    Persistence

We next provide suggestive evidence of impacts over time. We set the month prior to the
switch as time 0 and estimate separate coeﬃcients for each month following the switch (the
switch month is omitted).16 Figure 4 plots the resulting coeﬃcients. Overall, the reduction
persists for the first year on prepaid metering. If anything, the point estimates appear to
decline over time. Note that customers that do not switch meter types are not included in
the event study results.

4.1.2    Robustness checks

To examine the robustness of our estimate of the eﬀect of prepaid electricity metering on
electricity use, we repeat the analysis above with alternative specifications, including diﬀerent
instruments and a diﬀerence in diﬀerence design that includes comparison customers. As
shown in Appendix table A.4, the coeﬃcient remains reasonably stable, implying that the
results are not driven by outliers or by the assumptions used in variable construction.17
Appendix figure A.8 shows the descriptive consumption plot underlying the main diﬀerence
in diﬀerence specification (column 4).18 Next, we examine the robustness to alternative
  15
     We also construct t-statistics based on standard errors clustered at the randomization group level. For
our main specifications, we perform 1000 iterations of the wild cluster bootstrap procedure (see Cameron
et al. 2008), none of which generate t-statistics below the value without clustering, implying a p-value of
<0.0001.
  16
     We include month and billing year fixed eﬀects, and cluster standard errors at the customer level. Note
that we cannot simultaneously control for time and household fixed eﬀects and identify the event study
coeﬃcients, so we omit household fixed eﬀects from the specification.
  17
     Diﬀerences across the coeﬃcient on the alternative instruments is unsurprising given that the marginal
customer is likely to diﬀer depending on which instrument is used. Nevertheless, the results are qualitatively
similar across all instruments.
  18
     Note that neither of the comparison samples are ideal. The sample of postpaid comparison customers
(column 4) comes from other parts of the city since all postpaid customers in the project neighborhoods
were targeted for meter replacement. The sample of prepaid comparison customers is drawn from the


                                                     17
sample restrictions and manipulations of the outcome variable, and again see little diﬀerence
in the point estimates (see Appendix table A.5). Finally, we implement two robustness checks
designed to test remaining concerns about the implementation issues discussed in Section
3.3.1; we control for loadshedding and exclude Lifeline customers that received the incorrect
tariﬀ when their meter was replaced. Results change very little (see Appendix table A.6).
Finally, we conduct a placebo test that reassigns the switch date and the instrument to one
year prior to its actual occurrence and observe a small and insignificant coeﬃcient on the
prepaid indicator (see Appendix table A.6, column 4).


4.2     Heterogeneous treatment eﬀects
We preview the heterogeneity that we will return to in the benefit cost analysis (Section 5),
by examining impacts by observable customer characteristics. We re-estimate equation (1),
interacting the prepaid indicator with month and billing year fixed eﬀects with each binary
heterogeneity measure, summarized in Table 3.19 Columns 1 and 2 show the OLS eﬀect
on average daily kWh and columns 3 and 4 show the results instrumenting for the switch
date with the first date the contractor worked in the group. We show the total eﬀect for
each subgroup in columns 1 and 3 and the diﬀerence (i.e. the coeﬃcient on the interaction
term) in columns 2 and 4. We also report the number of customers and the postpaid average
daily kWh for each sub-group. We show the results in levels and report pre-switch average
consumption by subgroup in the column labeled Mean. The pairwise correlations between
the heterogeneity variables is shown in Appendix Table A.3.
   We begin with customer tariﬀs at the time of the program. On average, Lifeline customers
use less electricity per month than Domestic customers, and pay less per kWh (see Figure 1).
The first two rows Table 3 show results by tariﬀ prior to the switch. Domestic customers cut
back significantly more than do Lifeline customers. Proportional to their average consump-
tion on postpaid, the reduction by domestic customers is also larger, at around 12 percent
relative to a reduction of around 10 percent for Lifeline customers. Domestic customers
also tend to consume more electricity than do Lifeline customers; unsurprisingly, when we
split the sample into above and below median postpaid consumption, we see similar results,
with larger absolute (and proportional) reductions among the larger consumers. To examine
same neighborhood but provides a diﬀerent counterfactual: what consumption would have been if project
customers had always been on prepaid metering.
  19
     We focus on the specification that includes separate month and year fixed eﬀects because the prepaid
coeﬃcient may not be well identified within month-year for all sub-groups.



                                                   18
whether these two sets of results are simply capturing diﬀerences by wealth levels – Lifeline
customers and below median consumers also tend to be poorer (Appendix Table A.3) – we
split the sample by property value, which is the wealth proxy that we observe in the data.
We divide customers according to the valuation used for many other anti-poverty programs
in the City of Cape Town (300,000 ZAR based on the 2012 valuation, which corresponds to
around 29,000 USD2014). We see larger reductions among low property value customers,
both in levels and proportional to their average consumption on postpaid metering.
   Next, we examine responses by three measures of delinquency. First, customers that pay
more than the median number of bills late (more than 58 percent) prior to the program
reduce their consumption by more than do customers who tend to pay their bills on time.
Next, customers with multiple outstanding unpaid bills at the end of the panel, and those
that experienced disconnection at some point as a means of payment enforcement both
show similar reductions to customers with a better history of payment (if anything, they
are slightly less responsive). These last results are particularly relevant for considering the
payoﬀs to the utility from switching customers from postpaid to prepaid billing, which we
turn to in the next section.


4.3    Payment behavior and cost of supply
We turn from these impacts on kWh/day to the measures that will feed into the utility’s
benefit cost analysis, specifically, the amount owed by the customer, the cost of supply and
the timing of customer payments. The outcomes we show here exclude administrative costs
such as bill preparation, which we include in the benefit cost analysis and explain in the
next section. Summary statistics for each of these outcomes prior to the meter replacement
program are shown in Figure 1.

Eﬀect on amount owed per month Electricity is priced on an increasing block tariﬀ,
which means that reductions in consumption may lead to proportionally larger reductions
in the amount owed from customers whose reduction crosses a tariﬀ step, or proportionally
smaller (zero) reductions for customers that only consume their free electricity allowance on
either meter type. We estimate the impact of prepaid metering on the amount owed for
consumption in a month (Table 4, column 1).20 Customers owe 6.8 to 6.9 USD less per
 20
   This amount owed variable is calculated based on a month-level version of our main average kWh
measure, multiplied by the customer’s marginal price on each tariﬀ block.



                                               19
month on prepaid metering. This corresponds to a reduction of around 13 percent each
month relative to the average amount owed on postpaid metering (see Table 1).

Eﬀect on marginal supply cost The utility purchases electricity from the national elec-
tricity company based on prices that vary with time of day and month of the year. While
we do not observe the time of the day of consumption, we do observe the month of the year.
Reductions in consumption are most valuable if they occur in June, July and August, when
the utility pays a higher marginal cost per kWh (see Appendix figure A.4). We estimate
separate treatment eﬀects on the average kWh/day for each calendar month, and plot the
results in Figure 5. These indicate that the largest reductions occur in the months when
per kWh costs to the utility are highest. Column 2 of Table 4 shows the impact on the
marginal cost of supply, calculated by multiplying the utility’s marginal cost in the month
by the customer’s total kWh in the month. The point estimates indicate a 2.8 to 2.9 USD
per customer per month reduction (column 2), which is considerably below the reduction in
amount owed reported in column 1.

Payment timing The customer response to prepaid metering consists both of the quantity
of electricity consumption and when it is paid for. Mechanically, prepaid metering moves the
payment date from after consumption to before consumption. In addition, the billing cycle
adds a delay of around 60 days to the time between when a postpaid metering customer
consumes the average kWh in a month and when payment is due for that kWh. As discussed
in Section 3.1, our measure of payment timing is calculated as the days between when
consumption occurs and when payment arrives to the utility. Column 3 of Table 4 shows the
impact on the days between consumption and payment. Prepaid metering results payment
that arrives 75 (OLS) to 85 (IV) days sooner. Note that this measure of payment timing
excludes payments that never arrive; i.e. average payment timing excludes bills that are
eventually written oﬀ.


5    Costs and benefits to the utility
We calculate the costs and benefits of the meter replacement program for the City of Cape
Town, based on our empirical estimates and administrative cost records. We then examine
heterogeneity and implications for other settings.



                                            20
5.1     Present value of the meter replacement program
We write down a simplified present value expression for each metering type m = {pre, post}
to summarize the costs and benefits to the utility in each month t:21

                                                pq m          cq m + bm
                                   PV m =                               .                                (2)
                                             (1 + i)t+sm       (1 + i)t
Calculation of the present value requires estimation of three parameters: (1) the revenue
paid to the utility (pq m ), (2) the timing of payment (sm ) and (3) the cost of supply and
revenue recovery (cq m + bm ). We discuss each in turn.

Revenue The customer consumes quantity q m in month t. We account for the increasing
block tariﬀ structure by calculating the total amount owed (pq m ) for consumption in month
t. In our setting, tariﬀs are the same across metering technologies, though the utility shares
a small fixed margin per kWh (0.002 USD) with vendors on the prepaid system, regardless
of the price paid by the customer. This revenue measure is the same as what we calculate as
the amount owed for consumption in Section 4.3, except that it is net of vendor margins and
is set to zero in the case of non-payment, which is is defined as debts that are not recovered
within three years of the month of billing.22

Timing of payment The value of consumption to the electric utility also depends on when
the customer pays, sm , which is expressed in months relative to the consumption month t.
On prepaid metering, spre  0 since the customer cannot consume until they have purchased
electricity. On postpaid metering, spost > 0 since the customer does not receive a bill until
sometime after consumption occurs. This measure is the same as what we show in Section
4.3, expressed in months instead of days.
  21
     These calculations avoid a more complete modeling of consumer and utility decisions. For example,
utility decisions about enforcing non-payment aﬀect both revenue recovery rates and revenue recovery costs.
On the customer side, we take point estimates from our impact evaluation as given and do not model the
mechanisms that relate the metering technology to consumption. In addition, we ignore capital and fixed
supply costs, including the meter itself. A prepaid meter costs around USD 66, while a postpaid meter costs
around USD 30.
  22
     Debts older than three years are oﬃcially written oﬀ by the City. To calculate payment probabilities for
unpaid bills at the end of our panel that are younger than three years, we calculate a “hazard rate” or the
probability of default given that no payment has occurred by the number of months since billing. Overall,
we estimate that around 1.9 percent of the revenue owed on the postpaid system is never recovered, which is
consistent with the estimates used by the City of Cape Town, but is much better than revenue recovery rates
for most developing country utilities. See Section 3.1 and Appendix 6 for further discussion of the payment
variables.


                                                     21
Cost of supply and revenue recovery The utility’s marginal cost of supply varies by
time of the day and and month of the year, but we observe only average consumption per
month which we use to calculate a monthly kWh supply cost, which is the same as in
Section 4.3. We add to this technical and non-technical losses of 11.25 percent, based on
estimates provided by the Electricity Department (i.e. the cost of each kWh supplied is 1.1125
times the marginal cost). Recurring monthly costs bm include meter reading costs and bill
preparation, which are the same for all postpaid customers in the data, and total 1.74 USD
per customer per month. We also observe that around 20 percent of the customers in our
data are disconnected (and eventually reconnected) in at least one month while on postpaid
metering. Conditional on ever being disconnected, the average number of disconnections is
two. Disconnections are costly to the City, which charges customers only 30 USD of the 120
USD it takes to disconnect and reconnect a customer. We include the cost of disconnection
in the month in which a disconnection is observed. Finally, our calculations ignore fixed costs
associated with infrastructure and operation, which are covered out of the rate structure in
Cape Town. Thus, results should not be interpreted as profits.

Relative returns to the utility The electric utility’s object of interest is the present
value of prepaid metering relative to postpaid metering, i.e. P V pre/P V post . We can calculate
this for the City of Cape Town by plugging in our estimates from the meter replacement
project together with administrative costs obtained from the City. A summary of the values
used is provided in Table 5. The predicted means of amount owed, supply cost and timing
of payment variables are estimated for the sub-sample of compliers (i.e. switched customers)
using OLS with separate calendar month and year fixed eﬀects, and controls for the tariﬀ
and the months with tariﬀ errors (see Section 3.3.1).23 The final rows show the average per-
customer monthly present value calculation for the City of Cape Town for an annual interest
rate of 8 percent.24 Bootstrapped standard errors are in parentheses. The results show
a return that is around 10 percent higher on prepaid metering than on monthly postpaid
billing. Note that this proportional gain ignores the one-time cost of the meter and so is
  23
     For the purpose of analyzing average costs and benefits associated with meter type, we restrict the sample
to compliers only and focus on the policy relevant average treatment eﬀects from the OLS specification as
opposed to the local average treatment eﬀects produced by the IV. For most outcomes, the OLS and IV
specifications produce similar results. In addition, Appendix table A.5 shows similar eﬀects on electricity
use for compliers only as for the whole sample.
  24
     The City of Cape Town uses a discount rate approved by the National Energy Regulator of South Africa
(NERSA) for project evaluation. From 2010 to 2016, the rate was was 8% and a payback period of 25 years,
as stipulated by the South African electricity grid code.



                                                      22
constant over time. It takes a little over seven years for the additional revenue to cover the
fixed costs of the prepaid meter (USD 66).
    We perform back of the envelope calculations to calibrate the share of the gains that
come from diﬀerent sources. The value of receiving revenue sooner results in returns to
prepaid metering that is around 4.5 percent higher than on postpaid, or nearly half of the
overall increase in relative returns.25 The utility also avoids an expected loss of 0.84 USD
per customer per month associated with billing defaults, which amounts to 1.6 percent of
the revenue owed. On prepaid metering, the utility also avoids billing and meter reading
costs that result in fixed per customer costs per month. On the prepaid system, these are
replaced, in part, by vendor commissions that are proportional to consumption. For monthly
consumption less than 880 kWh per month (93 percent of customer-months on postpaid),
the costs of prepaid vending commissions are less than the costs of meter reading and bill
preparation. Finally, the utility avoids an expected enforcement cost of disconnection of
0.89 USD per customer per month. The relative return to prepaid metering is considerably
below what would be expected if the reduction in consumption were ignored. If consumption
is assumed to remain flat, then the diﬀerence in administrative costs, together with earlier
payments leads to a relative return that is around 33 percent higher for prepaid metering,
i.e. over three times the returns we calculate.


5.2     Heterogeneity and generalizability
The costs and benefits of prepaid metering depends both on the consumption and payment
behavior of the customer base and also on features of the tariﬀ and cost environment. As a
result the numbers from Cape Town need not generalize to other settings. We extend our
average cost benefit calculation to examine how the results vary by customer type and the
administrative setting.
   First, we revisit the customer characteristics analyzed in Section 4.2. We calculate esti-
mates of the returns from prepaid metering relative to postpaid metering for each sub-group.
Note that a relative return of 100 percent implies that prepaid and postpaid meters generate
the same returns to the utility. Figure 6 summarizes the results along with bootstrapped
95 percent confidence intervals (see also Appendix table A.7). We include the monthly re-
turns to postpaid metering for each customer type on the figure, and observe considerable
  25
    This return is based on equation (2) using revenue and costs for prepaid metering, and sm from each
meter type based on estimates in Table 5. If instead we calculate the eﬀect of earlier payments using revenue
and costs for postpaid metering, the relative returns are around 5.4 percent.


                                                     23
heterogeneity by characteristic in the baseline returns to the electric utility for serving each
type of customer. Each of the characteristics represents a potential targeting rule for the
City of Cape Town, and are suggestive of how results might look in other settings, with a
diﬀerent customer base. Relative returns are positive for both tariﬀ types. Low consumers
generate considerably higher payoﬀs than do high consumers, whose relative returns are very
close to zero. Low property value customers, defined by the 300,000 Rand value cutoﬀ used
for other policies by the City of Cape Town, also generate higher relative returns than cus-
tomers with higher property values. Perhaps unsurprisingly, relative returns are positive for
the delinquent customers in our sample: those with late payments, outstanding debts or a
history of disconnection on postpaid. Less delinquent customers, particularly those with no
outstanding payments at the end of the panel, actually generate negative returns on prepaid
relative to postpaid metering. Notably, the customer characteristics that are associated with
the highest returns from prepaid metering are likely to be considerably more prevalent in
other developing country settings, and are the mostly likely types of customers to be rationed
on a postpaid billing system.
   Next, we look to alternative assumptions about the cost environment. In Cape Town,
the discount rate used for project evaluation is relatively low at 8 percent. This places little
weight on the value of revenue received earlier under prepaid metering. The top panel of
Figure 7 shows that returns to each metering type fall as interest rates rise, with a steeper
slope for postpaid meters. The bottom panel shows returns by multiples of the marginal cost
of supply. Losses on the City of Cape Town’s network are around 11.25 percent, including
both technical and non-technical losses. Other developing country utilities tend to have
higher loss rates (Trimble et al. 2016), and so may face a higher cost of supply. Alternatively,
in settings where costs are high relative to tariﬀs, the estimates showing higher marginal costs
suggest that the relative benefit of prepaid metering will be higher. This is due largely to
the fact that reductions in consumption are less costly to the utility as the marginal kWh
becomes less profitable.


6    Conclusion
We study the impact of prepaid electricity metering on electricity use and utility returns
in Cape Town, South Africa. Using a unique dataset that tracks customers as they are
involuntarily switched from postpaid to prepaid metering, we document a 13 percent decrease
in electricity use, which persists for the 12 months following the switch. The average eﬀects

                                              24
mask considerable heterogeneity, with larger proportional reductions from poorer customers
and those with a history of paying their monthly bills late.
   Customer responses, both in terms of overall consumption and in the eﬀect of the me-
tering change on payment patterns, have implications for utility revenue and cost flows. We
calculate the returns to the utility from prepaid metering, relative to postpaid metering.
On the one hand, the utility recovers the revenue it is owed sooner and more completely.
On the other hand, the amount owed decreases substantially as consumption falls. Our
cost benefit analysis for Cape Town also accounts for billing costs, prepaid vendor margins,
and technical and non-technical losses on the system. We show that the returns to prepaid
metering will depend on these features of the cost environment, as well as on the customer
base. In our sample, smaller and poorer consumers and more delinquent customers yield the
highest returns to prepaid metering relative to monthly billing. These characteristics are
likely to be shared by customers in other developing country settings, where the decision to
connect a customer may depend on expected returns. Therefore prepaid metering may be
an important tool for expanding energy access via the grid to poor consumers.
   Our data do not allow for a clear accounting of the mechanisms underlying the customer’s
response to prepaid metering, though we clearly show that customer responses must be taken
into consideration when assessing the payoﬀs associated with prepaid metering. Ignoring
impacts on consumption leads to a substantial over-estimate of the benefits to the utility.
A full welfare accounting must, of course, consider the impacts on the customer. In many
settings, the choice between prepaid and postpaid metering is likely to aﬀect the extensive
margin of access. Consequently, the proper welfare comparison may be electrification with
prepaid metering or no electricity access at all.




                                            25
References
Baptista, Idalina, “Everyday practices of prepaid electricity in Maputo, Mozambique,”
 Working Paper, 2013.
Bekker, Bernard, Anton Eberhard, Trevor Gaunt, and Andrew Marquard, “South
  Africa’s rapid electrification programme: Policy, institutional, planning, financing and
 technical innovations,” Energy Policy, 2008, 36 (8), 3125–3137.
Besley, Timothy and Torsten Persson, “Taxation and Development,” Handbook of Public
  Economics, 2013, 5, 51.
Blundell, Richard and Costas Meghir, “Bivariate alternatives to the Tobit model,”
  Journal of Econometrics, 1987, 34 (1-2), 179–200.
Cameron, A Colin, Jonah B Gelbach, and Douglas L Miller, “Bootstrap-based
 improvements for inference with clustered errors,” The Review of Economics and Statistics,
 2008, 90 (3), 414–427.
Carrillo, Paul, Dina Pomeranz, and Monica Singhal, “Dodging the taxman: Firm
 misreporting and limits to tax enforcement,” Working Paper, 2014.
City of Cape Town, “Municipal Budget, 2015/16 - 2017/18,” 2016.
Dinkelman, Taryn, “The eﬀects of rural electrification on employment: New evidence from
  South Africa,” American Economic Review, 2011, 101 (7), 3078–3108.
Gans, Will, Anna Alberini, and Alberto Longo, “Smart meter devices and the eﬀect
 of feedback on residential electricity consumption: Evidence from a natural experiment in
 Northern Ireland,” Energy Economics, 2013, 36, 729–743.
Gaunt, Trevor, “Meeting electrification’s social objectives in South Africa, and implications
  for developing countries,” Energy Policy, 2005, 33 (10), 1309–1317.
Golumbeanu, Raluca and Douglas F Barnes, “Connection charges and electricity access
  in sub-Saharan Africa,” Working Paper, 2013, (6511).
Gordon, Roger and Wei Li, “Tax structures in developing countries: Many puzzles and
  a possible explanation,” Journal of public Economics, 2009, 93 (7), 855–866.
Henderson, Vernon, Adam Storeygard, and David Weil, “A Bright Idea for Measuring
  Economic Growth,” American Economic Review, 2011, 101 (3), 194–199.
Heymans, Chris, Kathy Eales, and Richard Franceys, “The Limits and Possibilities
  of Prepaid Water in Urban Africa: Lessons from the Field,” Technical Report, World Bank
  2014.
IEA, “World Energy Outlook Electricity Access Database,” Technical Report, International


                                             26
  Energy Agency 2013.
Jessoe, Katrina and David Rapson, “Knowledge is (Less) Power: Experimental Evidence
  from Residential Energy Use,” American Economic Review, 2014, 104 (4), 1417–1438.
Kay, John A, Michael J Keen, and C Nicholas Morris, “Estimating consumption
 from expenditure data,” Journal of Public Economics, 1984, 23 (1), 169–181.
Khan, Adnan Q, Asim I Khwaja, and Benjamin A Olken, “Tax farming redux: Exper-
  imental evidence on performance pay for tax collectors,” Quarterly Journal of Economics,
  2016, forthcoming.
Kumler, Todd, Eric Verhoogen, and Judith A Frías, “Enlisting employees in improv-
  ing payroll-tax compliance: Evidence from Mexico,” Working Paper, 2013.
Lee, Kenneth, Edward Miguel, and Catherine Wolfram, “Experimental Evidence on
  the Demand for and Costs of Rural Electrification,” Working Paper, 2016.
  , Eric Brewer, Carson Christiano, Francis Meyo, Edward Miguel, Matthew
  Podolsky, Javier Rosa, and Catherine Wolfram, “Electrification for "Under Grid"
 households in Rural Kenya,” Development Engineering, 2016, 1, 26–35.
McRae, Shaun, “Eﬃciency and Equity Eﬀects of Electricity Metering: Evidence from
 Colombia,” Working Paper, 2015.
Northeast Group, “Sub-Saharan Africa Electricity Metering: Market Forecast (2014 to
 2024),” Technical Report, Northeast Group, LLC 2014.
Pomeranz, Dina, “No Taxation without Information: Deterrence and Self-Enforcement in
 the Value Added Tax,” American Economic Review, 2015, 105 (8), 2539–2569.
Qiu, Yueming, Bo Xing, and Yi David Wang, “Prepaid electricity plan and electricity
  consumption behavior,” Contemporary Economic Policy, 2016, forthcoming.
Szabó, Andrea and Gergely Ujhelyi, “Reducing nonpayment for public utilities: Ex-
  perimental evidence from South Africa,” Journal of Development Economics, 2015, 117,
  20–31.
Tewari, Devi Datt and Tushaar Shah, “An assessment of South African prepaid elec-
  tricity experiment, lessons learned, and their policy implications for developing countries,”
  Energy Policy, 2003, 31 (9), 911–927.
Trimble, Christopher Philip, Masami Kojima, Ines Perez Arroyo, and Farah Mo-
  hammadzadeh, “Financial viability of electricity sectors in Sub-Saharan Africa: quasi-
  fiscal deficits and hidden costs,” World Bank Policy Research Working Paper, 2016, (7788).
van Heusden, Peter, “Discipline and the "new logic of delivery": Prepaid electricity in
  South Africa and beyond,” Electric Capitalism: Recolonising Africa on the Power Grid,


                                              27
  2012, p. 229.
Wolfram, Catherine, Orie Shelef, and Paul Gertler, “How Will Energy Demand De-
 velop in the Developing World?,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 2012, 26, 119–138.




                                         28
                                      Jul  2014  -­  Jun  2015  (in  2014  USD)
                .2
                .15
             USD/kWh
                .1
                .05
                0




                       0 25 60                     350                       600
                                                         kWh

                                              Lifeline  1              Lifeline  2
                                              Domestic




                       Figure 1: City of Cape Town electricity tariﬀs 2014-2015

Notes: Tariﬀ schedules for July 2014 to June 2015. Tariﬀ assignments are determined by a 12 month
rolling average of past electricity use. See text for additional details.




                                                     29
             7 10 13 16 19 22 25 28


                                                                                               0.72
                                                                                               0.50
                                                                                             0.73
                                                                                                                0.60
                                                                                           0.58
                                                                                        0.74
                                                                                     0.85
              Randomization group




                                                                                  0.55
                                                                                                                  0.30
                                                                                      0.88
                                                                                    0.50
                                                                                0.60
                                                                                  0.55
                                                                            0.63
                                                                     0.91
                                                                    0.87
                                                                   0.84
                                                                    0.73
                                                               0.86
                                                             0.92
                                                          0.92
                                                          0.94
                                                   0.88
                        4




                                               0.95
                                              0.98
                                            0.91
                        1




                                          0.87

                                           15 Dec 2014            15 Feb 2015                15 Apr 2015

                                            Maildrop                                                  Holiday
                                            Contractor begins work
                                            Median switch date (share switched)




                                      Figure 2: Switching patterns by randomization group

Notes: Project dates by randomization group (groups 1-13 correspond to the Mitchell’s Plain sam-
ple). The contractor instrument turns on on the first date that more than one contractor team
is working in the group. The maildrop instrument turns on on the first date that customers in
the group received information about the meter replacement program. The median switch date is
conditional on switching and the share of customers that ever switched in the group is printed on
the figure.




                                                                       30
                          18




                                                                                     1
                                                                                     .8
                                   16
               Median daily avg kWh




                                                                                     Share switched
                                                                                                .6
                       14




                                                                                      .4
             12




                                                                                     .2
                          10




                                                                                     0
                              2012m1    2013m1       2014m1     2015m1      2016m1

                                         Median daily avg kWh       Share switched




             Figure 3: Daily average kWh/month and share switched over time

Notes: Median average kWh in each month and the share of targeted customers switched to prepaid
metering. Note that the peak months of June and July correspond to the winter months in Cape
Town.




                                                          31
                                                  2
                    Avg daily kWh (est'd coeff)
                                                  0
                                                  -2
                                                  -4




                                                       -12        -6              0           6     12
                                                                        Months since switch




                                                        Figure 4: Event study (average daily kWh)

Notes: Event study of the eﬀect of prepaid metering on average daily kWh. The OLS specification
sets the month prior to the meter switch as the base month and regresses average daily kWh on
months since the switch, conditional on month and year fixed eﬀects.




                                                                            32
                             -1        -1.5




                                                                                                                                    .07
              Avg daily kWh (est'd coeff)




                                                                                                               Average marginal cost
                    -2.5      -2




                                                                                                                   .05
             -3              -3.5




                                                                                                               .03
                                              Jan                              Jul                       Dec
                                                                       Calendar month

                                                    Treatment effect             Average marginal cost




                                                     Figure 5: Treatment eﬀects by month

Notes: Month-specific treatment eﬀects, from OLS regression with customer and month-year fixed
eﬀects.




                                                                            33
          Prepaid returns relative to postpaid




                                                      400%


                                                      300%


                                                      200%


                                                      100%


                                                           0
                                                 Postpaid PV   22         2          27         4         23              13             17                16             20           6                 18                   11
                                                               Domestic
                                                                          Lifeline




                                                                                                                                                                          No debts
                                                                                     High kWh
                                                                                                Low kWh


                                                                                                          High prop val
                                                                                                                          Low prop val


                                                                                                                                         Usually on time
                                                                                                                                                           Usually late




                                                                                                                                                                                     Outstanding debts


                                                                                                                                                                                                         Never disconnected

                                                   Figure 6: Heterogeneity in relative returns to prepaid metering                                                                                                            Disconnected


Notes: Returns to prepaid metering relative to postpaid metering per customer per month. Separate
eﬀects are calculated for each customer characteristic (each pair of bars splits the population), and
standard errors are bootstrapped. Heterogeneity variables are as described in Table 3. The present
value of the monthly returns to the utility for each customer type on postpaid metering are printed
below the bars.




                                                                                                            34
                           19
                           18
                    Present value
                         1716
                           15




                                    0   .05        .1             .15              .2   .25
                                                  Annual interest rate

                                                  Postpaid               Prepaid
                           50
                    Present value
                         0 -50




                                    0          1                        2               3
                                              X times marginal costs (USD)

                                                  Postpaid               Prepaid




                   Figure 7: Returns, under alternative cost assumptions

Notes: The present value per month, by meter type. The top figure shows results as interest rates
vary and the bottom figure shows results by multiples of the observed average marginal costs of
supply.




                                                       35
                                    Table 1: Sample statistics


                                  Number      Mean     Median       SD       Min       Max
      Total obs.                  211,190       -        -           -        -          -
      Total cust                   4,246        -        -           -        -          -
      Obs. per cust                  -        49.74     54         8.989      1         54
      Prepaid obs. per cust          -        15.25     16         7.596      0         22

                                            Pre-project customer-level statistics
      Daily kWh                       -       16.18      15     8.20        0      101
      Amount owed per mo.             -         52       49      35         0      404
      Days to pay                     -       97.54      67    131.08 -969        1,381
      Share paid late                 -        0.54     0.58    0.33        0       1
      Outstanding debts               -       0.26        -       -         0       1
      Ever disconnected               -        0.21       -       -         0       1
      Lifeline tariﬀ                  -       0.31        -       -         0       1
      Property value                  -      29,856 26,662 14,115 10,704 156,908

Notes: Summary statistics for the sample. Pre-project customer level statistics are calculated for all
observations before November 2014 at the customer level. Days to pay is calculated as the number
of days between when consumption occurs and payment is received by the utility. Share paid late
is the share of months in which the customer paid past the billing due date. Outstanding debts
is an indicator for whether the customer had multiple unpaid bills at the end of the panel. Ever
disconnected equals one if payment was ever enforced through disconnection. Lifeline is the share
of customers that had ever received the Lifeline tariﬀ prior to the program. Property values are
assessed values for tax purposes. All monetary units are in 2014 USD.




                                                 36
                                 Table 2: Average daily kWh

                                      OLS                            IV
                                (1)            (2)            (3)           (4)

                                       Panel A: Avg daily kWh
           Prepaid          -2.135***   -2.173***   -1.964*** -1.889***
                             (0.110)     (0.137)     (0.110)   (0.199)
           R2                 0.150       0.153       0.149     0.153
           N                 207,930     207,930     207,929   207,929
           N customers        4,246       4,246       4,245     4,245
           Fixed eﬀects    month, year month-year month, year month-year

                                      Panel B: Log avg daily kWh
           Prepaid          -0.135***   -0.143***    -0.119***   -0.152***
                             (0.010)     (0.012)       (0.010)    (0.016)
           R2                 0.086       0.089         0.086      0.089
           N                 207,010     207,010      207,009     207,009
           N customers        4,246       4,246         4,245      4,245
           Fixed eﬀects    month, year month-year month, year month-year

Notes: The table shows the eﬀect of prepaid metering on average daily kWh per customer per month
in levels (Panel A) and logs (Panel B). Columns 1 and 2 report OLS coeﬃcients on an indicator
for prepaid metering, columns 3 and 4 instrument for the switch date with assignment to prepaid
metering. See the main text for further description of the instrument. All specifications exclude
the switch month and include customer fixed eﬀects and a time-varying tariﬀ control and cluster
standard errors at the customer level. Odd numbered columns include calendar month and year
fixed eﬀects; even numbered columns include month-year fixed eﬀects.




                                               37
                            Table 3: Heterogeneous treatment eﬀects

                                                       OLS                          IV
                                             Total eﬀects Diﬀerence      Total eﬀects Diﬀerence
                              N      Mean
                                                 (1)         (2)             (3)         (4)

                                               -2.169***     1.260***      -1.930***     1.211***
 Domestic                   2,907   17.71
                                                (0.137)       (0.203)       (0.125)       (0.255)
                                               -0.909***                   -0.720***
 Lifeline                   1,326    9.34
                                                (0.151)                     (0.222)

                                               -2.652***     1.626***      -2.590***     1.923***
 Above median kWh           2,132   20.05
                                                (0.170)       (0.208)       (0.154)       (0.208)
                                               -1.026***                   -0.667***
 Below median kWh           2,101   10.06
                                                (0.121)                     (0.140)

                                               -1.837***     -0.494**      -1.674***     -0.460**
 High prop value            1,482   17.54
                                                (0.195)       (0.235)       (0.182)       (0.228)
                                               -2.331***                   -2.133***
 Low prop value             2,751   13.77
                                                (0.132)                     (0.138)

                                               -1.752***     -0.818***     -1.751***     -0.508**
 Usually on time            2,103   14.03
                                                (0.128)       (0.221)       (0.128)       (0.216)
                                               -2.570***                   -2.259***
 Usually late               2,130   16.14
                                                (0.181)                     (0.174)

                                               -2.132***       -0.092      -2.092***       0.371
 No debts                   3,131   15.12
                                                (0.111)       (0.286)       (0.114)       (0.311)
                                               -2.225***                   -1.721***
 Outstanding debts          1,102   15.01
                                                (0.264)                     (0.289)

                                               -2.205***       0.121       -2.122***      0.575*
 Never disconnected         3,363   14.84
                                                (0.110)       (0.334)       (0.111)       (0.342)
                                               -2.084***                   -1.547***
 Ever disconnected          870     16.07
                                                (0.316)                     (0.324)

Notes: Eﬀects of the prepaid meter on average daily kWh by sub-group. Each coeﬃcient is from
a separate regression. Columns 1 and 2 report OLS coeﬃcients and Columns 3 and 4 report IV
coeﬃcients. Specifications include separate month and year fixed eﬀects interacted with the hetero-
geneity variable to allow for diﬀerential seasonal time trends by characteristics. All characteristics
are defined by the pre-project period as follows: Lifeline equals one for customers primarily on
lifeline tariﬀ, Low prop value equals one for customers with a 2012 ZAR property value below
300,000, Usually late equals one for customers who paid above the median share of their monthly
bills past the due date, Outstanding debts indicates that the customer had multiple unpaid bills
at the end of the panel. Ever disconnected equals one if the customer was ever disconnected on
postpaid metering.                               38
                             Table 4: Revenue-related outcomes

                                Amount owed Avg marg cost Days to pay
                                    (1)          (2)          (3)

                                                    Panel A: OLS
              Prepaid              -6.909***          -2.920***    -74.641***
                                    (0.548)            (0.248)       (4.001)

                                                    Panel B: IV
              Prepaid              -6.787***          -2.805***    -84.645***
                                    (0.788)            (0.361)       (4.946)

              N obs                 207,930            207,930       200,141
              N customers            4,246              4,246         4,234
              Month-year FE            x                  x             x

Notes: The table shows the eﬀect of prepaid metering on the amount owed for consumption (column
1), the monthly kWh supply cost to the City (column 2), and the days between consumption and
payment (column 3).




                                               39
                          Table 5: Present value calculation (i = 0.08)

                                                     Postpaid      Prepaid

                                                         Revenue estimate
                   Revenue    (pq m )                 51.13         45.20
                                                      (0.26)       (0.26)
                   Includes:
                   - Vendor commission                  0        0.002/kWh

                                                     Payment timing estimate
                   Months since consumption (sm )      2.71        -0.11
                                                      (0.05)      (0.05)

                                                          Cost estimate
                   Cost   (cq m   +   bm )            33.68         27.01
                                                      (0.13)       (0.13)
                   Includes:
                   - Meter reading                     0.91           0
                   - Billing                           0.85           0
                   - Losses (percent)                 11.25         11.25
                   - Disconnections                     90            0

                   Present value                      16.46         18.11
                                                      (0.31)        (0.34)

Notes: Present value in USD2014 by metering type for the City of Cape Town. Predicted means
and standard errors (delta method) are reported for each estimate, together with a list of the
administrative inputs to the calculations. The bottom panel presents the present value calculation
per month at an annual interest rate of 8 percent, with bootstrapped standard errors.




                                               40
