                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




             THE HISTORY OF THE CROSS SECTION OF STOCK RETURNS

                                     Juhani T. Linnainmaa
                                      Michael R. Roberts

                                      Working Paper 22894
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w22894


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                  December 2016




We thank Mike Cooper (discussant), Ken French, Travis Johnson (discussant), Mark Leary, Jon
Lewellen, David McLean, and Jeff Pontiff for helpful discussions, and seminar and conference
participants at University of Lugano, University of Copenhagen, University of Texas at Austin,
SFS 2016 Finance Cavalcade, and Western Finance Association 2016 meetings for valuable
comments. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2016 by Juhani T. Linnainmaa and Michael R. Roberts. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The History of the Cross Section of Stock Returns
Juhani T. Linnainmaa and Michael R. Roberts
NBER Working Paper No. 22894
December 2016
JEL No. G11,G12,G14

                                         ABSTRACT

Using data spanning the 20th century, we show that most accounting-based return anomalies are
spurious. When examined out-of-sample by moving either backward or forward in time,
anomalies' average returns decrease, and volatilities and correlations with other anomalies
increase. The data-snooping problem is so severe that even the true asset pricing model is
expected to be rejected when tested using in-sample data. Our results suggest that asset pricing
models should be tested using out-of-sample data or, when not feasible, by whether a model is
able to explain half of the in-sample alpha.


Juhani T. Linnainmaa
USC FBE Dept.
Bridge Hall - 308, MC-0804
3670 Trousdale Parkway, Ste. 308
Los Angeles, CA 90089-0804
and NBER
juhani.linnainmaa@marshall.usc.edu

Michael R. Roberts
The Wharton School
University of Pennsylvania
3620 Locust Walk, #2319
Philadelphia, PA 19104
and NBER
mrrobert@wharton.upenn.edu
1         Introduction
Asset pricing research continues to uncover new anomalies at an impressive rate. Harvey, Liu,
and Zhu (2015) document 314 factors identified by the literature, with the majority being
identified during the last 15 years. Cochrane (2011) summarizes the state of the literature by
noting: “We thought 100% of the cross-sectional variation in expected returns came from the
CAPM, now we think that’s about zero and a zoo of new factors describes the cross section.”
        We examine cross-sectional anomalies in stock returns using hand-collected accounting
data extending back to the start of the 20th century. Specifically, we investigate three potential
explanations for these anomalies: unmodeled risk, mispricing, and data-snooping. Each of
these explanations generate different testable implications across three eras encompassed by
our data: (1) pre-sample data existing before the discovery of the anomaly, (2) in-sample data
used to identify the anomaly, and (3) post-sample data accumulating after identification of
the anomaly.
        The anomalies on which we focus rely on accounting data, which, except for the value effect,
have been largely unavailable prior to 1963 when the popular Compustat database becomes
free of backfill bias.1 We amass comprehensive accounting data from Moody’s manuals from
1918 through the 1960s, and merge these data with the Compustat and CRSP records.2
To our knowledge, the final database provides the most comprehensive look at returns and
fundamentals from the start of the CRSP database in 1926 to today. Importantly, its coverage
of publicly traded firms is similar before and after 1963, and our tests indicate that the quality
of the pre-1963 data is comparable to that of the post-1963 data.
        We first characterize the returns earned by the profitability and investment factors in the
    1
     The 1963 date holds special significance only because Standard and Poor’s created Compustat in 1962.
Although Standard and Poor’s collected historical data going back to 1947, they did so only for some of the
surviving firms (Ball and Watts 1977).
   2
     These same historical accounting data have previously been used in Graham, Leary, and Roberts (2014,
2015). This data collection project resembles that undertaken in Davis, Fama, and French (2000) except
that, whereas Davis, Fama, and French (2000) collect information on the book value of equity, we collect
the complete income statements and balance sheets. The initial Davis, Fama, and French (2000) study used
data on industrial firms, but they subsequently extended the data collection efforts to cover both industrials
and non-industrials. These data are provided by Ken French at http://mba.tuck.dartmouth.edu/pages/
faculty/ken.french/data_library/det_historical_be_data.html.


                                                      1
pre-1963 period. Our focus on these factors is motivated by Fama and French (2015) and
Hou, Xue, and Zhang (2015) who show that these factors, in concert with the market and size
factors, capture much of the cross-sectional variation in stock returns. We find no statistically
reliable premiums on the profitability and investment factors in the pre-1963 sample period,
during which the average returns are two (t-value = 0.14) and nine (t-value = 0.86) basis points
per month, respectively. Between 1963 and 2014, these factors average 30 and 25 basis points
per month with t-values of 3.60 and 3.41, respectively. The absence of these premiums stands
in contrast to the value effect, which is statistically significant in the pre-1963 data (Fama
and French 2006). A three-factor model adjustment increases the alpha of the profitability
factor to 25 basis points per month (t-value = 1.90) in the pre-1963 data. This increase is
due to the same negative correlation between profitability and value that is present in the
post-1963 sample (Novy-Marx 2013). The three-factor model adjustment has no effect on the
investment factor’s insignificant alpha before 1963.
   The attenuations of the investment and profitability premiums in the pre-1963 data are
representative of most of the other 33 anomalies that we examine. Just eight out of the 36
(investment, profitability, value, and 33 others) earn average returns that are positive and
statistically significant at the 5% level in the pre-1963 period. In the CAPM and three-factor
models, the numbers of anomalies with statistically significant alphas are 8 and 14. These
results are not due to lack of power. In most cases, the historical out-of-sample period is 37
years long, typically longer than the original study’s sample period.
   We measure the performance of the average anomaly during the pre-discovery, in-sample,
and post-discovery periods to obtain precise estimates of the changes in average returns,
Sharpe ratios, CAPM and three-factor model alphas, and information ratios from the CAPM
and the three-factor model. All of these measures decrease sharply and statistically signifi-
cantly when we move out of the original study’s sample period by going either backward or
forward in time. The average anomaly’s Sharpe ratio and the information ratios from the
CAPM and the three-factor model, for example, decrease between 60% to 77%. Anomalies
perform significantly better during the in-sample period based on every metric; by contrast,


                                               2
the differences between the post- and pre-discovery periods are rarely more than one standard
error from zero, and never statistically significant.
       At first glance, these findings are consistent with data-snooping as the anomalies are clearly
sensitive to the choice of sample period. In contrast, if the anomalies are a consequence
of multidimensional risk that is not accurately accounted for by the empirical model (i.e.,
unmodeled risk), then we would have expected them to be similar across periods, absent
structural breaks in the risks that matter to investors. Similarly, if the anomalies are a
consequence of mispricing, then we would have expected them to be larger during the pre-
discovery sample period when limits to arbitrage, such as transaction costs (Hasbrouck 2009),
were greater. Both of these implications are counterfactual.
       Other features of the data point towards data snooping, whose bias works through t-values.
An effect is deemed a return anomaly if its t-value is high. Because t-values are proportional
to average excess returns scaled by volatilities, anomalies’ in-sample returns are “too high”
and their volatilities “too low” if data-snooping bias matters. Therefore, if anomalies are
selected because of their t-values, average returns and volatilities should correlate positively—
low return anomalies should be less volatile and vice versa. The decrease in the average
anomaly’s information ratio typically exceeds that in its alpha, suggesting that anomalies are
atypically safe in the original study’s sample.
       Our results do not suggest that all return anomalies are spurious. The average in-sample
anomaly earns a CAPM alpha of 32 basis points per month (t-value = 10.87). The average
alpha is 13 basis points (t-value = 4.42) per month for the pre-discovery sample and 14 basis
points (t-value = 4.06) for the post-discovery sample. Although these estimates lie far below
the in-sample numbers, they are highly statistically significant. Investors, however, face the
uncertainty of not knowing which anomalies are real and which are spurious, and so they
need to treat them with caution.3 Those who assume that the cross section is immutable may
   3
    This problem is the analogous to that highlighted in the mutual fund literature. Kosowski, Timmermann,
Wermers, and White (2006), Barras, Scaillet, and Wermers (2010), Fama and French (2010), and Linnainmaa
(2013), for example, develop tests that adjust for the multiple-comparisons problem, and estimate that the
fraction of actively managed mutual funds that can beat the market is small but positive. These tests, however,
do not assist in identifying the skilled managers.



                                                      3
be disappointed. For example, using post-1963 data to construct the mean-variance efficient
strategy from the market, size, value, investment, and profitability factors performs just the
same as the market portfolio when applied to the pre-1963 sample.
    Our findings suggest that asset pricing models should not be evaluated by their ability
to explain anomalies’ in-sample returns. If data-snooping works only through first moments,
then a general rule of thumb by which to judge asset pricing models using only in-sample
data is their ability to explain half of the alpha associated with the anomaly. However,
data-snooping can distort estimates of the return processes’ higher moments. We find that
the correlation structure of anomalies differs significantly between the in- and out-of-sample
periods, suggesting that estimates of factor loadings may be biased as well. Indeed, recent
research by McLean and Pontiff (2015) argues that learning by arbitrageurs from academic
research leads to increased comovement. Interestingly, we find the same pattern when we move
out-of-sample by moving backward in time. That is, before its discovery, an anomaly correlates
more with other yet-to-be-discovered anomalies than it correlates with those anomalies that are
already in-sample. Thus, because data-mining bias affects many facets of returns—averages,
volatilities, and correlations—it is best to test asset pricing models out of sample.
    The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes our data sources and
the coverage of publicly traded firms. Section 3 compares the returns earned by the prof-
itability and investment factors between the modern (post-1963) and the pre-1963 sample
period. Section 4 compares the average returns and CAPM and three-factor model alphas
of 36 anomalies between the original study’s sample period and the pre- and post-discovery
out-of-sample periods. Section 5 concludes.



2     Data

2.1    Data sources

We use data from four sources. First, we obtain monthly stock returns and shares-outstanding
data from the Center for Research in Securities Prices (CRSP) database from January 1926

                                               4
through December 2015. We exclude securities other than common stocks (share codes 10
and 11). CRSP includes all firms listed on the New York Stock Exchange (NYSE) since
December 1925, all firms listed on the American Stock Exchange (AMEX) since 1962, and all
firms listed on the NASDAQ since 1972. Although stocks also traded on regional exchanges
before 1962, CRSP does not cover the other venues.4 We take delisting returns from CRSP;
if a delisting return is missing and the delisting is performance-related, we impute a return of
−30% (Shumway 1997).
      Second, we take annual accounting data from Standard and Poor’s Compustat database.
These data begin in 1947 for some firms, but become more comprehensive in 1962. Standard
and Poor’s established Compustat in 1962 to serve the needs of financial analysts, and back-
filled information only for those firms that were deemed to be of the greatest interest to these
analysts (Ball and Watts 1977).
      Third, we add accounting data from Moody’s Industrial and Railroad manuals. We collect
information for all CRSP firms going back to 1918. These same data have previously been
used in Graham, Leary, and Roberts (2014, 2015).
      Fourth, we add to our data the historical book value of equity data provided by Ken French.
These are the data initially collected by Davis, Fama, and French (2000) for industrial firms,
but later expanded to include non-industrial firms. We use the same definition of book value
of equity as Fama and French (1992) throughout this study.
      In constructing our final database, we make the typical assumption that accounting data
are available six months after the end of the fiscal year (Fama and French 1993). In most
of our analyses, we construct factors using annual rebalancing. When we sort stocks into
portfolios at the end of June in year t, we therefore use accounting information from the fiscal
year that ended in year t − 1.
  4
    See, for example, Gompers and Lerner (2003). They note that firms that end up on the NYSE had often
been trading as public companies on regional exchanges long before obtaining the NYSE listing.




                                                  5
2.2      Coverage

Table 1 shows the number of firms in the CRSP database at five years intervals from 1925
through 1965. There are 490 (NYSE) firms on CRSP at the very beginning. The number of
CRSP firms increases over time, reaching 1,113 firms in 1960. The large jump to 2,164 firms
in 1965 is due to the introduction of AMEX in 1962.
      The second line shows the number of firms for which Compustat provides any accounting
information. There is no information until 1947, and by 1950 the data are available for 320
of the 998 NYSE firms. By 1965, which is the date by which Compustat is survivorship-bias
free, the accounting data are available for 1,265 of the 2,164 firms. The third line shows the
number of firms for which we have accounting information either from Compustat or Moody’s
Industrial and Railroad manuals. The number of firms with accounting information starts
at 345 in 1925 and increases over time as the number of firms listed on the NYSE expands.
The Moody’s manuals are an important source of information even after Compustat comes
online. In 1950, Compustat has data for 320 firms, and the Moody’s manuals have data for
462 additional firms. These manuals remain an important source even after 1962; in 1965,
these manuals provide information for 294 additional firms. That is, although Compustat is
free of a backfill bias as of 1963, it is not comprehensive. Figure 1 plots firm counts for CRSP,
Compustat, and the combination of Compustat and Moody’s from 1925 through 2014.5 This
figure illustrates that the final database that combines Compustat with Moody’s manuals has
similar coverage of CRSP firms both before and after 1963.
      The lower part of Table 1 disaggregates data coverage by data item. This breakdown
shows that the coverage of the Compustat data varies by data item. Accounts Payable, for
example, is missing for almost all firms in the pre-1962 (backfill) period. This lack of coverage
is, in part, due to the fact that not all firms reported this item in the 1960s and before. Even
with the Moody’s manuals, this item is missing for most firms. By contrast, almost all firms
that provide any accounting information report revenue, net income, and total assets.
  5
    We exclude year 2015 from this graph because, as of the time this study was undertaken, most firms’
accounting information was not yet available for the fiscal year that ended in 2015.



                                                  6
2.3       Data quality

Limitations in data quality could distort measurements of return anomalies. These anomalies
could appear weaker or be absent if the historical data contain errors or if individual firms
use different accounting standards. Because of the central importance of data quality, in this
section we describe four considerations and tests that indicate that the quality of the pre-1963
data is comparable to that of the post-1963 data.
       First, in terms of the accounting standards, the important historical date is the enactment
of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934. The purpose of this act was to ensure the flow
of accurate and systematic accounting information, and researchers typically consider the
accounting information reliable after this date. Cohen, Polk, and Vuolteenaho (2003), for
example, discuss the Securities Exchange Act in detail and, based on their analysis of the
historical SEC enforcement records, use the post-1936 data on the book value of equity in
their main tests. They characterize the first two years after the enactment of the act as an
initial enforcement period, and drop these years from the sample. Although our data start in
1926 for many anomalies, we show that the results are both qualitatively and quantitatively
the same when we exclude the pre-Securities Exchange Act era.6
       Second, we can compare the two parts of the sample by testing how closely the accounting
data conform to clean-surplus accounting. Under clean-surplus accounting, the change in book
value of equity equals earnings minus dividends (Ohlson 1995). Clean-surplus accounting is a
central idea in accounting theory because it requires that the changes in assets and liabilities
pass through the income statement. However, even under the generally accepted accounting
principles (GAAP), some transactions can circumvent the income statement and affect the
book value of equity directly.7 So, real-world income statement and balance sheet information
rarely line up exactly as they should under this ideal. We test the extent to which the
   6
     Cohen, Polk, and Vuolteenaho (2003) also note that the pre-1936 data are congruent with the later data:
“It is comforting, however, that our main regression results are robust to the choice between the 1928–1997
and 1936–1997 periods.” The timing convention in Cohen, Polk, and Vuolteenaho (2003) is such that their
year 1936 observations use book values from 1937. In our subsample analysis, we start the return data in July
1938 so that, consistent with Cohen, Polk, and Vuolteenaho (2003), the book values of equity come from 1937.
   7
     See endnote 1 in Ohlson (1995) for examples.



                                                     7
historical data conforms to this standard relative to the modern data. A test of conformity to
clean-surplus accounting is a joint test of two issues that are relevant for the validity of the
accounting information: (a) errors in Moody’s manuals and (b) firms’ tendencies to circumvent
the income statement.
      We implement this test by comparing how closely implied profitability, computed using the
clean-surplus formula, tracks the profitability that firms report on their income statements.
Specifically, under clean-surplus accounting, implied log-profitability equals
                                                                                    
                                            (1 + Rt ) × MEt−1 − Dt    BEt        Dt
   implied log-profitabilityt = log                                ×       − 1−          ,           (1)
                                                      MEt            BEt−1      BEt−1

where Rt is the total stock return over fiscal year t, MEt and BEt are the market and book
values of equity at the end of fiscal year t, and Dt is the sum of dividends paid over fiscal
year t.8 This formula adjusts the change in the book value of equity for dividends, share
repurchases, and share issuances to back out the implied earnings. The income-statement
profitability is the net income reported for fiscal year t divided by the book value of equity at
the end of fiscal year t − 1.
      We estimate annual panel regressions of implied log-profitability on the log-return on
equity using pre- and post-1963 data. We adjust standard errors by clustering by year. In
the pre-1963 data, the slope on log-return on equity is 1.07 (SE = 0.05), and the adjusted R2
is 32%. In the post-1963 data, the slope is 0.64 (SE = 0.02), and the adjusted R2 is 41%. In
cross-sectional regressions, the average slope estimate is 1.00 for the pre-1963 sample and 0.75
for the post-1963 sample. The comparable conformity to clean-surplus accounting suggests
that the historical data are accurate, and that the typical firm does not circumvent the income
statement to a significantly different degree in the pre-1963 data than in the post-1963 data.
      Third, we can place anomalies in an approximate order based on how sensitive they are to
the quality of the accounting data. We believe that some anomalies, such as those based on
the growth in total assets or sales, are more robust to noise in data than others, such as those
based on the book value of equity. Book value of equity is potentially problematic because
  8
      See, for example, Vuolteenaho (2002), Cohen, Polk, and Vuolteenaho (2003), and Nagel (2005).


                                                     8
it is the sum of retained earnings adjusted for dividends and net stock issues, and so it is
affected by both data quality and variation in accounting standards. Nevertheless, the value
premium (which is based on the book value of equity) is one of the anomalies that exists in
the pre-1963 data (Fama and French 2006); in section 4, we show that the asset and sales
growth anomalies, by contrast, are absent.
       Fourth, our results also suggest more directly that the pre-1963 accounting data are of
high quality and reflect differences in firm fundamentals. Specifically, the return anomalies we
construct from these data are significantly more volatile than what they would be if the data
were either noisy or irrelevant for describing firms’ return processes. To see the connection,
suppose that accounting variable X is unrelated to fundamentals either because the data are
of poor quality or because firms follow different accounting standards. In this case, if we sort
firms into portfolios by X, the average firms in the high and low portfolios will be similar
in every dimension. With an infinite number of firms, the firms in these portfolios will be
of the same size, have the same (true) market beta, and so forth. The two portfolios would
therefore earn identical returns—because even idiosyncratic risk disappears as the number of
firms grows—and therefore the volatility of the high-minus-low strategy would be zero. With
a finite number of firms, even a randomized factor’s volatility is positive because, first, the
portfolios do not perfectly diversify idiosyncratic risk and, second, because the firms in the high
and low portfolios have slightly different fundamentals because of chance. We therefore test
how volatile an actual anomaly is relative to its expected volatility under the null hypothesis
that the anomalies sort on noise.
       In section 4, we construct HML-like factors for 36 anomalies. The average anomaly fac-
tor’s annualized return volatility is 9.4% in the pre-1963 data. The volatility of the average
randomized factor, constructed from the same set of stocks as the actual factor, is 5.7% in the
pre-1963 data, and so the amount of excess volatility is 3.6% (SE = 0.6%). In the post-1963
data, the amount of excess volatility is 7.1% − 3.1% = 3.9% (SE = 0.2%). The 0.3% differ-
ence between the pre- and post-1963 periods has a t-value of 0.4.9 The comparable amounts
   9
    We estimate the standard errors for the excess volatilities and their difference by block bootstrapping the
data by calendar month. We measure the volatility of each actual and randomized factor and then compute


                                                      9
of excess volatility suggests that the historical accounting data measure differences in firm
fundamentals to the same extent as they measure them in the post-1963 data.



3     Profitability and investment factors
We begin by measuring the pre-1963 performance of the profitability and investment factors.
We focus on these factors because of their prominence in recent empirical asset pricing work.
Both Fama and French (2015) and Hou, Xue, and Zhang (2015) propose adding the profitabil-
ity and investment factors to the three-factor model. This section’s detailed analysis of the
profitability and investment factors sets the stage for Section 4 in which we analyze returns
on a total of 36 anomalies.


3.1     Defining factors

Both Fama and French (2015) and Hou, Xue, and Zhang (2015) measure investment as the
change in the book value of total assets over the previous fiscal year. Using the Compustat
variable names, this measure is defined as investmentt = att /att−1 . This measure is alter-
natively known as the asset-growth anomaly (Cooper, Gulen, and Schill 2008).10 We follow
Fama and French (2015) and construct HML-like profitability and investment factors by sort-
ing stocks into six portfolios by size and profitability, or by size and investment. For example,
we construct the following six portfolios at the end of each June using NYSE breakpoints to
generate the investment factor:


                                                         Investment
                 Size             Low (30%)              Neutral (40%)        High (30%)
            Small (50%)       Small-Conservative         Small-Neutral     Small-Aggressive
             Big (50%)         Big-Conservative           Big-Neutral       Big-Aggressive

the volatility and excess volatility of the average anomaly. We then resample the data with replacement and
repeat the computations. The average randomized factor is more volatile in the pre-1963 data—5.7% versus
3.1%—because of the smaller number of stocks.
  10
     We evaluate other investment-based anomalies in Section 4.

                                                    10
   We then hold these value-weighted portfolios from July of year t to the end of June of
year t + 1. The investment factor, called CMA for “conservative minus aggressive” in Fama
and French (2015), is the average return on the two low investment portfolios minus the
average return on the two high investment portfolios. We follow Fama and French (2015) and
measure profitability as operating profits over book value of equity. Using the Compustat
variable names, this measure is defined as profitabilityt = (revtt − cogst − xsgat − xintt )/bet .
Similar to the construction of the investment factor, we sort stocks into six portfolios at the
end of June of year t, and compute value-weighted returns on these portfolios from July of
year t to the end of June of year t + 1. The profitability factor, called RMW for “robust
minus weak” in Fama and French (2015), is then defined as the average return on the two
high-profitability portfolios minus the average return on the two low-profitability portfolios.
The size (SMB) and value (HML) factors are defined similarly (see Fama and French (1993)).
   Table 2 compares our size, value, profitability, and investment factors to the corresponding
Fama-French factors using the common sample period from July 1963 through December 2015.
In Panel A, we report average monthly percent returns for these factors as well as the t-values
associated with these averages. The average returns on these factors are nearly identical but
for investment that reveals a five-basis point difference. Panel B shows that the correlations
between our factors and the Fama-French factors are high. Even the lowest correlation, which
is the between the two investment factors, is 0.98. The reason for the small discrepancy
between our numbers and those in Fama and French (2015) is that the Compustat-CRSP
mapping used in Fama and French (2015) includes more firms than the standard mapping
provided by CRSP.


3.2    Portfolio and factor returns

Table 3 compares the performance of the four factors between the pre- and post-1963 sample
period. The pre-1963 sample period runs from July 1926 through June 1963 and the post-1963
sample period runs from July 1963 through December 2015. We further divide the pre-1963
sample into two subperiods. The early part runs from July 1926 through June 1938 and the


                                               11
late part from July 1938 through June 1963. The Securities and Exchange Act had been in
effect for two years by the time the late part begins (Cohen, Polk, and Vuolteenaho 2003).
       The estimates for the pre-1963 sample period differ significantly from those for the post-
1963 sample period. Although the value premium is significant over the 1926–1963 period—the
estimated monthly premium is 0.43% with a t-value of 2.09—the premiums associated with
the size, profitability, and investment factors are not. The average return on the size factor
is 0.19% (t-value = 1.16), and those on the investment and profitability factors are 0.02%
(t-value = 0.14) and 0.09% (t-value = 0.86).11 The average returns on the portfolios that
are used to construct the profitability and investment factors show that these insignificant
estimates are not confined to either big or small stocks.
       Panel B of Table 3 shows that the absence of profitability and investment premiums is
unlikely due to any lack of statistical power. The six portfolios are reasonably well diversified
even during the early part of the pre-1963 sample. Over the entire pre-1963 sample, the
average number of stocks per portfolio is always above 50. This amount of diversification,
combined with the length of the sample period (37 years) gives us confidence that we should
be able to detect return premiums when they exist. Moreover, the absence of the profitability
and investment premiums is unlikely to be due to the fact that they use complex accounting
measures. The investment premium, for example, is based on the growth in total assets.
Although there may be noise in this measure, the amount of such noise is probably less than
that in book value of equity, yet the value premium is statistically significant in the pre-1963
data.
  11
    In Table 3, we define the profitability factor without the SG&A term. Companies did not historically
report these expenses, and so we construct the factor without them to maintain comparability throughout
the 1926–2015 sample. This alternative profitability factor is superior to the original factor in the post-1963
sample—its t-value of 3.60 exceeds the t-value of 2.88 on the with-SG&A version—and so this change does
not handicap the factor. This performance improvement is consistent with Ball, Gerakos, Linnainmaa, and
Nikolaev (2015). They note that Compustat adds R&D expenses to XSGA even when companies report R&D
expenses as a separate line item. An operating profitability measure’s predictive power increases substantially
when SG&A is not used to compute the profitability measure or when the R&D expenses are removed from
XSGA.




                                                      12
3.3    Cross sections of profitability and investment

Figure 2 shows how the cross sections of profitability and investment evolve between 1926 and
2015 by plotting these variables’ decile breakpoints. The distribution of profitability changes
over time. First, except for the 1940s, the distribution widens over time. Second, the Great
Depression, World War II and, to a lesser extent, the recovery from the financial crisis, appear
as shocks that shift the entire distribution. Panel B shows that asset growth (investment) is
significantly more volatile than profitability, and its aggregate fluctuations—which register as
shifts in the entire distribution—more pronounced.
   In Table A2 in the Appendix, we show that the distributions of fundamentals are not
related to the premiums earned by the profitability and investment factors. Whereas the
value spread—that is, the difference in the average book-to-market ratios of value and growth
firms—positively and statistically significantly predicts the value premium (Cohen, Polk, and
Vuolteenaho 2003), neither profitability nor asset growth spread predicts their factors’ return
premiums. Figure A1 in the Appendix shows the distributions of the other anomalies that we
study later and Table A2 shows that, in most cases, the anomaly spreads are unrelated to the
factor premiums.


3.4    Alphas and subsample analysis

Panel C of Table 3 shows the CAPM alphas for the four factors and three-factor model
alphas for the two factors, profitability and investment, that are not part of this model.
These regressions are important from the investing viewpoint. A statistically significant alpha
implies that the combination of the right-hand side factors is not mean-variance efficient; an
investor could improve his Sharpe ratio by adding the left-hand side factor to his portfolio.
From the asset pricing perspective, a statistically significant alpha implies that adding the
left-hand side factor to the asset pricing model improves it (Barillas and Shanken 2015).
   All four CAPM alphas are statistically insignificant during the entire pre-1963 period and
during both subperiods. The insignificance of the value factor is consistent with Ang and
Chen (2007), and its insignificance stems from value factor’s positive market beta during this

                                              13
period. In the three-factor model, the profitability factor is significant at the 10% level during
the entire pre-1963 period, and at a 5% level during the later part of this period from July 1938
through June 1963. The three-factor model alpha is higher than the CAPM alphas because of
the negative correlation between value and profitability (Novy-Marx 2013). The investment
factor’s three-factor model alpha, however, is lower than its CAPM alpha.
   Figure 3 reports average returns for the same factors using rolling ten-year windows. For
profitability and investment factors, we plot both the average returns on the standard factors
as well as on the orthogonal components of these factors. A factor’s orthogonal component in
month t is equal to its alpha from the three-factor model regression plus the month-t residual.
The time-series behavior of the value premium differs significantly from those of the other
premiums. Whereas the value premium is positive almost throughout the full sample period
except for the interruption towards the end of the 1990s during the Nasdaq episode, the other
premiums are less stable.
   The size factor performs poorly in the 1950s and 60s, and then again in the 90s, and it is
too volatile to attain but fleeting periods of statistical significance. The investment premium
is positive until 1950 after which point it turns and remains negative until the mid-1970s.
The profitability premium is negative before 1950 and then again around 1980. However,
the negative correlation between profitability and value is apparent throughout the entire
1926–2016 sample. Except for the very end of this long sample, the return on the orthogonal
component of the profitability factor exceeds that on the profitability factor. Although the
orthogonal component of profitability also suffers some losses, these down periods are shorter
and milder than what they are without the value factor.


3.5    An investment perspective

The pre-1963 sample looks very different from the post-1963 data in terms of the profitability
and investment premiums. Figure 4 illustrates this dissimilarity by reporting annualized
Sharpe ratios for the market portfolio and an optimal strategy that trades the market, size,
value, profitability, and investment factors. We construct the mean-variance efficient strategy


                                               14
using the modern sample period that runs from July 1963 through December 2015. We report
the Sharpe ratios for rolling ten-year windows.
    The market’s Sharpe ratio for the entire 1926 through 2015 period is 0.42. It is slightly
higher (0.46) for the pre-1963 sample than for the post-1963 sample (0.39). The optimal
strategy’s Sharpe ratio for the post-1963 sample period is 1.07; by construction, this strategy
is in-sample for this period. However, for the pre-1963 sample, the Sharpe ratio of this strategy
is just 0.53, that is, almost the same as that of the market. Figure 4 shows that the optimal
strategy rarely dominates the market portfolio by a wide margin in the pre-Compustat period;
at the same time, the optimal strategy performs very poorly relative to the market in the 1950s.
    This computation illustrates that our view of what matters in the cross section of stocks
greatly depends on where we look. An assumption that the cross section is immutable is poor
at least when it comes to the profitability and investment factors. Figure 4 shows that the
strategy that is (ex-post) optimal in the post-1963 data is unremarkable in the pre-1963 data.
Moreover, this computation suggests that investors could not have known in real-time in June
1963—at least on the basis of any historical return data—that this particular combination of
size, value, profitability, and investment factors would perform so well relative to the market
over the next 50 years.



4     Assessing the pre-discovery and post-discovery per-
      formance of 36 anomalies

4.1    Competing explanations for cross-sectional return anomalies

In this section, we use data on 36 anomalies to investigate the extent to which they are
driven by three potential mechanisms—unmodeled risk, mispricing, and data-snooping. The
first mechanism, unmodeled risk, asserts that cross-sectional return anomalies come about
because stock risks are multidimensional. If the Sharpe (1964)-Lintner (1965) capital asset
pricing model is not the true data-generating model, an anomaly might represent a deviation


                                               15
from the CAPM. The most prominent examples of this argument are the value and size effects.
Fama and French (1996) suggest that the value effect is a proxy for relative distress and that
the size effect is about covariation in small stock returns that, while not captured by the
market returns, is compensated in average returns. The same argument can be made for any
return anomaly. The joint hypothesis problem states that it may be our imperfect model that
misprices assets and not the investors. Under the risk explanation, we expect the in-sample
period to resemble the out-of-sample period, assuming that there are no structural breaks in
the risks that matter to investors.
       The second mechanism, mispricing, asserts that investor irrationality combined with lim-
its to arbitrage causes asset prices to deviate from fundamentals. Lakonishok, Shleifer, and
Vishny (1994), for example, suggest that value strategies are not fundamentally riskier, but
that the value effect emerges because the typical investor’s irrational behavior induces mis-
pricing. Under the mispricing explanation, we expect the anomalies to grow stronger as we
move backward in time. Trading costs were almost twice as high in the 1920s than in the
1960s (Hasbrouck 2009, Figure 3), and so would-be arbitrageurs would have had less power
to attack mispricing.12
       The third mechanism, data snooping, suggests that some, if not all, return anomalies are
spurious. If researchers try enough trading strategies, some of these experiments produce
impressive t-statistics, even though the anomaly is entirely sample-specific. If an initial study
exhausts all available data, it is difficult to address data-mining concerns except by waiting for
additional data to accumulate.13 The data-snooping explanation suggests that the in-sample
period is different from the periods that predate and follow the original study’s sample period.
  12
    See also French (2008).
  13
    Researchers can also turn to other markets or asset classes for additional evidence (see, for example, Fama
and French (1998) and Asness, Moskowitz, and Pedersen (2013)) or, in some cases, examine securities excluded
from the initial study (see, for example, Barber and Lyon (1997) and Ang, Shtauber, and Tetlock (2013)).
Jegadeesh and Titman (2001) is a prime example of a paper that analyzed data that had accumulated after
the initial study; in this case, the original momentum study of Jegadeesh and Titman (1993).




                                                      16
4.2    Defining anomalies

In this section, we compare how the returns on 36 accounting-based anomalies differ between
the in-sample period (used in each original study) and out-of-sample periods that either pre-
date or follow the in-sample period. The benefit of analyzing a large number of anomalies
is the increase in statistical power. Consider, for example, the investment and profitability
premiums of Section 3. Although we cannot reject the null hypothesis that these premiums
are zero in the pre-1963 period, we also cannot reject the null hypothesis that these premiums
differ between the pre-1963 and post-1963 periods because the premiums are too noisy.
   Table 4 lists the additional anomalies that we study along with references to the original
studies and the original sample periods. The starting point for our list is McLean and Pontiff
(2015). We add to their list a few anomalies that have been documented after that study.
We describe each anomaly in detail in the Appendix. All these anomalies use accounting
information and, therefore, with the exceptions of book-to-market and net share issuances,
have not been extended to the pre-Compustat sample. We group similar anomalies into seven
categories: profitability, earnings quality, valuation, investment and growth, financing, dis-
tress, and composite anomalies. In our classification, composite anomalies, such as Piotroski’s
(2000) F-score, are anomalies that combine multiple anomalies into one. We do not examine
“return-based” anomalies such as momentum because many of these anomalies have already
been taken to the pre-1963 period, often already in the original study. To the best of our
knowledge, our list of anomalies is comprehensive: we include all accounting-based anomalies
that can be replicated or reasonably approximated using the data from the Moody’s manuals.
   We use the same definitions for all 36 anomalies—that is, value, profitability, investment,
and the 33 additional anomalies—throughout the 1926–2015 sample period. For example,
even though we could start using reported capital expenditures (CAPX) from Compustat to
construct some of the anomalies, we always approximate these expenditures by the annual
change in the plant, property, and equipment plus depreciation. By using constant definitions,
we ensure that the estimates are comparable over the entire period. Table A1 in the Appendix
describes these approximations and compares the average returns and the CAPM and three-


                                              17
factor model alphas of the original definitions and the approximations.
   We construct similar HML-like factors for each of the additional anomalies as what we
constructed for the profitability and investment anomalies in Section 3. That is, we sort
stocks into six portfolios at the end of June of year t by size and each anomaly variable, and
then compute value-weighted returns on these portfolios from July of year t to June of year
t + 1. The exceptions are the debt and net issuance anomalies. The debt issuance anomaly
takes short positions in firms that issue debt and long positions in all other firms. The net
issuance anomalies take short positions in firms that issue equity and long positions in firms
that repurchase equity. We compute the return on each anomaly as the average of the two
high portfolios minus the average of the two low portfolios. We reverse the high and low labels
for those anomalies for which the original study indicates that the average returns of the low
portfolios exceed those of the high portfolios.


4.3    In-sample estimates

Table 5 reports the average monthly percent returns and the CAPM and three-factor model
alphas for the 36 anomalies. We estimate the average returns and alphas using the same
sample period as that used in the original study. The returns on the value, profitability, and
investment factors are reported on rows labeled book-to-market (value), operating profitability
(profitability), and asset growth (investment).
   Table 5 shows that 30 anomalies earn average returns that are positive and statistically
significant at the 5% level. In the CAPM and the three-factor model, the numbers of positive
and statistically significant anomalies are 32 and 29. Every anomaly is statistically significant
at the 5% level in either the CAPM or the three-factor model. The differences between the
average returns and alphas are sometimes large. The average return on the distress anomaly,
for example, is 30 basis points per month (t-value = 2.4). However, because this anomaly
covaries negatively with the market and HML factors (Campbell, Hilscher, and Szilagyi 2008),
its CAPM and three-factor model alphas are considerably higher, 45 basis points (t-value =
4.09) and 49 basis points (t-value = 4.82) per month, respectively.


                                                  18
       Some of the most impressive t-values belong to the composite anomalies. Piotroski’s F-
score, which is a combination of 9 firm-quality signals, earns a three-factor model alpha of
60 basis points per month, which is statistically significant with a t-value of 7.48. Judged
by the three-factor model alphas, gross profitability, net operating assets, and total external
financing are among the best-performing non-composite anomalies.
       Table 6 averages the estimates for the seven anomaly categories and includes an “all”
category that includes all anomalies except for the two composite anomalies. The average
anomaly is highly profitable during the in-sample period. Its average return is 28 basis points
per month (t-value = 8.67); its CAPM alpha is 32 basis points (t-value = 10.83); and its
three-factor model alpha is 26 basis points (t-value = 11.03).14


4.4       Pre-discovery out-of-sample estimates

Panel A of Table 7 reports average returns and alphas for the same 36 anomalies using data
that predates the sample periods used in the original studies. The anomalies are significantly
weaker during this out-of-sample period. Only 8 anomalies earn average returns that are
positive and statistically significant at the 5% level. A total of 16 anomalies have either
CAPM or three-factor model alphas that are statistically significant at the 5% level. Put
differently, less than half of the anomalies that earn statistically significant alphas during the
original sample periods do so in the pre-discovery sample.
       The lack of significance is unlikely due to a lack of power. In many cases, the pre-discovery
sample period is 37 years long—and therefore often longer than that used in the original study.
The total number of monthly in-sample observations for the 36 anomalies is 12,443; the number
of pre-discovery observations is 18,505; and the number of post-discovery observations is 7,299.
       Among the best-performing anomalies are net working capital changes and all three distress
  14
    We compute the point estimates and the standard errors in Table 6 as follows. We first compute each
anomaly’s average return, CAPM alpha, and three-factor model alpha for the pre-discovery, in-sample, post-
discovery periods. We then take the averages of these estimates either across all anomalies or by an anomaly
category. These averages are the point estimates reported in Table 6. We then resample the data by drawing
calendar months with replacement 10,000 times to get the bootstrapped distributions of average returns,
CAPM alphas, and three-factor model alphas.



                                                    19
anomalies. Of the two composite anomalies, the profitability component of the quality-minus-
junk factor (Asness, Frazzini, and Pedersen 2013) earns a three-factor model alpha that is
statistically significant with a t-value of 2.30.
       One noteworthy anomaly is that related to net share issues. Both the one- and five-year
versions of this anomaly are statistically significant at the 5% level for the pre-discovery period.
The significance of the net issuance anomaly over the modern, post-1963 sample period has
been highlighted, for example, in Daniel and Titman (2006), Boudoukh, Michaely, Richardson,
and Roberts (2007), Fama and French (2008), and Pontiff and Woodgate (2008). The last
two of these studies, however, find no reliable evidence of this anomaly in the pre-1963 data.
The estimates in Panel A of Table 7 suggest, in contrast to these null results, that the net
share issues anomaly exists also in the pre-Compustat period. The reason for this difference
appears to lie with the corrections to the number of shares data CRSP made in a project
started in 2013.15
       Table 6 shows that the average anomaly’s average return, CAPM alpha, and three-factor
model is 8 basis points (t-value = 2.18), 13 basis points (t-value = 4.27), and 16 basis points
(t-value = 5.70), respectively, during the pre-discovery period. For some categories, the three-
factor model alphas significantly differ from the average returns. In particular, the average
profitability and distress anomalies earn negative average returns but, because of their nega-
tive covariances with the market and value factors, their three-factor model are positive and
statistically significant with t-values of 3.54 and 4.41, respectively.


4.5       Post-discovery out-of-sample estimates

Panel B of Table 7 reports average returns and alphas for 34 out of the 36 anomalies for which
we have at least five years of post-discovery data. This five-year threshold leaves out two
anomalies, Operating profitability and QMJ: Profitability.
  15
    See http://crsp.com/files/images/release_notes/mdaz_201306.pdf and http://crsp.com/files/
images/release_notes/mdaz_201402.pdf. Ken French also highlights the repercussions of these changes
at http://mba.tuck.dartmouth.edu/pages/faculty/ken.french/data_library.html: “The file [CRSP]
released in January 2015. . . incorporates over 4000 changes that affect 400 Permnos. As a result, many of the
returns we report for 1925–1946 change in our January 2015 update and some of the changes are large.”


                                                     20
   The estimates for the post-discovery period are similar to those for the pre-discovery out-
of-sample period. Of the 34 anomalies, only two earn average returns that are positive and
statistically significant at the 5% level, and 10 earn either CAPM or three-factor model alphas
that are significant at this level. Leverage is also statistically significant at the 5% level—its
t-value is −3.72—but its sign is the opposite of that for the in-sample period, and so we do
not add it to the count of anomalies that “work.” Because the post-discovery period is often
significantly shorter than either the in-sample or the pre-discovery period, the anomaly-level
estimates are noisier than those in Table 5 and Panel A of Table 7.
   Many of the anomalies that are statistically significant in the post-discovery data are not
the same that are significant in the pre-discovery period. A notable exception is distress risk,
which earns a monthly three-factor model alpha of 55 basis points (t-value = 3.28) after its
discovery. This anomaly is therefore significant both before (t-value = 2.66) and after the
original study’s sample period.
   Table 6 shows that the average anomaly’s average return, CAPM alpha, and three-factor
model is 10 basis points (t-value = 2.83), 14 basis points (t-value = 4.21), and 11 basis points
(t-value = 3.97), respectively, during the post-discovery period. The pre-discovery and post-
discovery data are in some agreement in terms of which anomaly categories reliably predict
returns. Earnings quality and investment and growth categories have low three-factor model
alphas both before and after their discovery, whereas profitability, financing, and distress
categories earn high alphas. Over the seven anomaly categories, the correlation in three-
factor model t-values, which are proportional to Sharpe ratios, is 0.54.


4.6    Comparing the performance of anomalies: Pre-discovery out-
       of-sample period, original sample, and post-discovery sample

In Table 8 we compare the performance of the average anomaly between the pre-discovery,
in-sample, and post-discovery periods. We measure average returns, Sharpe ratios, excess
volatilities, and alphas and information ratios estimated from the CAPM and three-factor
models. Excess volatility is defined, similar to Section 2.3, as an anomaly’s annualized stan-

                                               21
dard deviation minus the standard deviation of its randomized version. Panel A uses the full
data starting in July 1926. Panel B removes the pre-Securities and Exchange Act data and
the initial two-year enforcement period (Cohen, Polk, and Vuolteenaho 2003) and starts the
sample in July 1938.
   The estimates show, for example, that the average anomaly earns 28 basis points (t-value
= 8.67) per month during the sample period used in the original study, but just 8 basis points
(t-value = 2.07) during the historical out-of-sample period and 10 basis points (t-value = 2.63)
after the end of the original sample. The differences in average returns between the original
period and pre- and post-discovery periods are significant with t-values of −4.24 and −4.78.
These results do not materially change when we move to the CAPM or the three-factor model.
The differences in CAPM alphas are −19 basis points (t-value = −4.55) and −18 basis points
(t-value = −4.74). The differences in three-factor model alphas are −39 basis points (t-value
= −5.76) and −40 basis points (t-value = −4.28).
   The attractiveness of an anomaly as an investment depends on its volatility (or residual
volatility) in addition to its alpha. Although the average anomaly earns a lower alpha out-of-
sample, a simultaneous decrease in volatility could offset some of this effect. The estimates of
the Sharpe and information ratios address this possibility. Sharpe ratio divides each anomaly’s
average return by its volatility, and information ratio divides its alpha by the standard devi-
ation of its residuals. The Sharpe ratios and information ratios display the same pattern as
average returns and alphas. They are statistically significantly higher during the in-sample
period than what they are either before or after this in-sample period, and the estimates for
the pre- and post-discovery samples are not statistically significantly different from each other.
   The average anomaly’s information ratio from the three-factor model is 0.63 during the
original study’s sample period, but just 0.24 for both the pre- and post-discovery periods.
These differences, which are statistically significant with t-values of −5.09 and −4.26, cor-
respond to 61% decrease in the information when we move out-of-sample by going either
backward or forward in time. The decreases in the three-factor model alphas, by contrast, are
40% (pre-discovery) and 61% (post-discovery) and so, if anything, the risk adjustment works


                                               22
the “wrong way:” not only do anomalies earn high alphas during the original study’s sample
period, but they are also less risky than what they are before this period.
   The estimates in Panel A of Table 8 support the data-mining explanation for the return
anomalies. Under this explanation, the in-sample period stands out as being special. The
differences between the post- and pre-periods are generally less than one standard error away
from each other; the in-sample period, by contrast, is different from both of them by at least
four standard errors. These estimates show that the average returns and information ratios
jump up as we enter the in-sample period and then, after this period ends, they fall back to
levels that are statistically indistinguishable from those seen during the pre-sample period.
   The estimates are not sensitive to removing the pre-Securities and Exchange Act data
from the pre-discovery sample. Panel B of Table 8 removes the first 12 years of the data, but
the differences between the in-sample period and the pre-discovery period, and those between
the post-discovery and pre-discovery period, are quantitatively similar. Also in this sample
the pre-period looks very similar to the post-period, and it is the in-sample period that stands
out.


4.7    Changes in the correlation structure of returns

Data-mining does not necessarily work only through first moments. If the probability that an
anomaly gets published depends on its statistical significance, then also the return processes’
higher moments may be distorted. An anomaly’s t-value is higher if its returns are less volatile.
Researchers also often verify that a new candidate anomaly is not subsumed by known factors,
such as size and value, or related anomalies. An anomaly is more likely to pass these tests
if its correlation with other known anomalies are atypical. In this section, we measure the
extent to which data-mining alters the correlation structure of returns.
   The first column of Table 9 shows estimates from a panel regression that explains anomaly




                                               23
returns using the average returns on all other anomalies,


  anomalyi,t = a + b1 × in-sample index−i,t + b2 × post-sample index−i,t + b3 × posti,t
                                                                                
               + posti,t × b4 × in-sample index−i,t + b5 ∗ post-sample index−i,t + ei,t ,(2)


where posti,t takes the value of one if anomaly i is in the post-discovery sample in month t and
zero otherwise, in-sample index−i,t is the average return on all anomalies except anomaly i
that are in-sample in month t, and post-sample index−i,t is the average return on all anomalies
except anomaly i that are in the post-discovery sample in month t. We cluster standard
errors by calendar month to account for the correlated errors in the cross sections. The
specification (2) is similar to that estimated in McLean and Pontiff (2015) except that they
(a) examine a different set of anomalies and (b) use the publication date as the cutoff. The
interaction terms measure the changes in correlations as an anomaly moves from the in-sample
period to the post-discovery sample upon its discovery.
   The estimates in Table 9 suggest that anomalies correlate more with other already dis-
covered anomalies after their discovery. When an anomaly is in-sample, its slope coefficient
against the in-sample index is 0.59, but that against the post-sample index is just 0.09. How-
ever, when the anomaly moves out of sample, these correlations change to 0.59+(−0.42) = 0.17
and 0.09 + 0.46 = 0.54. These changes are associated with t-values of −9.9 and 11.3.
   These estimates are consistent with arbitrageurs inducing comovement among already dis-
covered anomalies (McLean and Pontiff 2015). If institutional investors such as hedge funds
trade many anomalies at the same time, their capital in- and out-flows may translate into
correlated price pressures in the anomalies’ long and short legs. This regression therefore sug-
gests that the post-discovery decrease in average returns may, in part, be due to sophisticated
money flowing into the anomalies, thereby correcting the mispricings that these anomalies
represent, but also by increasing their correlations.
   The estimates from the second regression in Table 9, however, suggest an alternative
explanation. This regression is the same as the first except that we swap the post-discovery



                                               24
period for the pre-discovery period. That is, we examine how an anomaly’s correlation with
other in-sample and pre-discovery anomalies changes when it “moves” from the in-sample
period to the pre-discovery period. This specification is a natural counterfactual counterpart
to the first regression because the threshold between the pre-discovery and the in-sample
periods holds no special significance to arbitrageurs. The estimates in this column are similar
to those in the first column, although the sequence of events is reversed. When an anomaly
is in-sample, its correlation with other in-sample anomalies is 0.62, and that with the pre-
discovery anomalies is 0.06. These correlations, however, change to 0.01 and 0.42 when the
anomaly moves to the pre-discovery period. The differences between the in-sample and pre-
discovery periods are statistically significant with t-values of −13.5 and 8.1.
    The similarity between the two regressions in Table 9 suggest that the higher post-discovery
correlations are not necessarily driven by arbitrageurs. Rather, the correlations may increase
because data-mining affects the entire return process, including the correlations with other
anomalies. Although the increase in correlations appears to be another consequence of the
data-mining process, our results do not imply that arbitrageurs have no influence over the
return processes. In particular, McLean and Pontiff (2015) show that the average returns
decrease not only after the end of the in-sample period but also later after an anomaly’s pub-
lication date. The second date holds no special significance under the data-mining explanation,
but it is important if arbitrageurs learn about anomalies from published research.



5     Discussion and conclusions
The investment and profitability premiums are largely absent from the cross section of stock
returns before 1963, and so are most of the 36 accounting-based anomalies that we examine.
At most 16 of these anomalies earn positive and statistically significant CAPM or three-factor
model alphas in the pre-discovery period, and 10 do so in the post-discovery period. Because
these anomaly-level estimates are noisy, we aggregate anomalies to get sharper estimates of
the differences between the pre-discovery, in-sample, and post-discovery periods. Our results


                                               25
suggest that data-snooping bias has had a significant impact on the discovery of the return
anomalies. Average returns, Sharpe ratios, and alphas and information ratios from the CAPM
and three-factor model all decrease sharply and statistically significantly when we move out
of the original study’s sample period by moving either backward or forward in time. The
information ratios from the three-factor model, for example, decrease by more than three-
fifths when we move out-of-sample to either direction.
   Our results suggest that many anomalies do not require explanations that invoke multi-
dimensional risks or mispricing. Under the risk-based explanation, we would not expect the
original sample period to stand out in the way it does in the data. And under the behav-
ioral explanation, we would expect the average anomaly to become more profitable as we
move backward in time because of the higher trading costs. Alphas and information ratios,
however, are lower in the pre-discovery sample.
   Our results may be good news for asset pricing models. Instead of having to explain away
an average annualized three-factor model alpha of 3.1% (t-value = 11.6), our results imply
that the correct standard by which to evaluate these models is by assessing their ability to
explain approximately half of this alpha; depending on the asset pricing model, the out-of-
sample alphas are between 40% to 60% of the in-sample alphas. Even the correct asset pricing
model could not be expected to explain away the remainder, the spurious part of the alpha.
However, because data snooping affects all facets of return processes—averages, volatilities,
and correlations with other anomalies and factors—it will be difficult to correct test statistics
even approximately for the effects of data-snooping bias. A preferred approach, when feasible,
would be to test asset pricing models using out-of-sample data such as ours.
   Future research can benefit from the new historical sample to gain additional insights into
asset prices. Two questions permeate most of the empirical asset pricing literature. The first
relates to identifying a parsimonious empirical asset pricing model that provides a passable
description of the cross section of average returns; the second is about delineating between
the risk-based and behavioral explanations for the many anomalies. Both lines of research
can greatly benefit from the power afforded by an additional 37 years of pristine data.


                                               26
A     Anomalies
In this appendix, we define the anomalies examined in Section 4. When applicable, we state the
formulas using the Compustat item names. For those anomalies that are computed through
a process involving multiple steps, we refer to the studies that describe the implementation in
detail. We also indicate the first study that used each variable to explain the cross section of
stock returns, and the sample period used in that study. When applicable, we use McLean and
Pontiff (2015) to identify the first study. We state both the year and month when the months
are provided in the original study; if not, we state the year, and assume that the sample
begins in January and ends in December. The sample period refers to the sample in which
the study uses the anomaly variable to predict returns. We lack quarterly data and some of
the data items that would be needed to extend some anomalies back to 1926. Table A1 in the
Appendix describes these approximations and compares the average returns and the CAPM
and three-factor model alphas of the original definitions and the approximations.


A.1     Profitability

  1. Gross profitability is defined as the revenue minus cost of goods sold, all divided
      by total assets: gross profitabilityt = (revtt − cogst )/att . Novy-Marx (2013) examines
      the predictive power of gross profitability using return data from July 1963 through
      December 2010.

  2. Operating profitability is defined as the revenue minus cost of goods sold, SG&A,
      and interest, all divided by book value of equity: operating profitabilityt = (revtt −
      cogst − xsgat − xintt )/bet . Fama and French (2015) construct a profitability factor based
      on operating profitability using return data from July 1963 through December 2013.

  3. Return on assets is defined as the earnings before extraordinary items, divided by
      total assets: return on assetst = ibt /att . Haugen and Baker (1996) use return on assets
      to predict returns between 1979 and 1993.



                                               27
 4. Return on equity is defined as the earnings before extraordinary items, divided by
      the book value of equity: return on equityt = ibt /bet . Haugen and Baker (1996) use
      return on equity to predict returns between 1979 and 1993.

 5. Profit margin is defined as the earnings before interest and taxes, divided by sales:
      profit margint = oiadpt /revtt . Soliman (2008) uses profit margin to predict returns
      using return data from 1984 to 2002.

 6. Change in asset turnover is defined as the annual change in asset turnover, where as-
      set turnover is revenue divided by total assets: change in asset turnovert = ∆(revtt /att ).
      Soliman (2008) uses the change in asset turnover to predict returns between 1984 and
      2002.


A.2     Earnings quality

 7. Accruals is the non-cash component of earnings divided by the average total assets:
      accrualst = (∆actt − ∆chet − ∆lctt − ∆dlct − ∆txpt − dpt )/((att−1 + att )/2), where ∆
      denotes the change from fiscal year t − 1 to t. Sloan (1996) uses data from 1962 to 1991
      to examine the predictive power of accruals.

 8. Earnings consistency is the geometric average changes in (scaled) earnings to price
      over the previous five years; see Alwathainani (2009) for the formulas and sample selec-
      tion rules. Alwathainani (2009) uses earnings consistency to predict stock returns using
      data from January 1971 through December 2007.

 9. Net operating assets represent the cumulative difference between operating income
      and free cash flow, scaled by lagged total assets, net operating assetst = [(att − chet ) −
      (att − dlct − dlttt − bet )]/att−1 . Hirshleifer, Hou, Teoh, and Zhang (2004) form trading
      strategies based on net operating assets using data from July 1964 through December
      2002.




                                               28
 10. Net working capital changes is another measure of accruals: net working capital changest =
       [∆(actt − chet ) − ∆(lctt − dlct )]/att . Soliman (2008) uses net working capital changes to
       predict stock returns using return data from 1984 to 2002.


A.3      Valuation

 11. Book-to-market ratio is defined as the book value of equity divided by the December
       market value of equity: book-to-market ratiot = bet /mvt . Fama and French (1992)
       use book-to-market ratio to predict returns using return data from July 1963 through
       December 1990.16

 12. Cash flow-to-price ratio is defined as the income before extraordinary items plus de-
       preciation, all scaled by the December market value of equity: cash flow-to-price ratiot =
       (ibt + dpt )/mvt . Lakonishok, Shleifer, and Vishny (1994) use cash flow-to-price ratio in
       tests that use return data from May 1968 through April 1990.

 13. Earnings-to-price ratio is defined as the income before extraordinary items divided by
       the December market value of equity: earnings-to-price ratiot = ibt /mvt . Basu (1977)
       measures the predictive power of earnings-to-price ratio using data from April 1957
       through March 1971.

 14. Enterprise multiple is a value measure used by practitioners: enterprise multiplet =
       (mvt +dlct +dlttt +pstkrvt −chet )/oibdpt , where mvt is the end-of-June (that is, portfolio
       formation date) market value of equity. Loughran and Wellman (2011) compare the
       predictive power of enterprise multiple to that of book-to-market using return data from
  16
    The book value of equity is computed as follows. First, we set the book value of equity equal to stock-
holders’ equity (SEQ) if this data item exists. This is also the data item collected by Davis, Fama, and French
(2000) for the pre-1963 data. Second, if SEQ is missing but both common equity (CEQ) and the par value
of preferred stock (PSTK) exist, then we set the book value of equity equal to PSTK + CEQ. Third, if the
above definitions cannot be used, but the book values of total assets (AT) and total liabilities (LT) exist,
then we set the book value of equity equal to AT − LT. If the book value of equity is now non-missing, we
adjust it by subtracting the redemption, liquidation, or par value of preferred stock—in that order, depending
on data availability. Lastly, we add deferred taxes (TXDITC) and subtract postretirement benefits (PRBA)
when these items exist.



                                                      29
      July 1963 through December 2009.

 15. Sales-to-price ratio is defined as total sales divided by December market value of
      equity: sales-to-price ratiot = revtt /mvt . Barbee, Mukherji, and Raines (1996) compare
      the predictive power of sales-to-price to those of book-to-market and debt-to-equity ratio
      using return data from 1979 through 1991.


A.4     Growth and investment

 16. Asset growth is defined as the percentage change in total assets, asset growtht =
      att /att−1 − 1. Cooper, Gulen, and Schill (2008) examine the predictive power of asset
      growth using return data from July 1968 to June 2003.

 17. Growth in inventory is defined as the change in inventory divided by the average
      total assets, growth in inventoryt = ∆invtt /[(att + att−1 )/2]. Thomas and Zhang (2002)
      use growth in inventory to predict stock returns using return data from 1970 to 1997.

 18. Sales growth is constructed by ranking firms each year by sales rank and by computing
      the weighted average sales growth rank over the previous five years: sales growtht =
      5 ∗ rankt + 4 ∗ rankt−1 + 3 ∗ rankt−2 + 2 ∗ rankt−3 + 1 ∗ rankt−4 . The ranks are computed
      using data on firms with six years of sales data. Lakonishok, Shleifer, and Vishny (1994)
      measure the predictive power of sales growth using return data from May 1968 through
      April 1990.

 19. Sustainable growth is defined as the percentage change in the book value of equity,
      sustainable growtht = (bet − bet−1 )/bet−1 . Lockwood and Prombutr (2010) use return
      data from July 1964 through June 2007 to measure the predictive power of sustainable
      growth.

 20. Adjusted CAPX growth is the industry-adjusted increase in capital expenditures over
      its average value over the previous two years, all scaled by the average value over the pre-
      vious two years. First, unadjusted CAPEX growth is computed as CAPEX growtht =

                                               30
   (capxt − (capxt−1 + capxt−2 )/2)/[(capxt−1 + capxt−2 )/2]. The industry adjustment sub-
   tracts the average CAPEX growth of the firms with the same two-digit SIC code. Abar-
   banell and Bushee (1998) use industry-adjusted CAPEX growth as a return predictor
   using return data from 1974 through 1993.

21. Growth in sales minus inventory is the difference between sales growth and inventory
   growth. Sales growth is the increase in sales over its average value over the previous two
   years, all scaled by the average value over the previous two years; inventory growth is the
   increase in inventory over its average value over the previous two years, all scaled by the
   average value over the previous two years; growth in sales minus inventoryt = [revtt −
   (revtt−1 + revtt−2 )/2]/[(revtt−1 + revtt−2 )/2] − [invtt − (invtt−1 + invtt−2 )/2]/[(invtt−1 +
   invtt−2 )/2]. Abarbanell and Bushee (1998) use growth in sales minus inventory to predict
   returns from 1974 through 1993.

22. Investment growth rate is the percentage change in capital expenditures, investment growth ratet =
   capxt /capxt−1 − 1. Xing (2008) uses investment growth rate to construct an investment
   factor using return data from 1964 to 2003.

23. Abnormal capital investment is defined as capital expenditures scaled by revenues,
   scaled by the average of this ratio over the previous three years: abnormal capital investmentt =
   (capxt /revtt )/{[(capxt−1 /revtt−1 ) + (capxt−2 /revtt−2 ) + (capxt−3 /revtt−3 )]/3}. Titman,
   Wei, and Xie (2004) measure the predictive power of abnormal capital investment using
   return data from July 1973 through June 1996.

24. Investment-to-capital ratio is defined as the ratio of capital expenditures to the
   lagged net value of plant, property, and equipment, investment-to-capital ratiot = capxt /ppentt−1 .
   Xing (2008) uses the investment-to-capital ratio to predict stock returns using return
   data from 1964 to 2003.

25. Investment-to-assets ratio is defined as the change in the net value of plant, prop-
   erty, and equipment plus the change in inventory, all scaled by lagged total assets,


                                              31
      investment-to-assets ratiot = (∆ppentt + ∆invtt )/att−1 . Lyandres, Sun, and Zhang
      (2008) use the investment-to-assets ratio to predict returns from January 1970 through
      December 2005.


A.5     Financing

 26. Debt issuance is defined as indicator variable that takes the value of one if the sum of
      short- and long-term debt on the balance sheet in year t exceeds this sum in year t − 1,
      debt issuancet = 1dlct +dlttt >dlct−1 +dlttt−1 . Spiess and Affleck-Graves (1999) measure debt
      offerings using the Investment Dealers’ Digest Directory of Corporate Financing over
      the period 1975–1989 as the source, and measure the performance of debt issuers and
      non-issuers using return data from February 1975 through December 1994. McLean and
      Pontiff (2015) use Compustat variables dltist to measure debt issuances, and we use the
      same definition in the original-versus-approximation comparison in Table A1.

 27. Leverage is defined as the ratio of long-term debt and the December book value of
      equity, leveraget = dlttt /met . Bhandari (1988) uses leverage (defined as total assets
      minus book value of equity, all divided by the market value of equity) as a return
      predictor using return data from 1948 to 1979.

 28. One-year share issuance is the log-change in the split-adjusted number of shares out-
      standing from fiscal year t−1 to t, one-year share issuancet = adjusted shroutt /adjusted shroutt−1 ,
      where adjusted shroutt = shroutt ∗cfacshrt from CRSP or, if missing or zero, 1000∗cshot ∗
      ajext from Compustat. The number of shares from CRSP are measured at the fiscal-year
      ends. The share issuance factor takes long positions in firms that repurchase shares (one-
      year share issuancet < 0) and short positions in firms that issue shares (one-year share
      issuancet > 0). Pontiff and Woodgate (2008) measure the predictive power of one-year
      share issuance using return data from 1932 through 2003. Because of the corrections to
      the historical CRSP data (see footnote 15), we set the beginning of the in-sample period
      as July 1968, the same as that in Daniel and Titman (2006).


                                                32
 29. Five-year share issuance is the log-change in the split-adjusted number of shares
       outstanding from fiscal year t − 5 to t. The share issuance factor takes long positions
       in firms that repurchase shares and short positions in firms that issue shares. Daniel
       and Titman (2006) examine the predictive power of five-year share issuance using return
       data from July 1968 through December 2003.

 30. Total external financing is the sum of net share issuance and net debt issuance minus
       cash dividends, all scaled by total assets. We compute this measure from the balance
       sheet as total external financingt = [(adjusted shroutt /adjusted shroutt−1 − 1) ∗ met +
       (∆dlct + ∆dlttt ) − dvct ]/att , where the first term approximates share issuance and met
       is the fiscal year-end market value of equity. Bradshaw, Richardson, and Sloan (2006)
       use a measure of total external financing computed from the statement of cash flows to
       predict returns using return data from 1971 through 2000. Their measure is defined as
       total external financingt = (sstkt − prstkct + dltist − dltrt + dlccht − dvt )/att , with dlccht
       set to zero when missing.


A.6      Distress

 31. Ohlson’s O-Score is a measure of distress. It is the fitted value from a logistic re-
       gression that Ohlson (1980) estimates to explain bankruptcies using data from 1970
       and 1976. The fitted values of this regression are given by O-scoret = −1.32 − 0.407 ∗
       log(att /cpiindt ) + 6.03 ∗ ltt /att − 1.43 ∗ (actt − lctt )/att + 0.076 ∗ lctt /actt − 1.72 ∗ 1ltt >att −
       2.37∗ibt /att −1.83∗oiadpt /ltt +0.285∗1ibt <0&ibt−1 <0 −0.521∗(ibt −ibt−1 )/(|ibt |+|ibt−1 |),
       where cpiindt is the consumer price index normalized so that 1968 value is 100.17 Dichev
       (1998) uses Ohlson O-score to predict stock returns using return data from January 1981
       through December 1995.

 32. Altman’s Z-Score is another measure of distress. It is the fitted value from a discrimi-
       nant function that Altman (1968) estimates to predict bankruptcies among 66 companies
  17
    Because cpiindt appears inside a log and because we predict the cross section of returns, this price-level
adjustment washes out.

                                                       33
      from 1946 through 1965: Altman’s Z-scoret = 1.2 ∗ (actt − lctt )/att + 1.4 ∗ ret /att + 3.3 ∗
      (nit + xintt + txpt )/att + 0.6 ∗ met /ltt + 1.0 ∗ revtt /att , where met is the December market
      value of equity. Dichev (1998) predicts returns using Altman’s Z-score from January
      1981 through December 1995.

 33. Distress risk is yet another measure of distress. It is the fitted value from a logistic
      regression that Campbell, Hilscher, and Szilagyi (2008) estimate using data for the
      period from 1963 through 2003 to predict failures. We use the logit-regression estimates
      for the 12-month horizon reported in Campbell, Hilscher, and Szilagyi (2008, Table IV).
      The original study details the variable construction rules in Section I and the Appendix.
      Campbell, Hilscher, and Szilagyi (2008) measure the relation between distress and stock
      returns using data from 1981 through 2003. We consider the full 1963–2003 period to
      be the in-sample period.


A.7     Composite anomalies

 34. Piotroski’s F-score is a score that ranges from 0 to 9, constructed by taking the sum
      of nine binary signals that measure financial performance. The signals are based on
      income, accruals, ratios of current assets and current liabilities, and so forth. Piotroski
      (2000) describes the construction of the score in detail, and predicts returns on high
      book-to-market stocks using return data from 1976 to 1996. We compute Piotroski’s
      F-score for all firms.

 35. Market-to-book and accruals is constructed by combining information on book-
      to-market ratios and accruals. The market-to-book and accruals-signal is set to one
      for firms that are both in the highest book-to-market quintile and the lowest accruals
      quintile, and it is set to zero for firms that are both in the lowest book-to-market quintile
      and in the highest accruals quintile. These quintiles are based on NYSE breakpoints.
      Bartov and Kim (2004) use this composite anomaly to predict returns between May
      1981 and April 2000.


                                                 34
36. Quality-minus-junk: Profitability is the profitability component of the quality-
   minus-junk measure of Asness, Frazzini, and Pedersen (2013). This measure is a combi-
   nation of six profitability signals: gross profitability, return on equity, return on assets,
   cash flow to assets, gross margin, and accruals. This composite measure is constructed
   by transforming each signal into a z-score based on the cross-sectional averages and
   standard deviations, and by taking the average of the resulting six z-scores. Asness,
   Frazzini, and Pedersen (2013) examine the predictive power of this composite measure
   using return data from 1956 to 2012.




                                             35
REFERENCES

 Abarbanell, J. S. and B. J. Bushee (1998). Abnormal returns to a fundamental analysis
   strategy. Accounting Review 73 (1), 19–45.
 Altman, E. I. (1968). Financial ratios, discriminant analysis and the prediction of corporate
    bankruptcy. Journal of Finance 23 (4), 589–609.
 Alwathainani, A. M. (2009). Consistency of firms’ past financial performance measures and
    future returns. British Accounting Review 41, 184–196.
 Ang, A. and J. Chen (2007). CAPM over the long run: 1926–2001. Journal of Empirical
   Finance 14 (1), 1–40.
 Ang, A., A. A. Shtauber, and P. C. Tetlock (2013). Asset pricing in the dark: The cross-
   section of OTC stocks. Review of Financial Studies 26 (12), 2985–3028.
 Asness, C., T. J. Moskowitz, and L. H. Pedersen (2013). Value and momentum everywhere.
    Journal of Finance 68 (3), 929–985.
 Asness, C. S., A. Frazzini, and L. H. Pedersen (2013). Quality minus junk. AQR Capital
    Management working paper.
 Ball, R., J. Gerakos, J. T. Linnainmaa, and V. Nikolaev (2015). Deflating profitability.
    Journal of Financial Economics 117 (2), 225–248.
 Ball, R. and R. Watts (1977). Reply to Salamon and Smith. Journal of Finance 32 (5),
    1802–1808.
 Barbee, Jr., W. C., S. Mukherji, and G. A. Raines (1996). Do sales-price and debt-equity
    explain stock returns better than book-market and firm size? Financial Analysts Jour-
    nal 52 (2), 56–60.
 Barber, B. M. and J. D. Lyon (1997). Firm size, book-to-market ratio, and security returns:
    A holdout sample of financial firms. Journal of Finance 52 (2), 875–883.
 Barillas, F. and J. Shanken (2015). Which alpha? Working paper, Emory University.
 Barras, L., O. Scaillet, and R. Wermers (2010). False discoveries in mutual fund perfor-
    mance: Measuring luck in estimated alphas. Journal of Finance 65 (1), 179–216.
 Bartov, E. and M. Kim (2004). Risk, mispricing, and value investing. Review of Quantitative
    Finance and Accounting 23 (4), 353–376.
 Basu, S. (1977). Investment performance of common stocks in relation to their price-earnings
    ratios: A test of the efficient market hypothesis. Journal of Finance 32 (3), 663–682.

                                             36
Bhandari, L. C. (1988). Debt/equity ratio and expected common stock returns: Empirical
  evidence. Journal of Finance 43 (2), 507–528.
Boudoukh, J., R. Michaely, M. Richardson, and M. R. Roberts (2007). On the impor-
   tance of measuring payout yield: Implications for empirical asset pricing. Journal of
   Finance 62 (2), 877–915.
Bradshaw, M. T., S. A. Richardson, and R. G. Sloan (2006). The relation between corporate
   financing activities, analysts’ forecasts and stock returns. Journal of Accounting and
   Economics 42 (1–2), 53–85.
Campbell, J. Y., J. Hilscher, and J. Szilagyi (2008). In search of distress risk. Journal of
  Finance 63 (6), 2899–2939.
Cochrane, J. H. (2011). Presidential address: Discount rates. Journal of Finance 66 (4),
   1047–1108.
Cohen, R. B., C. Polk, and T. Vuolteenaho (2003). The value spread. Journal of Fi-
  nance 58 (2), 609–641.
Cooper, M. J., H. Gulen, and M. J. Schill (2008). Asset growth and the cross-section of
   stock returns. Journal of Finance 63 (4), 1609–1651.
Daniel, K. and S. Titman (2006). Market reactions to tangible and intangible information.
  Journal of Finance 61 (4), 1605–1643.
Davis, J. L., E. F. Fama, and K. R. French (2000). Characteristics, covariances, and average
  returns: 1929 to 1997. Journal of Finance 55 (1), 389–406.
Dichev, I. A. (1998). Is the risk of bankruptcy a systematic risk? Journal of Finance 53 (3),
   1131–1147.
Fama, E. F. and K. R. French (1992). The cross-section of expected stock returns. Journal
   of Finance 47 (2), 427–465.
Fama, E. F. and K. R. French (1993). Common risk factors in the returns of stocks and
   bonds. Journal of Financial Economics 33 (1), 3–56.
Fama, E. F. and K. R. French (1996). Multifactor explanations of asset pricing anomalies.
   Journal of Finance 51 (1), 55–84.
Fama, E. F. and K. R. French (1998). Value versus growth: The international evidence.
   Journal of Finance 53 (6), 1975–1999.
Fama, E. F. and K. R. French (2006). The value premium and the CAPM. Journal of
   Finance 61 (5), 2163–2185.

                                            37
Fama, E. F. and K. R. French (2008). Average returns, B/M, and share issues. Journal of
   Finance 63 (6), 2971–2995.
Fama, E. F. and K. R. French (2010). Luck versus skill in the cross section of mutual fund
   returns. Journal of Finance 65 (5), 1915–1947.
Fama, E. F. and K. R. French (2015). A five-factor asset pricing model. Journal of Financial
   Economics 116 (1), 1–22.
French, K. R. (2008). Presidential address: The cost of active investing. Journal of Fi-
   nance 63 (4), 1537–1573.
Gompers, P. A. and J. Lerner (2003). The really long-run performance of initial public
  offerings: The pre-Nasdaq evidence. Journal of Finance 58 (4), 1355–1392.
Graham, J. R., M. T. Leary, and M. R. Roberts (2014). Taxes and corporate capital struc-
   ture in the U.S. Wharton working paper.
Graham, J. R., M. T. Leary, and M. R. Roberts (2015). A century of capital structure: The
   leveraging of corporate America. Journal of Financial Economics 118 (3), 658–683.
Harvey, C. R., Y. Liu, and H. Zhu (2015). . . . and the cross-section of expected returns.
   Review of Financial Studies 29 (1), 5–68.
Hasbrouck, J. (2009). Trading costs and returns for u.s. equities: Estimating effective costs
   from daily data. Journal of Finance 64 (3), 1445–1477.
Haugen, R. A. and N. L. Baker (1996). Commonality in the determinants of expected stock
  returns. Journal of Financial Economics 41 (3), 401–439.
Hirshleifer, D., K. Hou, S. H. Teoh, and Y. Zhang (2004). Do investors overvalue firms with
   bloated balance sheets? Journal of Accounting and Economics 38, 297–331.
Hou, K., C. Xue, and L. Zhang (2015). Digesting anomalies: An investment approach.
  Review of Financial Studies 28 (3), 650–705.
Jegadeesh, N. and S. Titman (1993). Returns to buying winners and selling losers: Impli-
   cations for stock market efficiency. Journal of Finance 48 (1), 65–91.
Jegadeesh, N. and S. Titman (2001). Profitability of momentum strategies: An evaluation
   of alternative explanations. Journal of Finance 56 (2), 699–720.
Kosowski, R., A. Timmermann, R. Wermers, and H. White (2006). Can mutual fund “stars”
   really pick stocks? New evidence from a bootstrap analysis. Journal of Finance 61 (6),
   2551–2595.


                                            38
Lakonishok, J., A. Shleifer, and R. Vishny (1994). Contrarian investment, extrapolation
   and investment risk. Journal of Finance 49 (5), 1541–1578.
Linnainmaa, J. (2013). Reverse survivorship bias. Journal of Finance 68 (3), 789–813.
Lintner, J. (1965). The valuation of risk assets and the selection of risky investments in
   stock portfolios and capital budgets. Review of Economics and Statistics 47 (1), 13–37.
Lockwood, L. and W. Prombutr (2010). Sustainable growth and stock returns. Journal of
   Financial Research 33 (4), 519–538.
Loughran, T. and J. W. Wellman (2011). New evidence on the relation between the enter-
   prise multiple and average stock returns. Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analy-
   sis 46 (6), 1629–1650.
Lyandres, E., L. Sun, and L. Zhang (2008). The new issues puzzle: Testing the investment-
   based explanation. Review of Financial Studies 21 (6), 2825–2855.
McLean, R. D. and J. Pontiff (2015). Does academic research destroy stock return pre-
  dictability? Journal of Finance. Forthcoming.
Nagel, S. (2005). Short sales, institutional investors and the cross-section of stock returns.
   Journal of Financial Economics 78 (2), 277–309.
Novy-Marx, R. (2013). The other side of value: The gross profitability premium. Journal
   of Financial Economics 108 (1), 1–28.
Ohlson, J. A. (1980). Financial ratios and the probabilistic prediction of bankruptcy. Journal
   of Accounting Research 18 (1), 109–131.
Ohlson, J. A. (1995). Earnings, book values, and dividends in equity valuation. Contempo-
   rary Accounting Research 11 (2), 661–687.
Piotroski, J. D. (2000). Value investing: The use of historical financial statement information
   to separate winners from losers. Journal of Accounting Research 38, 1–41.
Pontiff, J. and A. Woodgate (2008). Share issuance and cross-sectional returns. Journal of
   Finance 63 (2), 921–945.
Sharpe, W. F. (1964). Capital asset prices: A theory of market equilibrium under conditions
   of risk. Journal of Finance 19 (3), 425–442.
Shumway, T. (1997). The delisting bias in CRSP data. Journal of Finance 52 (1), 327–340.
Sloan, R. G. (1996). Do stock prices fully reflect information in accruals and cash flows
   about future earnings? The Accounting Review 71 (3), 289–315.

                                             39
Soliman, M. T. (2008). The use of DuPont analysis by market participants. Accounting
    Review 83 (3), 823–853.
Spiess, D. K. and J. Affleck-Graves (1999). The long-run performance of stock returns
   following debt offerings. Journal of Financial Economics 54 (1), 45–73.
Thomas, J. K. and H. Zhang (2002). Inventory changes and future returns. Review of
  Accounting Studies 7 (2), 163–187.
Titman, S., K. C. J. Wei, and F. Xie (2004). Capital investments and stock returns. Journal
   of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 39 (4), 677–700.
Vuolteenaho, T. (2002). What drives firm-level stock returns? Journal of Finance 57 (1),
   233–264.
Xing, Y. (2008). Interpreting the value effect through the q-theory: An empirical investiga-
   tion. Review of Financial Studies 21 (4), 1767–1795.




                                           40
Figure 1: Number of firms in CRSP, Compustat, and Moody’s Industrial and
Railroad Manuals, 1925–2014. This figure shows the number of firms in the Center for
Research in Securities Prices (CRSP) database; the number of these firms in Standard and
Poor’s Compustat database; and the number of these firms in either Compustat or Moody’s
Industrial and Railroad manuals between 1925 and 2014. The vertical lines indicate the dates
on which the AMEX (1962) and Nasdaq (1972) stocks are added to CRSP.

                 8000      CRSP
                           Compustat
                           Compustat + Moody's
                 6000
Number of -rms




                                    AMEX

                 4000



                 2000

                                                                        Nasdaq

                    0
                    1925   1935    1945     1955   1965          1975   1985     1995   2005
                                                          Year




                                                   41
Figure 2: Cross sections of operating profitability and asset growth, 1926–2015.
This figure displays the decile breakpoints for operating profitability (Panel A) and asset
growth (Panel B) between 1926 and 2015. The thick red line corresponds to the distribution’s
median. We compute the distributions at the end of June each year and use accounting
data from the fiscal year that ended at least six months before. Operating profitability is
the revenue minus cost of goods sold minus interest expense, all scaled by the book value
of equity. Asset growth is the year-to-year percentage growth in the book value of total
assets. The operating profitability and asset growth variables are those used to construct the
profitability and investment factors in Panels B and C of Table 3.

                                                  Panel A: Operating pro-tability breakpoints


                             1:50
   Operating pro-tability




                             1:25

                             1:00

                             0:75

                             0:50

                             0:25

                             0:00
                                    1930   1940   1950       1960        1970   1980     1990   2000   2010
                                                                         Year

                                                         Panel B: Asset growth breakpoints

                             0:50
   Asset growth




                             0:25




                             0:00




                            !0:25
                                    1930   1940   1950       1960        1970   1980     1990   2000   2010
                                                                         Year

                                                                    42
Figure 3: Monthly percent returns on size, value, profitability, and investment
factors, 1926–2015. This figure reports rolling averages of monthly percent returns for the
size (Panel A), value (Panel B), profitability (Panel C), and investment (Panel D) factors from
July 1926 through December 2015. Each point represents the average return for a ten-year
window up to the date indicated by the x-axis. The first point corresponds to June 1936, and
it represents the average return from July 1926 through June 1936. The dotted lines denote
the 95% confidence intervals. Panels C and D show average returns for the standard factors
(RMW and CMA) and for the factor components that are orthogonal to the market, size, and
value factors (RMWO and CMAO). A factor’s orthogonal component in month t is equal to
its alpha from the three-factor model regression plus the month-t residual. The confidence
intervals in Panels C and D are for the orthogonal components.
                                                     Panel A: Size premium
                          2:0
                                                                                             SMB
                          1:5
Monthly percent return




                          1:0


                          0:5


                          0:0


                         !0:5


                                1940   1950   1960     1970        1980       1990   2000   2010
                                                              Year
                                                     Panel B: Value premium
                          2:0
                                                                                             HML
                          1:5
Monthly percent return




                          1:0


                          0:5


                          0:0


                         !0:5


                                1940   1950   1960     1970        1980       1990   2000   2010
                                                              Year
                                                              43
                                                        Panel C: Pro-tability premium
                          1:5
                                       RMW
                                       RMWO
                          1:0
Monthly percent return




                          0:5


                          0:0


                         !0:5



                                1940      1950   1960         1970        1980    1990   2000   2010
                                                                     Year

                                                        Panel D: Investment premium
                          1:0
                                       CMA
                                       CMAO
Monthly percent return




                          0:5




                          0:0




                         !0:5

                                1940      1950   1960         1970        1980    1990   2000   2010
                                                                     Year




                                                                     44
Figure 4: Annualized Sharpe ratios for the market portfolio and an ex-post mean-
variance efficient strategy for ten-year rolling windows, 1926–2015. This figure
reports Sharpe ratios for the market portfolio (thin line) and an ex-post mean-variance efficient
strategy (thick line). Each point reports the annualized Sharpe ratio for a ten-year window up
to the date indicated by the x-axis. The first point corresponds to June 1936, and it represents
the Sharpe ratio from July 1926 through June 1936. The mean-variance efficient strategy is
computed from the returns on the market, size, value, profitability, and investment factors
from July 1963 through December 2015. This strategy is in-sample for the post-1963 period
and out-of-sample for the pre-1963 period. The dashed segment in the thick line from July
1963 through May 1973 corresponds to a period during which the optimal strategy is partly
in-sample and partly out-of-sample due to the use of ten-year rolling windows.


                                       Market portfolio                            In-sample
                          2:0          Optimal strategy
Annualized Sharpe ratio




                          1:5


                          1:0


                          0:5


                          0:0
                                       Out-of-sample

                                1940        1950          1960   1970       1980     1990      2000   2010
                                                                         Year




                                                                    45
Table 1: Data coverage on CRSP, Compustat, and Moody’s Industrial and Railroad
manuals, 1925–1965

This table reports the number of firms available on the Center for Research in Security Prices
Database, Standard and Poor’s Compustat database, and Moody’s Industrial and Railroad
manuals between 1925 and 1965. The top part of the table shows the number of firms in
CRSP; the number of these firms in Compustat; and the number of these firms in either
Compustat or Moody’s manuals. The bottom part of the table reports, for select data items,
the number of firms covered by Compustat and the number of additional firms covered by the
Moody’s manuals.




                                             46
                                                          Year
                       1925   1930    1935    1940      1945 1950     1955    1960    1965

                                                    Number of firms

CRSP                   490    748      717        784   842   998     1,058   1,113   2,164
Compustat                0      0        0          0     0   320       450     537   1,265
Compustat + Moody’s    345    568      564        486   640   782       828     800   1,559

                                     Number of Compustat firms by data item

Income statement
  Revenue                0      0        0         0      0   319      450     537    1,258
  Cost of goods sold     0      0        0         0      0   251      332     433    1,253
  Depreciation           0      0        0         0      0   312      444     529    1,233
  Interest               0      0        0         0      0   299      430     516    1,188
  Net income             0      0        0         0      0   320      450     537    1,264
Balance sheet
 Total assets            0      0        0         0      0   319      449     537    1,264
 Total liabilities       0      0        0         0      0   284      315     404    1,187
 Common equity           0      0        0         0      0     0        0       3      702
 Accounts payable        0      0        0         0      0     0        0       3      208
 Receivables             0      0        0         0      0   319      383     465    1,154
 Inventory               0      0        0         0      0   318      382     462    1,148

                       Number of additional firms from Moody’s manuals by data item

Income statement
  Revenue              186    328      389        463   598   447      372     259     292
  Cost of goods sold    64    187      264        416   544   398      338     245     269
  Depreciation         227    465      529        479   633   442      365     257     253
  Interest             152    347      316        254   345   279      259     195     195
  Net income           342    550      553        485   640   458      377     264     292
Balance sheet
 Total assets          345    552      557        486   640   457      377     265     292
 Total liabilities     345    568      564        486   640   465      376     264     293
 Common equity         293    537      545        486   640   436      362     246     290
 Accounts payable      338    547      552        483   638   437      363     245     282
 Receivables           344    544      554        485   639   456      372     262     292
 Inventory             340    542      549        479   632   451      371     263     286


                                             47
              Table 2: Comparison to Fama-French Factors, 1963–2015

Panel A shows the average monthly percent returns and the associated t-values for the
size, value, profitability, and investment factors between July 1963 through December 2015.
Panel B reports the correlations between our factors and those reported by Fama and French
for the same sample period. The size (SMB) and value (HML) factors sort stocks into six
portfolios by size and book-to-market at the end of each June and hold the value-weighted
portfolios from the July of year t to the June of year t + 1. These sorts use the median NYSE
breakpoint for size and the 30th and 70th percentile NYSE breakpoints for book-to-market.
SMB is the average return on the three small-stock portfolios minus the average return on the
three big-stock portfolios. HML is the average return on the two high-book-to-market port-
folios minus the average return on the two low-book-to-market portfolios. The profitability
factor (RMW) sorts stocks into six portfolios by size and operating profitability. Operating
profitability is revenue minus the sum of the cost of goods sold, sales, general & administra-
tive expenses, and interest scaled, all scaled by the book value of equity. RMW is the average
return on the two high profitability (robust) portfolios minus that on the two low profitability
(weak) portfolios. The investment factor (CMA) sorts stocks into six portfolios by size and
growth in the book value of total assets. CMA is the average return on the two low investment
(conservative) portfolios minus that on the two high investment (aggressive) portfolios.

Panel A: Monthly percent returns
                                    Our factors                      Fama-French factors
                               Mean           t-value            Mean                t-value
Size (SMB)                      0.22             1.85             0.23                  1.86
Value (HML)                     0.34             3.00             0.34                  2.96
Profitability (RMW)             0.25             2.88             0.25                  2.93
Investment (CMA)                0.25             3.38             0.30                  3.77

Panel B: Correlations between our factors and Fama-French factors
                                                  Fama-French factors
Our factors                     SMB             HML               RMW                    CMA
Size (SMB)                      0.998
Value (HML)                                     0.994
Profitability (RMW)                                                0.993
Investment (CMA)                                                                         0.981




                                              48
Table 3: Monthly percent returns and alphas on size, value, profitability, and
investment portfolios and factors, 1926–2015

Panel A reports average monthly percent returns for the size, value, profitability, and in-
vestment factors, and for value-weighted portfolios that are used to construct these factors.
The size and value factors are constructed by sorting stocks into portfolios by size and book-
to-market; the profitability factor sorts stocks by size and profitability; and the investment
factor by size and investment (asset growth). Profitability is revenue minus the sum of the
cost of goods sold and interest expense, all divided by the book value of equity. The portfolios
are constructed using the median NYSE breakpoint for size and the 30th and 70th percentile
breakpoints for book-to-market, profitability, or asset growth. These portfolios are rebalanced
annually at the end of June. Panel B reports the average number of stocks in each portfolio.
Panel C reports monthly CAPM alphas for the four factors, and the three-factor model alphas
for the profitability and investment factors. The pre-1963 sample period is divided into two
segments, July 1926 through June 1938 and July 1938 through June 1963. In Panels A and C
t-values for the average monthly percent returns and alphas are reported in parentheses.




                                              49
Panel A: Monthly percent returns
                                    Pre-1963 sample
                          July 1926     July 1938     July 1926                   July 1963
Portfolio               – June 1938   – June 1963   – June 1963             – December 2015

                                   Portfolios sorted by size and book-to-market

Small Growth                  0.76                1.21            1.06                0.90
      Neutral                 1.06                1.30            1.22                1.25
      Value                   1.45                1.59            1.55                1.38
Big Growth                    0.81                0.99            0.93                0.88
      Neutral                 0.70                1.16            1.01                0.91
      Value                   0.94                1.50            1.32                1.07
Size factor                   0.28                 0.15           0.19                0.22
                             (0.67)               (1.07)         (1.16)              (1.85)
Value factor                  0.41                 0.44           0.43                0.33
                             (0.76)               (2.68)         (2.09)              (2.96)

                                      Portfolios sorted by size and profitability

Small Weak                    0.88                1.32            1.18                0.93
      Neutral                 0.78                1.38            1.18                1.21
      Robust                  0.75                1.36            1.16                1.30
Big Weak                      0.81                1.09            1.00                0.78
      Neutral                 0.76                1.08            0.98                0.87
      Robust                  0.68                1.24            1.06                1.02
Profitability factor         −0.13                 0.09           0.02                0.30
                            (−0.31)               (0.65)         (0.14)              (3.60)

                                      Portfolios sorted by size and investment

Small Aggressive              0.84                1.24            1.11                0.99
      Neutral                 1.58                1.39            1.45                1.30
      Conservative            1.06                1.38            1.27                1.31
Big Aggressive                0.69                1.09            0.96                0.86
      Neutral                 1.14                1.14            1.14                0.91
      Conservative            0.86                1.04            0.98                1.03
Investment factor             0.19                 0.04           0.09                0.25
                             (0.79)               (0.40)         (0.86)              (3.41)


                                             50
Panel B: Average number of stocks in a portfolio
                                     Pre-1963 sample
                        July 1926        July 1938          July 1926             July 1963
Portfolio            – June 1938       – June 1963        – June 1963       – December 2015

                                 Portfolios sorted by size and book-to-market

Small Growth                  44.7                 66.5           59.4                966.4
      Neutral                111.0                179.6          157.3              1,017.0
      Value                  135.5                191.7          173.5              1,039.1
Big Growth                   131.1                197.3          175.9                370.9
      Neutral                123.7                172.3          156.5                309.4
      Value                   38.7                 71.1           60.6                143.8

                                     Portfolios sorted by size and profitability

Small Weak                    28.5                102.2           78.3                867.6
      Neutral                 28.8                107.1           81.7              1,190.2
      Robust                  25.4                 80.8           62.8                943.6
Big Weak                      20.7                 71.2           54.8                249.3
      Neutral                 38.0                126.0           97.5                330.7
      Robust                  24.1                 93.8           71.2                228.9

                                     Portfolios sorted by size and investment

Small Aggressive              46.8                 87.1           74.0                943.7
      Neutral                 85.4                111.9          103.3                822.6
      Conservative            89.0                125.6          113.8              1,014.7
Big Aggressive                86.8                108.2          101.3                287.0
      Neutral                 92.4                149.0          130.7                340.4
      Conservative            43.4                 69.0           60.7                167.7




                                             51
Panel C: Monthly CAPM and three-factor model alphas
                           Pre-1963 sample
               July 1926        July 1938           July 1926          July 1963
Factor       – June 1938      – June 1963        – June 1963     – December 2015

                                         CAPM alphas

SMB                 0.17             −0.09               0.02               0.12
                   (0.44)           (−0.67)             (0.12)             (1.04)
HML                 0.17               0.17              0.11               0.43
                   (0.40)             (1.11)            (0.61)             (3.99)
RMW                 0.02               0.19              0.20               0.27
                   (0.06)             (1.26)            (1.34)             (3.18)
CMA                 0.17             −0.02               0.06               0.32
                   (0.71)           (−0.19)             (0.52)             (4.70)

                                  Three-factor model alphas

RMW                 0.06               0.30              0.25               0.35
                   (0.18)             (2.61)            (1.90)             (4.30)

CMA                 0.12             −0.07               0.02               0.14
                   (0.54)           (−0.84)             (0.21)             (2.66)




                                         52
                           Table 4: Defining return anomalies

This table lists the return anomalies examined in this study, the paper that first used each
variable to predict the cross section of returns, and the sample period used in that study. An
asterisk denotes an anomaly that is defined differently from the initial study due to the lack
of either quarterly data or some data items. The approximations are described in Table A1.
The bolded anomalies—operating profitability, book-to-market, and asset growth—are the
profitability, value, and investment factors studied in detail in Section 3. The anomalies are
described in the Appendix in Section A.




                                             53
                                                                                        Original
Category      No. Anomaly                      Original study                           sample
Profitability 1 Gross profitability            Novy-Marx (2013)                         1963–2010
              2 Operating profitability    ∗   Fama and French (2015)                   1963–2013
              3 Return on assets∗              Haugen and Baker (1996)                  1979–1993
              4 Return on equity∗              Haugen and Baker (1996)                  1979–1993
              5 Profit margin                  Soliman (2008)                           1984–2002
              6 Change in asset turnover       Soliman (2008)                           1984–2002
Earnings      7 Accruals  ∗                    Sloan (1996)                             1962–1991
quality       8 Earnings consistency           Alwathainani (2009)                      1971–2007
              9 Net operating assets           Hirshleifer, Hou, Teoh, and Zhang (2004) 1964–2002
              10 Net working capital changes Soliman (2008)                             1984–2002
Valuation 11 Book-to-market                    Fama and French (1992)                   1963–1990
              12 Cash flow-to-price            Lakonishok, Shleifer, and Vishny (1994) 1968–1990
              13 Earnings-to-price             Basu (1977)                              1957–1971
              14 Enterprise multiple∗          Loughran and Wellman (2011)              1963–2009
              15 Sales-to-price                Barbee, Mukherji, and Raines (1996)      1979–1991
Investment 16 Asset growth                     Cooper, Gulen, and Schill (2008)         1968–2003
and growth 17 Growth in inventory              Thomas and Zhang (2002)                  1970–1997
              18 Sales growth                  Lakonishok, Shleifer, and Vishny (1994) 1968–1990
              19 Sustainable growth            Lockwood and Prombutr (2010)             1964–2007
              20 Adjusted CAPX growth    ∗     Abarbanell and Bushee (1998)             1974–1993
              21 Growth in sales − inventory Abarbanell and Bushee (1998)               1974–1993
              22 Investment growth rate∗       Xing (2008)                              1964–2003
                                             ∗
              23 Abnormal capital investment Titman, Wei, and Xie (2004)                1973–1996
              24 Investment-to-capital∗        Xing (2008)                              1964–2003
              25 Investment-to-assets          Lyandres, Sun, and Zhang (2008)          1970–2005
Financing 26 Debt issuance∗                    Spiess and Affleck-Graves (1999)         1975–1994
              27 Leverage                      Bhandari (1988)                          1948–1979
              28 One-year share issuance       Pontiff and Woodgate (2008)              1970–2003
              29 Five-year share issuance      Daniel and Titman (2006)                 1968–2003
              30 Total external financing∗     Bradshaw, Richardson, and Sloan (2006) 1971–2000
Distress      31 O-Score                       Dichev (1998)                            1981–1995
              32 Z-Score∗                      Dichev (1998)                            1981–1995
              33 Distress risk                 Campbell, Hilscher, and Szilagyi (2008) 1963–2003
Composite 34 Piotroski’s F-score               Piotroski (2000)                         1976–1996
anomalies 35 M/B and accruals∗                 Bartov and Kim (2004)                    1981–2000
              36 QMJ: Profitability            Asness, Frazzini, and Pedersen (2013)    1956–2012




                                               54
Table 5: In-sample average returns and CAPM and three-factor model alphas for
36 anomalies

This table reports monthly average returns, CAPM alphas, and three-factor model alphas for
the 36 anomalies described in Appendix A. Every anomaly is constructed as an HML-like
factor by sorting stocks first into six portfolios by size and the anomaly variable at the end of
each June. The sorts use the 50 and 30/70 NYSE breakpoints. The return on the anomaly
factor is the average return on the two high portfolios minus that on the two low portfolios.
The high and low labels are chosen based on the original study so that the stocks in the high
portfolio earn higher returns than those in the low portfolios. The sample periods, which are
the same as those used in the original studies, are reported in Table 4.




                                               55
                                                Average
                                                 return           CAPM               FF3
Category        Anomaly                          r̄   t(r̄)       α̂   t(α̂)       α̂      t(α̂)
Profitability   Gross profitability           0.22    2.27     0.18    1.88     0.39       5.01
                Operating profitability       0.30    3.47     0.26    3.05     0.34       4.13
                Return on assets              0.07    0.52     0.07    0.52     0.44       4.50
                Return on equity              0.20    1.51     0.16    1.20     0.41       3.65
                Profit margin                 0.40    2.09     0.57    3.31     0.41       3.31
                Change in asset turnover      0.44    4.41     0.47    4.82     0.47       4.94
Earnings        Accruals                      0.23    2.76     0.29    3.66     0.21       2.77
quality         Earnings consistency          0.61    3.21     0.49    2.66     0.48       2.61
                Net operating assets          0.36    5.04     0.34    4.83     0.38       5.56
                Net working capital changes   0.19    2.08     0.21    2.34     0.23       2.46
Valuation       Book-to-market                0.43    3.08     0.50    3.80
                Cash flow-to-price            0.65    4.17     0.71    4.91     0.22    3.58
                Earnings-to-price             0.47    3.19     0.58    4.17     0.35    3.82
                Enterprise multiple           0.42    4.07     0.50    5.28     0.21    3.27
                Sales-to-price                0.39    2.38     0.40    2.35     0.10    0.87
Investment      Asset growth                  0.38    3.97     0.46    5.36     0.22    3.36
and growth      Growth in inventory           0.24    2.80     0.32    4.02     0.14    2.13
                Sales growth                  0.17    1.58     0.22    2.10     0.01    0.07
                Sustainable growth            0.18    2.02     0.27    3.26     0.03    0.43
                Adjusted CAPX growth          0.20    3.05     0.22    3.43     0.13    2.06
                Growth in sales − inventory   0.31    4.00     0.30    3.85     0.32    3.90
                Investment growth rate        0.23    4.39     0.26    5.41     0.19    3.97
                Abnormal capital investment   0.20    3.45     0.20    3.49     0.15    2.66
                Investment-to-capital         0.16    1.38     0.31    3.20     0.05    0.74
                Investment-to-assets          0.26    3.11     0.32    4.07     0.15    2.12
Financing       Debt issuance                 0.20    4.74     0.18    4.32     0.20    4.74
                Leverage                      0.17    2.09     0.17    2.11    −0.01   −0.17
                One-year share issuance       0.30    3.40     0.38    4.71     0.24    3.61
                Five-year share issuance      0.23    2.82     0.29    3.94     0.18    2.88
                Total external financing      0.34    3.03     0.49    5.38     0.37    5.16
Distress        O-Score                       0.21    1.77     0.25    2.12     0.44    4.15
                Z-Score                       0.09    0.47    −0.08  −0.49      0.46    4.24
                Distress risk                 0.30    2.44     0.45    4.09     0.48    4.82
Composite       Piotroski’s F-score           0.48    5.64     0.54    6.45     0.60    7.49
anomalies       M/B and accruals              0.61    2.33     0.86    3.36     0.31    1.59
                QMJ: Profitability            0.24    3.26     0.29    3.98     0.44    7.03




                                              56
Table 6: Average returns, CAPM alphas, and three-factor models for anomaly
categories

This table reports monthly average returns and the CAPM and three-factor model alphas
for anomalies classified by anomaly group. We estimate average returns, CAPM alphas, and
three-factor model alphas for each anomaly using pre-discovery data, the data used in the
original study, and post-discovery data. We report average measures by anomaly group. We
compute the standard errors by block bootstrapping the data by calendar month 10,000 times.
We exclude book-to-market from the list of anomalies because it is part of the three-factor
model and it has been previously extended to pre-1926 data. The post-discovery sample
excludes two anomalies, “Operating profitability” and “QMJ: Profitability,” with less than
five years of data.




                                            57
Anomaly                   Pre-discovery              Original             Post-discovery
category                 EST       t-value       EST       t-value       EST        t-value

                                                 Average returns

Profitability           −0.05       −0.41         0.27        3.89       0.06          0.62
Earnings quality         0.15        1.94         0.35        6.17       0.16          1.23
Valuation                0.17        1.59         0.48        5.10       0.23          1.74
Investment and growth    0.12        2.12         0.23        4.33       0.03          0.48
Financing                0.06        1.42         0.25        4.62       0.11          2.06
Distress                −0.02       −0.13         0.20        1.98       0.07          0.52
Composite                0.25        2.45         0.44        4.92       0.11          0.54
All except composite     0.08        2.09         0.28        8.62       0.10          2.68

                                                  CAPM alphas

Profitability            0.11         1.27        0.29       4.11        0.19          2.24
Earnings quality         0.12         1.65        0.33       6.04        0.06          0.49
Valuation                0.20         2.34        0.55       6.01        0.32          2.44
Investment and growth    0.10         2.07        0.29       6.03        0.05          0.68
Financing                0.11         2.90        0.31       6.32        0.16          3.05
Distress                 0.24         2.16        0.20       2.09        0.16          1.43
Composite                0.34         3.62        0.56       6.72        0.16          0.77
All except composite     0.13         4.42        0.32      10.87        0.14          4.06

                                             Three-factor model alphas

Profitability            0.21         3.34        0.41       7.42     0.17            2.33
Earnings quality         0.12         1.57        0.33       5.98     0.02            0.19
Valuation                0.18         2.28        0.22       4.51     0.14            2.12
Investment and growth    0.09         1.88        0.14       3.80     0.05            0.88
Financing                0.12         3.62        0.19       5.00     0.10            2.49
Distress                 0.36         4.33        0.46       6.13     0.22            2.82
Composite                0.29         3.47        0.45       6.66    −0.10           −0.72
All except composite     0.16         5.78        0.26      11.50     0.10            3.66




                                         58
Table 7: Pre- and post-discovery out-of-sample average returns and CAPM and
three-factor model alphas for 36 anomalies

This table reports average returns and the CAPM and three-factor model alphas for the 36
anomalies described in Appendix A. Panel A reports estimates for the pre-discovery periods
that pre-date the sample periods used in the original studies. Panel B uses data that have
accumulated after the end of the original sample. We exclude two anomalies, “Operating
profitability” and “QMJ: Profitability,” from Panel B because they have less than five years
of post-discovery data.




                                            59
Panel A: Pre-discovery estimates
                                                 Average
                                                  return            CAPM             FF3
Category        Anomaly                           r̄     t(r̄)       α̂ t(α̂)       α̂     t(α̂)
Profitability   Gross profitability            0.00 −0.01         0.28  1.73     0.35      2.60
                Operating profitability       -0.01 −0.07         0.17  1.11     0.22      1.65
                Return on assets              -0.13 −0.94         0.06  0.48     0.23      2.64
                Return on equity              -0.08 −0.57         0.05  0.39     0.23      2.47
                Profit margin                 -0.12 −1.02         0.01  0.05     0.14      1.60
                Change in asset turnover       0.07     0.84      0.09  1.14     0.11      1.44
Earnings        Accruals                       0.10     1.01      0.10  1.00     0.07      0.79
quality         Earnings consistency           0.18     0.67      0.04  0.16     0.07      0.27
                Net operating assets           0.10     1.26      0.08  0.93     0.09      1.13
                Net working capital changes    0.23     3.56      0.27  4.22     0.24      3.78
Valuation       Book-to-market                 0.43     2.08      0.10  0.59
                Cash flow / price              0.14     1.17      0.12  0.98     0.10    0.91
                Earnings / price               0.11     0.54      0.28  1.47     0.33    1.95
                Enterprise multiple            0.17     1.06      0.24  1.54     0.22    1.43
                Sales / price                  0.26     2.41      0.17  1.63     0.06    0.73
Investment      Asset growth                   0.06     0.59      0.03  0.27    −0.03   −0.30
and growth      Growth in inventory            0.21     2.73      0.21  2.66     0.19    2.54
                Sales growth                   0.08     0.52      0.02  0.12    −0.03   −0.20
                Sustainable growth             0.00     0.00     −0.10 −0.82    −0.15   −1.68
                Adjusted CAPX growth           0.14     1.76      0.06  0.80     0.03    0.40
                Growth in sales − inventory    0.08     0.66      0.14  1.20     0.21    2.02
                Investment growth rate         0.07     0.78      0.10  1.07     0.09    1.04
                Abnormal capital investment    0.10     0.92      0.12  1.09     0.15    1.43
                Investment-to-capital          0.19     2.13      0.18  2.00     0.17    1.88
                Investment-to-assets           0.25     3.15      0.25  3.07     0.22    2.91
Financing       Debt issuance                  0.05     0.89      0.10  1.77     0.12    2.15
                Leverage                       0.09     0.62     −0.02 −0.15    −0.04   −0.37
                One-year share issuance        0.20     2.51      0.24  2.95     0.26    3.25
                Five-year share issuance       0.08     1.15      0.15  2.16     0.18    2.68
                Total external financing      -0.14 −1.28         0.06  0.65     0.11    1.42
Distress        O-Score                        0.00     0.02      0.24  2.29     0.35    4.17
                Z-Score                       -0.14 −0.91         0.09  0.75     0.26    3.02
                Distress risk                  0.07     0.31      0.38  1.83     0.45    2.66
Composite       Piotroski’s F-score            0.06     0.61      0.14  1.34     0.18    1.87
anomalies       M/B and accruals               0.63     2.90      0.53  2.45     0.28    1.64
                QMJ: Profitability             0.04     0.18      0.36  1.72     0.42    2.30




                                               60
Panel B: Post-discovery estimates
                                                 Average
                                                  return            CAPM             FF3
Category        Anomaly                           r̄     t(r̄)       α̂ t(α̂)       α̂   t(α̂)
Profitability   Gross profitability            0.24     1.33      0.37  2.07     0.18    1.39
                Return on assets               0.19     1.21      0.36  2.60     0.42    3.34
                Return on equity               0.25     1.50      0.43  2.89     0.41    3.46
                Profit margin                 -0.31 −1.84        −0.11 −0.78    −0.07 −0.61
                Change in asset turnover      -0.06 −0.67        −0.08 −0.77    −0.08 −0.88
Earnings        Accruals                       0.15     1.69      0.13  1.38     0.13    1.44
quality         Earnings consistency           0.46     0.99      0.15  0.38     0.01    0.03
                Net operating assets           0.04     0.28     −0.02 −0.11    −0.03 −0.17
                Net working capital changes    0.00     0.04     −0.04 −0.39    −0.03 −0.37
Valuation       Book-to-market                 0.23     1.26      0.35  2.03
                Cash flow / price              0.24     1.25      0.42  2.38     0.17    2.00
                Earnings / price               0.36     2.56      0.52  4.08     0.20    2.55
                Enterprise multiple           -0.09 −0.57        −0.11 −0.64     0.03    0.27
                Sales / price                  0.41     2.26      0.46  2.56     0.15    1.45
Investment      Asset growth                   0.05     0.48      0.03  0.26     0.04    0.37
and growth      Growth in inventory            0.11     1.06      0.12  1.14     0.09    0.90
                Sales growth                  -0.06 −0.50         0.06  0.56    −0.06   −0.72
                Sustainable growth             0.09     0.64      0.08  0.54     0.20    1.80
                Adjusted CAPX growth           0.02     0.21      0.07  0.93     0.03    0.42
                Growth in sales − inventory    0.11     1.29      0.11  1.24     0.13    1.51
                Investment growth rate        -0.15 −1.64        −0.12 −1.34    −0.11   −1.29
                Abnormal capital investment    0.00     0.00      0.01  0.05     0.00   −0.03
                Investment-to-capital         -0.02 −0.19         0.03  0.22     0.04    0.41
                Investment-to-assets           0.17     1.15      0.11  0.76     0.17    1.25
Financing       Debt issuance                  0.13     1.55      0.08  0.96     0.14    2.43
                Leverage                       0.09     0.64      0.15  1.04    −0.23   −3.72
                One-year share issuance        0.04     0.42      0.11  1.21     0.11    1.38
                Five-year share issuance       0.08     0.90      0.14  1.76     0.14    1.82
                Total external financing       0.23     1.53      0.35  2.96     0.33    3.48
Distress        O-Score                       -0.08 −0.70        −0.01 −0.09     0.04    0.40
                Z-Score                       -0.04 −0.23        −0.09 −0.51     0.09    0.91
                Distress risk                  0.33     1.27      0.59  2.86     0.55    3.28
Composite       Piotroski’s F-score            0.09     0.58      0.22  1.59     0.18    1.54
anomalies       M/B and accruals               0.13     0.36      0.10  0.29    −0.38   −1.54




                                               61
Table 8: Measuring changes in average returns, alphas, and information ratios
between pre-discovey, in-sample, and post-discovery periods

This table compares the performance of the average anomaly between the sample period used
in the original study (original sample) and the periods that predate or follow the original
sample period (pre- and post-discovery samples). Panel A uses data starting in July 1926.
Panel B uses data back to July 1938. We estimate average monthly returns, variance ratios,
annualized volatilities, CAPM alphas, and three-factor model alphas for 36 of the anomalies
listed in the Appendix. The list of anomalies excludes book-to-market, and the post-discovery
anomaly list additionally excludes the two anomalies, “Operating profitability” and “QMJ:
Profitability,” with less than five years of post-discovery out-of-sample data. Variance ratio
is the variance of factor returns divided by the return variance of a randomized factor. The
randomized factor takes the same stocks as the actual factor and randomly sorts them into
low, neutral, and high√ portfolios. Annualized information ratios from the CAPM and three-
factor models equal 12 × α̂/σ̂ε , where σ̂ε is the volatility of the regression residuals. We
report t-values in parentheses. We compute the standard errors by block bootstrapping the
data by calendar month 10,000 times.




                                             62
Panel A: Full pre-1963 sample
                         Pre-                   Post-                Differences
                    discovery   Original    discovery           Pre         Post    Post
Measure               sample     sample       sample      − Original − Original    − Pre

                                             Average returns

Average return          0.08        0.28          0.10        −0.21       −0.19      0.02
                       (2.09)      (8.62)        (2.68)      (−4.35)     (−4.64)    (0.36)
Sharpe ratio            0.13        0.55          0.13        −0.43       −0.42      0.00
                       (2.64)      (8.74)        (1.82)      (−5.51)     (−4.66)    (0.01)
Excess volatility       3.69        3.46         3.64          0.23        0.21     −0.03
                       (4.12)     (15.98)      (12.16)        (0.34)      (1.04)   (−0.04)
                                                    CAPM

Alpha                   0.13        0.32          0.14        −0.19       −0.18      0.01
                       (4.42)     (10.87)        (4.06)      (−4.63)     (−4.58)    (0.21)
Information ratio       0.19        0.65          0.23        −0.46       −0.43      0.03
                       (4.11)     (10.43)        (2.87)      (−6.03)     (−4.52)    (0.37)

                                            Three-factor model

Alpha                   0.16        0.26          0.10        −0.11       −0.16     −0.05
                       (5.78)     (11.50)        (3.66)      (−3.05)     (−4.55)   (−1.33)
Information ratio       0.24        0.63          0.24        −0.39       −0.40     −0.01
                       (5.04)     (10.93)        (3.02)      (−5.27)     (−4.23)   (−0.09)




                                            63
Panel B: Pre-1963 sample without the pre-Securities and Exchange Act data
                        Pre-                  Post-              Differences
                   discovery   Original discovery           Pre         Post    Post
Measure              sample     sample      sample − Original − Original       − Pre

                                            Average returns

Average return          0.08       0.28          0.10     −0.20       −0.19      0.01
                       (2.81)     (8.59)        (2.66)   (−4.51)     (−4.64)    (0.24)
Sharpe ratio            0.16       0.55          0.13     −0.40       −0.42     −0.03
                       (2.62)     (8.79)        (1.80)   (−4.65)     (−4.67)   (−0.27)
Excess volatility       3.24       3.46        3.64       −0.22        0.21      0.45
                       (2.48)    (15.94)     (12.09)     (−0.24)      (1.03)    (0.51)
                                                   CAPM

Alpha                   0.12       0.32          0.14     −0.20       −0.18      0.02
                       (5.23)    (10.75)        (4.03)   (−5.22)     (−4.58)    (0.39)
Information ratio       0.23       0.65          0.23     −0.43       −0.43      0.00
                       (4.21)    (10.44)        (2.83)   (−5.25)     (−4.53)   (−0.02)

                                           Three-factor model

Alpha                   0.15       0.26          0.10     −0.12       −0.16     −0.04
                       (5.94)    (11.45)        (3.62)   (−3.52)     (−4.57)   (−1.02)
Information ratio       0.29       0.63          0.24     −0.34       −0.40     −0.05
                       (5.67)    (10.94)        (2.98)   (−4.48)     (−4.26)   (−0.54)




                                           64
               Table 9: Changes in the correlation structure of returns

This table reports estimates from two panel regressions that explain monthly anomaly returns
using the average returns on all other anomalies that are either in-sample or out-of-sample. In
the first regression, posti,t takes the value of one if anomaly i is in the post-discovery out-of-
sample period in month t and zero otherwise; in-sample index−i,t is the average return on all
anomalies except anomaly i that are in-sample in month t; and post-sample index−i,t is the
average return on all anomalies except anomaly i that are in the post-discovery out-of-sample
period in month t. In the second regression, prei,t takes the value of one if anomaly i is in
the pre-discovery out-of-sample period in month t and zero otherwise; in-sample index−i,t is
the average return on all anomalies except anomaly i that are in-sample in month t; and
pre-sample index−i,t is the average return on all anomalies except anomaly i that are in the
pre-discovery out-of-sample period in month t. The interaction terms measure the changes in
correlations when an anomaly moves from being in sample to being out of sample. t-values
are computed by clustering standard errors by calendar month.




                                               65
Regressor                                 Coefficient                   t-value

              Regression 1: In-sample versus post-discovery anomalies

Intercept                                       0.09                      6.72
Main effects
  In-sample index−i,t                          0.59                     16.13
  Post-sample index−i,t                        0.09                      8.67
  Posti,t                                     −0.10                     −4.31
Interactions
  Posti,t × In-sample index−i,t               −0.42                     −9.90
  Posti,t × Post-sample index−i,t              0.46                     11.28

Adjusted R2                                                8.7%
N                                                         15,152

               Regression 2: In-sample versus pre-discovery anomalies

Intercept                                       0.10                      4.83
Main effects
  In-sample index−i,t                          0.62                     15.16
  Pre-sample index−i,t                         0.06                      2.68
  Prei,t                                      −0.05                     −2.04
Interactions
  Prei,t × In-sample index−i,t                −0.62                     −13.54
  Prei,t × Pre-sample index−i,t                0.36                       8.11

Adjusted R2                                                4.0%
N                                                         13,680




                                         66
Figure A1: Cross sections of anomaly variables, 1926–2015. This figure displays the
decile breakpoints for 28 of the anomalies described in the Appendix between 1926 and 2015.
Figure 2 shows the decile breakpoints for two additional anomalies, operating profitability
and asset growth, that are discussed in the main text. This figure does not include the five
anomalies that are defined as discrete signals (debt issuance; market-to-book and accruals;
one-year and five-year share issuances; Piotroski’s F-score) and QMJ: Profitability, which, by
definition, has the same distribution in every cross section. The thick red line corresponds to
the distribution’s median. We compute the distributions at the end of June each year and
use accounting data from the fiscal year that ended at least six months before. The dotted
vertical lines indicate the year 1963.

             Gross pro-tability            Return on assets              Return on equity
                                    0:2
      0:6                                                         0:2
      0:4                             0
                                                                    0
      0:2
                                   !0:2                          !0:2
        0


               Pro-t margin           Change in asset turnover               Accruals
     0:4                            0:5
     0:2                                                            0
       0                                                         !0:2
                                      0
    !0:2                                                         !0:4
    !0:4                                                         !0:6
                                   !0:5
    !0:6

            Earnings consistency          Net operating assets     Net working capital changes
                                                                  0:2
     1:5                              1
       1                                                          0:1
     0:5                            0:5                             0
       0
    !0:5                                                         !0:1
                                      0

              Book-to-market               Cash .ow-to-price             Earnings-to-price
       10                             3                           0:5
                                      2
                                                                    0
        5                             1
                                      0                          !0:5

        0                           !1                            !1

            Enterprise multiple              Sales-to-price             Growth in inventory
                                     15
       20
                                     10                           0:1
       10                             5                             0

        0                             0                          !0:1
                                                 67
            Sales growth                  Sustainable growth          Adjusted CAPX growth
  10                                                              2
                                  0:5
                                                                  0
                                    0
   5                                                             !2
                                 !0:5

  Growth in sales ! inventory           Investment growth rate   Abnormal capital investment
                                   10                             6
 0:5
                                                                  4
   0                                5
!0:5                                                              2
 !1                                 0                             0

        Investment-to-capital            Investment-to-assets               Leverage
   3
                                  0:2                             4
   2
   1                                0                             2

   0                             !0:2                             0

       Total external -nancing                 O-Score                      Z-Score
 0:6                                5                            20
 0:4
                                    0
 0:2                                                             10
   0                              !5
!0:2                                                              0

            Distress risk
   0

 !5

!10




                                                68
Table A1: Monthly average returns, CAPM alphas, and three-factor model alphas
for anomalies and their approximations

This table shows the monthly average returns and the CAPM and three-factor model alphas
for the 14 anomalies that we define differently from the original study. Moody’s manuals do
not contain SG&A expenses (XSGA), taxes payable (TXP), capital expenditures (CAPX),
debt issuances (DLTIS), and retained earnings (RE). We leave out XSGA and TXP, approx-
imate CAPX as the change in the plant, property, and equipment plus depreciation (or zero,
whichever is greater), approximate debt issuance as the change in the outstanding short-term
and long-term debt on the balance sheet, and approximate retained earnings by the sum of
the retained earnings and capital surplus. We also approximate equity issuance as the number
of adjusted shares outstanding times the market value of the company.




                                            69
                                                             Original          Approximation
Anomaly                       Approximation                r̄ α̂capm   α̂ff3    r̄ α̂capm   α̂ff3
Operating profitability       No SG&A                   0.25   0.31   0.35   0.31   0.27   0.35
                                                       (2.88) (3.56) (4.26) (3.52) (3.08) (4.13)
Return on assets              Annual data and annual    0.51   0.46   0.87   0.05   0.05   0.41
                              rebalancing              (3.10) (2.81) (7.11) (0.37) (0.37) (4.17)
Return on equity              Annual data and annual    0.71   0.65   0.94   0.15   0.09   0.37
                              rebalancing              (4.50) (4.13) (7.05) (1.12) (0.67) (3.29)
Accruals                      No taxes payable          0.21   0.27   0.16   0.22   0.28   0.19
                                                       (2.46) (3.31) (2.26) (2.50) (3.35) (2.51)
Enterprise multiple           Liquidation value of      0.42   0.50   0.21   0.42   0.51   0.21
                              preferred stock          (4.02) (5.28) (3.31) (4.04) (5.28) (3.31)
Adjusted CAPX growth          CAPX approximated         0.29   0.33   0.22   0.15   0.17   0.10
                                                       (4.18) (4.79) (3.37) (2.39) (2.71) (1.59)
Investment growth rate        CAPX approximated         0.27   0.32   0.21   0.18   0.20   0.12
                                                       (4.38) (5.46) (3.87) (3.60) (4.07) (2.62)
Abnormal capital investment   CAPX approximated         0.21   0.20   0.18   0.18   0.17   0.14
                                                       (3.24) (3.19) (2.76) (3.09) (2.89) (2.37)
Investment-to-capital         CAPX approximated         0.14   0.31   0.00   0.19   0.34   0.06
                                                       (1.09) (2.82)(−0.04) (1.56) (3.29) (0.79)
Debt issuance                 Debt issuance from the    0.04   0.03   0.10   0.15   0.13   0.17
                              balance sheet            (0.60) (0.46) (1.56) (3.29) (2.83) (3.68)
Total external financing      Equity and debt           0.36   0.50   0.37   0.21   0.33   0.25
                              issuances approximated   (3.11) (5.01) (4.66) (2.19) (3.95) (3.60)
Altman’s Z-score              No TXP; CAPS added        0.08 −0.08    0.45   0.10 −0.08    0.45
                              to RE                    (0.45)(−0.50) (3.83) (0.50)(−0.48) (3.97)
Financial distress            Annual data               0.36   0.45   0.62   0.22   0.30   0.36
                                                       (2.25) (2.86) (4.15) (1.47) (2.14) (2.57)
M/B and accruals              No taxes payable          0.66   0.90   0.40   0.69   0.93   0.41
                                                       (2.64) (3.75) (2.12) (2.65) (3.72) (2.10)




                                              70
        Table A2: Predicting annual anomaly returns with anomaly spreads

This table reports estimates from OLS regressions that predict annual anomaly returns with
anomaly spreads. Anomaly spread is computed from the same six portfolios that are used to
construct the anomaly factors. In the case of book-to-market, for example, we compute average
book-to-markets for the six portfolios, and define value spread as the average book-to-market
of the two high portfolios minus the average book-to-market of the two low portfolios. These
regressions do not include the five anomalies that are defined as discrete signals (debt issuance;
market-to-book and accruals; one-year and five-year share issuances; Piotroski’s F-score) or
QMJ: Profitability, which, by definition, has the same distribution in every cross section. The
bottom row reports the estimates from a pooled regression. This pooled regression uses a
normalized spread, which is defined as the percentile rank of the spread within each anomaly.
This pooled regression clusters standard errors by year.




                                               71
                                                     Intercept       Slope       Adjusted
Category            Anomaly                        EST t-value    EST t-value         R2
Profitability       Gross profitability           −0.12 −1.24     0.26    1.40      1.1%
                    Operating profitability       −0.01 −0.20     0.02    1.18      0.4%
                    Return on assets              −0.02 −0.38     0.07    0.31     −1.0%
                    Return on equity               0.00     0.18  0.02    0.56     −0.8%
                    Profit margin                 −0.01 −0.61     0.00    0.11     −1.1%
                    Change in asset turnover       0.03     1.35 −0.05 −0.86       −0.3%
Earnings            Accruals                       0.03     2.10 −0.03 −0.76       −0.5%
quality             Earnings consistency           0.04     0.78  0.04    0.43     −1.1%
                    Net operating assets           0.00 −0.02     0.05    0.79     −0.4%
                    Net working capital changes    0.02     0.39  0.09    0.33     −1.0%
Valuation           Book-to-market                −0.01 −0.18     0.02    3.49     11.3%
                    Cash flow-to-price             0.02     0.63  0.05    0.69     −0.6%
                    Earnings-to-price              0.10     3.34 −0.21 −2.43        5.3%
                    Enterprise multiple            0.01     0.19  0.00    1.21      0.5%
                    Sales-to-price                −0.07 −2.20     0.02    4.05     14.9%
Investment          Asset growth                  −0.02 −0.76     0.09    2.22      4.3%
and growth          Growth in inventory            0.01     0.44  0.14    0.45     −0.9%
                    Sales growth                  −0.12 −0.94     0.02    1.05      0.1%
                    Sustainable growth             0.00     0.11  0.02    0.62     −0.7%
                    Adjusted CAPX growth           0.02     0.68  0.00    0.05     −1.1%
                    Growth in sales − inventory    0.02     1.95  0.00    0.15     −1.1%
                    Investment growth rate         0.00 −0.20     0.01    1.51      1.4%
                    Abnormal capital investment    0.00 −0.07     0.01    0.65     −0.7%
                    Investment to capital          0.02     1.95  0.00    1.57      1.7%
                    Investment-to-assets          −0.01 −0.18     0.17    1.18      0.4%
Financing           Leverage                      −0.01 −0.28     0.01    1.46      1.3%
                    Total external financing      −0.08 −2.64     0.22    3.21      9.6%
Distress            O-Score                       −0.04 −0.54     0.01    0.52     −0.8%
                    Z-Score                       −0.01 −0.18     0.00 −0.16       −1.1%
                    Distress risk                  0.03     0.94  0.00 −0.06       −1.2%
Pooled regression                                  0.00   0.43    0.04   2.96       0.8%




                                           72
