                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                RELATIONSHIP LENDING AND THE GREAT DEPRESSION

                                           Jon Cohen
                                      Kinda Cheryl Hachem
                                        Gary Richardson

                                       Working Paper 22891
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w22891


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                          December 2016, Revised January 2020




We thank Joseph Johnson, Padma Sharma, and Daniel Tracht for excellent research assistance.
We also thank Ben Bernanke, Gabe Chodorow-Reich, Oli Coibion, Jonathan Dingel, Joe
Haubrich, Erik Hurst, Chris Koch, Fabrizio Perri, Johannes Wieland, and three anonymous
referees, as well as seminar and conference participants at Chicago Booth, UW-Madison, FRB
Cleveland, NBER SI 2016 Monetary Economics, the 2018 Texas Monetary Conference, and the
University of Michigan for helpful comments. Kinda Hachem thanks Chicago Booth for financial
support in earlier stages of this work. The views in this paper are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond, the Federal Reserve
System, or the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2016 by Jon Cohen, Kinda Cheryl Hachem, and Gary Richardson. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Relationship Lending and the Great Depression
Jon Cohen, Kinda Cheryl Hachem, and Gary Richardson
NBER Working Paper No. 22891
December 2016, Revised January 2020
JEL No. E44,G01,G21,L14,N22

                                         ABSTRACT

The collapse of long-term lending relationships amplified the Great Depression. We demonstrate
this by developing a new measure of lending relationships that can be calculated from widely
available data at any level of aggregation. Our approach exploits differences in the
responsiveness of loan rates to bank funding costs and is supported by historical evidence and
theoretical arguments. The new measure reveals that the marginal impact of bank suspensions on
economic activity was higher in more relationship-intensive areas, providing the first formal
evidence that relationship lending propagated the real effects of banking sector distress in the
early 1930s.

Jon Cohen                                      Gary Richardson
Department of Economics                        Department of Economics
University of Toronto                          University of California, Irvine
Max Gluskin House                              3155 Social Sciences Plaza
150 St. George Street, 322                     Irvine, CA 92697-5100
Toronto, Ontario M5S 3G7                       and NBER
Canada                                         garyr@uci.edu
jon.cohen@utoronto.ca

Kinda Cheryl Hachem
University of Virginia
Darden School of Business
100 Darden Boulevard
Charlottesville, VA 22906
and NBER
hachemk@darden.virginia.edu
1     Introduction

The Great Depression was the longest and deepest downturn in U.S. history. Scholars have
long debated how the collapse of commercial banking in the early 1930s contributed to the
contraction of commerce and industry. The pioneering work of Bernanke (1983) inspired a
large literature that seeks to estimate the size and signi…cance of this credit channel. The
assumption that underlies almost all of these papers is that bank suspensions had real e¤ects
because they destroyed – or at the very least prevented the immediate redeployment of –
some critical input into the bank lending process that impacts the cost of credit. Absent
this assumption, it is di¢ cult to explain why bank suspensions would contribute to such a
deep and protracted decline in economic activity. But what exactly was this critical input
and why was it so di¢ cult to redeploy? Despite the abundant scholarship on the Great
Depression, data limitations have impeded attempts to answer this question.
    In this paper, we demonstrate that the critical input impaired by bank suspensions was
the soft information that banks had acquired about the quality of their borrowers over the
course of multi-period lending relationships. Soft information cannot be directly observed
by the econometrician and the type of microeconomic data on bank-…rm interactions used
to construct proxies for it in modern analyses of relationship lending are unavailable for the
1920s and 1930s. We resolve this problem by developing a new measure of continuing lending
relationships that can be constructed from data aggregated at any level or frequency, enabling
comparison to the time-series and panel data typically analyzed by macroeconomists. We
then use our measure to show that disruptions to continuing relationships as a result of bank
suspensions in the early 1930s contributed to the severity of the Great Depression.
    Our measure is based on the idea that loan rates charged in continuing relationships are
less responsive to changes in bank funding costs than are those charged on other loans. We
start by comparing average interest rates on two types of bank loans: one that historical
sources describe as relational (commercial loans) and one that they describe as transactional
(brokers’ loans). We …nd that the average interest rate on the relationship loans was less

                                              2
responsive to changes in bank funding costs than was the average interest rate on the trans-
actional loans. We present a model based on Hachem (2011) to help understand why this
was the case. We choose this model because its assumptions are consistent with the insti-
tutional details of the period we study, namely the short-term and uncollateralized nature
of commercial loans, the potential sequencing of these loans as part of longer-term lending
relationships, and the competitive nature of bank lending.
   At the heart of the model are the asymmetric information problems inherent in …nancial
intermediation. The …rst is adverse selection, which exists because borrowers have private
information about their ability to operate certain projects. The second is moral hazard,
where higher loan rates increase a borrower’s incentive to undertake projects with high
default risk. Moral hazard generates a threshold loan rate above which borrowers shift
their unobservable e¤orts towards riskier projects. Heterogeneous ability implies that this
threshold depends on the borrower’s type. A continuing relationship lender is able to use
information gleaned about his borrower’s type during previous interactions to determine the
threshold and decide whether or not to pass an increase in bank funding costs through to
the borrower. New relationship lenders and/or transactional lenders cannot condition this
decision on the borrower’s type because they lack information about it.
   The model predicts that the incentive compatible contract o¤ered by a continuing re-
lationship lender eliminates risk-shifting by reducing the pass-through from bank funding
costs to loan rates for some borrowers. From this, it can be shown that relationship loan
rates are on average less elastic with respect to bank funding costs than are transactional
loan rates. The di¤erence is driven by continuing rather than new relationships. Moreover,
the elasticity of the weighted average of all loan rates in a region is decreasing in the degree
to which that region’s banks are engaged in continuing relationships. Our new measure of
continuing lending relationships is based on this last prediction.
   We use data from the consolidated balance sheets and income statements of national
banks, as reported by the Comptroller of the Currency in the 1920s, to implement our


                                               3
measure for the eve of the Great Depression. These data allow us to infer the weighted
average loan rate at a semi-annual frequency for 82 locations, generating a panel with which
we can calculate the elasticity of the loan rate with respect to the marginal cost of funds
for banks (the discount rate) in each location. To control for location-speci…c di¤erences in
rates of return and their responsiveness, we also calculate the elasticity of securities returns
with respect to the discount rate in each location and use the net elasticity as a gauge of loan
rate responsiveness. Regions with relatively less elastic loan rates are those where the theory
predicts bank portfolios contained a higher proportion of information-intensive continuing
relationship loans. We rule out concentration of the local banking market and di¤erential
demand for credit as alternative explanations for the cross-sectional variation in net elasticity.
Our measure detects more continuing relationships in areas where historical sources believe
relationship lending prevailed, such as rural areas with small banks. That being said, we
verify the economic content of net elasticity over and above other local characteristics by
controlling for them in our cross-sectional regressions.
   Using our new measure, we proceed to study the importance of relationship lending
for understanding the real e¤ects of banking distress in the early 1930s. Net elasticity is
not correlated with banking distress, indicating that suspensions were not more common in
relationship-intensive areas. We estimate that bank suspensions alone explain one-eighth of
the national economic contraction observed during the Great Depression. Equally important,
we show that the marginal impact of bank suspensions on economic activity was more severe
in areas with more continuing relationships, other things the same. In other words, the
destruction of continuing relationships ampli…ed the Great Depression. The interaction
between banking distress in the early 1930s and our measure of continuing relationships
in the 1920s is a statistically signi…cant predictor of cross-sectional di¤erences in economic
performance in both 1933 and 1935, suggesting that the real e¤ects of destroying continuing
relationships were long-lived.1 Although Calomiris and Mason (2003), Richardson and Troost
   1
       Rajan and Ramcharan (2016) also observe lingering e¤ects of the Depression, but, unlike


                                                4
(2009), Ziebarth (2013), and Carlson and Rose (2015) all …nd evidence that the collapse of
commercial banks adversely a¤ected the availability of credit and thus the activities of …rms
during this period, none, due to data limitations, manages to isolate the role of relationship
lending in propagating the real e¤ects of banking sector distress.2
   In keeping with Bernanke (1983) and others, we focus on the Great Depression. No other
crisis comes close in terms of the dimensions of the downturn and the largely unfettered
nature of the banking panics. However, the value of our methodology transcends resolution
of data limitations in the 1920s and 1930s. Policy-makers working in real time, often in crisis
situations, usually have only aggregate data to inform them about what is happening at more
disaggregated levels. Our method permits the extraction of more detailed information from
these aggregates. Our …ndings also transcend the historical context of the Great Depression.
Relationship lending remains a principal source of working capital in many parts of the world,
facilitating the allocation of scarce …nancial resources to the full range of credit-worthy …rms.
The soft information on which these relationships depend is intrinsically di¢ cult to transfer
from one bank to another. Our results suggest that the ‡ow of funds is more likely to be
disrupted by failures of lenders who have accumulated knowledge of their borrowers through
continuing relationships than by failures of those in the early stages of new relationships or
of those who extend credit transactionally. This is a valuable lesson as policy-makers debate
the scope for bank bailouts and the parameters of government safety nets.
   The rest of the paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 provides historical background on
us, focus on banking concentration post-WWII, not on economic activity in the 1930s and
the role of relationship lending.
   2
     In contrast to the mainstream view, Cole and Ohanian (2007) argue that the collapse
of the U.S. banking system in the early 1930s had few real economic e¤ects, citing weak
correlation between bank failures and economic outcomes, even at the state level. On this
point, our results suggest that the correlation would be much stronger if calculated using
only bank failures that destroyed continuing relationships.



                                               5
the lending activities of Depression-era commercial banks to motivate our new measure of
continuing lending relationships. Section 3 presents theoretical foundations for this measure
and Section 4 describes its empirical implementation for the 1920s. Section 5 presents the
key empirical results, using cross-sectional di¤erences in continuing relationships in the 1920s
to pinpoint the real e¤ects of banking distress in the early 1930s. Section 6 concludes.



2        Historical Background

This section reviews the lending activities of Depression-era commercial banks and furnishes
new stylized facts about the responsiveness of interest rates to motivate a new measure of
continuing lending relationships that overcomes data limitations.


2.1        Relationship Versus Transactional Loans

The annual report of the Comptroller of the Currency provides information on U.S. bank
balance sheets in the 1920s and 1930s in a format that is consistent across geographic lo-
cations. Up until 1928, the Comptroller divided bank loans into four categories: (i) real
estate loans, (ii) loans on …nancial securities, (iii) uncollateralized loans, and (iv) loans col-
lateralized by personal security. The last category consists primarily of loans secured by
di¢ cult-to-evaluate collateral such as goods in the process of production and distribution,
warehouse receipts, and, in the case of farm loans, future crops.3
    The sum of (iii) and (iv) constitutes commercial lending and is the largest category overall,
accounting for an average of 67% of loans by national banks during the 1920s. In the years
just prior to the Great Depression, almost 50% of national bank loans were uncollateralized,
with another 10% collateralized by personal security. Category (ii), which consisted largely
    3
        After 1928, the Comptroller combined uncollateralized loans and loans collateralized by
personal security into one category and re…ned somewhat the criteria for loans on …nancial
securities in line with the Fed’s 1929 direct action campaign.


                                                6
of loans to brokers, was the second largest category, accounting for an average of 28% of
national bank loans during the 1920s. Category (i), real estate loans, was the smallest
category, accounting for only 5% of lending by national banks over the same period.
   Loans to brokers were short-term (e.g., call loans or 90-day time loans) and facilitated
the purchase of stocks and bonds. Historical sources are unequivocal about the lack of
relationship lending in brokers’loans. These loans were “usually made on an impersonal basis
with the borrower and lender dealing through agents”and “not connected with established
customer relationships” (Board of Governors 1943, p. 425). Thomas (1935) further notes
that in the U.S., contrary to practices in London, the agents made little inquiry into the
borrower’s credit-worthiness. Brokers’ loans in the U.S. were thus purely transactional,
with no decisions made on the basis of soft information gathered in previous periods. The
transactional nature of brokers’loans is also emphasized by Currie (1931).
   In contrast, commercial lending, which provided working capital to merchants and man-
ufacturers, was a prime venue for relationship building (e.g., Miller (1927), Foulke and
Prochnow (1939)). The maturity of bank loans to commercial clients typically ranged from
one to six months and never exceeded one year.4 As noted earlier, commercial loans were
either uncollateralized or collateralized by goods in the process of production and distrib-
ution. Such goods were di¢ cult to value, costly to repossess, and, if liquidated, could be
sold only with a long delay and/or at a considerable loss. For all intents and purposes, then,
commercial loans were an unsecured form of lending. As a result, these loans tended to be
relationship-based, in that …rms borrowed repeatedly from the same bank, often also ob-
taining deposit, payment, and other intermediation services from this bank. This approach
allowed banks to incorporate information acquired during the initial loan period into future
credit terms, including the possibility of discontinuing the relationship (Langston (1921)).
   4
       To be eligible for use as collateral at a Federal Reserve Bank’s discount window, com-
mercial loans had to mature in 180 days or less if collateralized by agricultural commodities
and 90 days or less otherwise.


                                               7
   The commercial lending activities of Depression-era banks thus involved the production
and use of information. This information was “soft” because it was acquired gradually
through repeated personal interactions between banks and their clients. Personal interac-
tions generate assessments of borrower quality that are di¢ cult to standardize, transfer, or
replicate without …rst replicating the entire relationship. Hard information instead involves
facts that can be easily obtained prior to origination. By and large, businesses most depen-
dent on banks for commercial loans were small with little or no public record. Surveys by the
Department of Commerce and the National Industrial Conference Board determined that
86% of small manufacturing …rms in 1929 and 72% of retailers, many of whom sold $12,000
or less of goods annually, depended on banks for working capital (DOC 1935, pp. 65-66;
NICB 1932, p. 62).5 Small, new, or otherwise opaque …rms know their intrinsic quality and
their motivation to acquire and repay credit; their banks do not but can learn by cultivating
a lending relationship.6
   Within the set of relationship loans, then, it is important to separate loans made as
part of a continuing relationship from …rst-time relationship loans. Since soft information
on borrower quality is accumulated over time through repeated interactions, it is embodied
in continuing relationships, not new ones. Suspending a bank also suspends its accumu-
lated knowledge and, because it would take time for other banks to replicate the underlying
relationships, the ‡ow of funds to …rms will be disrupted. We thus need to distinguish be-
   5
       Small manufacturers (i.e., those with no more than 250 employees) comprised 97% of all
manufacturing …rms in the U.S. and employed 48% of all manufacturing workers.
  6
    While banks often had boards of local businessmen who could help assess the quality
of …rms in the community, repeated relationships allowed banks to accumulate information
that even the best informed local businessman would not have had (e.g., high-frequency cash
‡ow data obtained by monitoring the …rm’s deposit accounts, the identities of all parties that
the …rm paid by check or received checks from, proprietary business plans, etc.). This may
have even contributed to local businessmen wanting to be on bank boards in the …rst place.



                                               8
tween new and continuing relationships and focus sharply on the latter in order to accurately
estimate the real e¤ects of …nancial crises.
   The available data on loan quantities in the 1920s and 1930s do not distinguish between
stages of a commercial lending relationship: the Comptroller does not divide commercial
loans in this way and we cannot use loan-level data to track interactions between borrower
and lender pairs, as is often done in modern analyses of relationship lending, because such
data do not exist for a representative sample of banks and …rms in our period.7 To overcome
these data limitations, we propose to do with price what we cannot do with quantity. Specif-
ically, we argue that interest income can be used to construct a measure that distinguishes
not only between relationship and transactional loans but also between new and continuing
relationships. The rest of this section provides some motivating evidence on the information
content of interest rates using the distinction between relationship and transactional loans.


2.2      Interest Rate Responsiveness

In the decades surrounding the Great Depression, the Federal Reserve tracked interest rates
on several types of bank loans in New York City. Figure 1 plots monthly average interest
rates on new 90-day brokers’loans (black dots) and one-to-six month loans to commercial
clients (gray dots) for the period January 1919 to December 1938. We also plot the marginal
cost of funding a bank loan in New York City, as measured by the discount rate set by the
Federal Reserve Bank of New York (black line).8
   7
       Modern analyses include Berger and Udell (1995), Ongena and Smith (2001), Elsas
(2005), and Chodorow-Reich (2014). In other contexts where data are a constraint, the use
of historical narratives has often proved fruitful (Romer and Romer (1989, 2004, 2015)).
However, we have yet to …nd a source that provides consistent narratives of local conditions
across time and space in the Depression-era U.S.
   8
     The discount rate was the marginal cost for commercial loans because banks could fund
those loans by discounting them at the Fed. Discounting commercial loans to accommodate


                                               9
   Figure 1 shows that interest rates on brokers’loans rose swiftly and substantially when the
discount rate rose. Interest rates on commercial loans moved in the same direction, but slowly
and slightly. Even the Federal Reserve noted that “because of a variety of considerations
arising out of customer relationships,” rates on commercial loans behaved di¤erently than
rates on brokers’loans, which were arm’s length and impersonal (Board of Governors 1943,
p. 426). The Fed did not elaborate on these considerations (we will do so in Section 3)
but Figure 1 clearly shows that commercial loan rates and interest rates on brokers’loans
di¤ered in their responsiveness to bank funding costs despite having similar maturities.


2.2.1   Contemporaneous Responses

Table 1 presents a more formal treatment of the data plotted in Figure 1. The top panel
regresses monthly changes in the commercial loan rate on monthly changes in the discount
rate. The middle panel regresses monthly changes in the brokers’ loan rate on monthly
changes in the discount rate. Column (1) uses all observations from January 1919 to De-
cember 1938. On average, the commercial loan rate rose by 19 basis points (bps) while the
brokers’loan rate rose by 79 bps in a month when the NY Fed increased the discount rate
by 100 bps. These responses di¤er signi…cantly in statistical terms, as shown in the bottom
panel, which rejects the null hypothesis of equality at the 1% signi…cance level. Column (2)
adds month …xed e¤ects to control for any seasonal patterns in the data and reaches the
same conclusion. Compared to brokers’loan rates, commercial loan rates responded much
less substantially within a month to changes in the discount rate.
seasonal and cyclical peaks in credit demand was one of the principal motivations for the
creation of the Federal Reserve System. The Fed also needed banks to discount loans as they
were its primary source of income before it was allowed to hold securities in the 1930s. Loans
on …nancial securities were technically not discountable, but the Fed expressed concern about
banks using discount loans to invest in …nancial securities, suggesting that the discount rate
was also the marginal cost for brokers’loans and security holdings by banks more generally.


                                             10
   The rest of Table 1 demonstrates the robustness of this result. Column (3) excludes
observations where the NY Fed changed the discount rate by more than 50 bps. There are
only 8 such observations in our sample but one may be concerned that they are outliers.
Column (4) restricts the sample to months where the NY Fed’s discount rate decision is
known to have been driven by considerations outside of New York City.9 Column (5) excludes
May to September 1931 to control for the possibility that banks in New York City colluded
to keep loan rates constant after the collapse of Creditanstalt in Austria in May 1931.
Column (6) excludes observations before 1922 and after 1929 to control for economic turmoil
during the Great Depression as well as direct intervention in credit markets by the federal
government in the years following WWI and after the Depression. The columns in Table
1 reveal a consistent message: brokers’loan rates responded three to six times as much as
commercial loan rates to changes in the discount rate.


2.2.2     Cumulative Responses

Table 2 addresses the possibility that interest rates responded to the discount rate with a
lag. We regress changes in loan rates on the contemporaneous discount rate change, six
months of lagged discount rate changes, and month …xed e¤ects. Setting the coe¢ cients on
the lagged changes to zero would return the speci…cation in the second column of Table 1.
   Column (1) in Table 2 shows that, on average, when the NY Fed raised the discount
rate by 100 bps, the brokers’ loan rate rose by 78 bps in the same month and did not
exhibit any statistically signi…cant changes thereafter. The impact of discount rate changes
   9
       These months include April 1924 to February 1925 (when the NY Fed lowered rates to
help Britain return to the gold standard at its pre-war parity), February 1928 to September
1929 (when the NY Fed kept rates constant because the Federal Reserve Board forbade
it from raising rates to control stock market speculation), and October 1931 to January
1932 (when the NY Fed raised rates to stem gold out‡ows from the U.S. following Britain’s
departure from the gold standard).


                                            11
on brokers’loan rates was thus swift and substantial. The response of commercial loan rates
was di¤erent. Column (2) shows that commercial loan rates in New York City rose by 18
bps in the same month as the discount rate change and continued to rise for at least two and
perhaps as long as …ve months after it. However, the cumulative six-month response of the
commercial loan rate (43 bps) remained well below the response of the brokers’loan rate.
   Columns (3) and (4) explore the impact of discount rate changes on commercial loan rates
outside of New York City. The Fed tracked a sample of these rates and reported one average
for Northern and Eastern cities (N/E) and another for Southern and Western cities (S/W).
Each average spans several Fed districts, with discount rates varying by district because the
twelve Federal Reserve Banks had latitude to operate largely independent discount windows
during the period we study (Richardson and Troost (2009)). We report results for the
discount rate to which each average appears most responsive. All three commercial loan
rates in Table 2 (NYC, N/E, and S/W) respond only partially to changes in the discount
rate, reaching an average cumulative response of 45 bps after six months.
   Column (5) explores the impact of discount rate changes on the commercial paper rate
in New York City. Like commercial loans from banks, commercial paper …nanced goods in
the process of production and sale, in contrast to brokers’loans which …nanced the purchase
of securities. For the period we consider, the Fed kept track of interest rates on commercial
paper maturing in four to six months in New York City. This maturity is similar to that
of commercial loans. However, unlike the recipients of commercial loans, borrowers in the
commercial paper market were large, well-known …rms with good credit ratings and a public
history of repayment. There was little information left to be acquired about them and
hence no need for learning through relationship lending. Investors buying commercial paper
and banks making brokers’loans thus shared the feature that neither used soft information
acquired as part of a lending relationship.
   The two open-market rates in Table 2 (brokers’ loan rate and commercial paper rate)
behave like each other, illustrating that the di¤erence in the responsiveness of the interest


                                              12
rates plotted in Figure 1 re‡ects the nature of the loan (relational versus transactional),
not the purpose of the loan (…nancing working capital versus buying securities). The open-
market rates respond substantially to discount rate changes in the initial month, less in the
next month, and not at all after a few months. Their average cumulative response is 82
bps after six months and the null hypothesis that it equals 100 bps by the second month
cannot be rejected. The null hypothesis that the cumulative response of the open-market
rates equals that of the commercial loan rates is rejected at the 1% signi…cance level.


2.3    Discussion

The evidence in Tables 1 and 2 makes it clear that, in response to changes in the discount
rate, interest rates on bank loans to commercial customers changed less than interest rates
on loans that did not occur in the context of a lending relationship. The responsiveness of
interest rates can therefore be used to distinguish relationship loans from transactional ones.
   Why do di¤erences in responsiveness exist? Before constructing a measure around them,
it will be useful to connect the patterns in Section 2.2 to theory. Whatever model one uses, it
has to be consistent with the key institutional features of the 1920s and 1930s, namely that
the vast majority of bank loans were short-term and lending relationships were e¤ectively
uncollateralized. It must also incorporate the fact that the banking sector in the U.S., both
nationally and locally, was much less concentrated and therefore much more competitive
than it is today. Section 3 presents a model that embraces these institutional features.
   The model makes the following predictions. First, the average interest rate on relation-
ship loans will be less responsive to changes in bank funding costs than the interest rate
on transactional loans, consistent with the evidence in Tables 1 and 2. Second, the average
interest rate charged as part of a continuing relationship will be less responsive to changes
in bank funding costs than the interest rate charged at the beginning of a relationship. Con-
tinuing relationships are therefore the primary force behind the di¤erential responsiveness
of relationship and transactional loan rates found in Section 2.2. Third, the responsiveness


                                              13
of the weighted average of all loan rates in a region to bank funding costs is decreasing in
the degree to which that region’s banks are engaged in continuing relationships.
     This last prediction is important because it allows us to propose a new measure of con-
tinuing relationships that exploits changes in loan pricing over time with geographical areas
as the unit of observation. We emphasize that our measure is based on di¤erences in the
responsiveness of loan rates to bank funding costs over the course of a relationship, not on
the level of loan rates at a given point in time. Petersen and Rajan (1994) argue that lending
relationships have little e¤ect on the price of credit, but theirs is a result about the level of
loan rates in a single cross-section, not a result about changes in loan rates over time. Based
on the evidence above, the e¤ects we are interested in are potentially quite large.10



3         New Indicator of Continuing Relationships: Theory

To help interpret the evidence in Section 2, we sketch a simple model of relationship lending
based on Hachem (2011). We choose this model because its assumptions are consistent with
the historical features of national bank lending described above. We then derive a prediction
about loan rate elasticities (Section 3.3) that can be used in empirical work.


3.1        Environment

There are two stages and three periods. All agents are risk neutral. There is a continuum of
…rm types, denoted by ! and distributed uniformly over the unit interval. Types are private
information and cannot be credibly communicated by …rms. In each stage, …rm ! can operate
a limited liability production project that generates output      1   > 0 with probability p (!),
where p0 (!) > 0. The project delivers zero output otherwise. For simplicity, we consider
    10
         Recent analyses of the transmission of the Lehman shock to Italy also suggest that
relationships a¤ect the pricing of credit (e.g., Gambacorta and Mistrulli (2014), Gobbi and
Sette (2015), Bolton et al (2016)).


                                               14
p (!) linear. Output is independently distributed across …rms and stages.
   The …rm’s project requires one unit of capital input each time it is operated. Capital
is available to a mass of ex ante identical banks at an exogenous policy rate r set by the
central bank. Firms are not endowed with capital, nor can they store capital or output across
stages. The credit contracts that transfer capital from banks to …rms are uncollateralized
and mature at the end of the stage in which they are signed.
   In the …rst stage, banks are perfectly competitive and o¤er the same zero-pro…t interest
rate R1 . All interest rate decisions are subject to a risk-shifting problem. Speci…cally, …rms
can divert capital into speculative projects that deliver                 2   >   1   with probability q < p (0)
and nothing otherwise. We set q      2   = p (0)   1   to reduce notation. Banks cannot observe the
exact value of output so interest rates cannot be contingent on whether                       1   or   2   is realized.
However, the presence of output is detectable so …rms with positive output repay their banks.
   The loan rate that makes …rm ! indi¤erent between production and speculation is:

                                                   p (!) 1    q       2
                                      R (!)
                                                      p (!)   q

           0
where R (!) > 0.11 Firms select banks randomly in the …rst stage then decide which
projects to undertake. Firm ! will choose the production project in the …rst stage if and
only if R1      R (!). All agents play the …rst-stage game in the …rst period.
   At the beginning of the second period, banks and …rms face an exogenous separation
probability s 2 (0; 1). A separated …rm becomes a new …rm, drawing a new type from the
uniform distribution and playing the …rst-stage game again. An unseparated …rm continues
to the second stage and has its type discovered by its …rst-stage bank (“insider”). This
discovery after one period of lending represents the soft information that a relationship
gradually produces. The insider then decides whether to continue the relationship and
  11
       At a given loan rate R, …rm ! expects payo¤ p (!) [        1       R] from production and q [           2    R]
from speculation. R (!) is the loan rate that equates these expected payo¤s.



                                                    15
extend another unit of capital to the …rm. If the insider wants to keep the …rm, the interest
rate cannot exceed what other banks (“outsiders”) would optimally charge, else the …rm will
move to an outsider. The …rm cannot credibly communicate its type to an outsider, in the
same way that it could not credibly communicate its type when it …rst joined the insider.
The relationship thus a¤ords the insider an informational advantage over outsiders.
    All interest rate decisions in the second stage (insider and outsider) are also subject to
the risk-shifting problem, meaning …rm ! chooses the speculative project in the second stage
if and only if charged a second-stage interest rate above R (!). The insider’s o¤er maximizes
his pro…t subject to the risk-shifting problem, which he can now evaluate at the exact !, and
the ability of the …rm to move to an outsider. Outsiders are perfectly competitive and o¤er
the same zero-pro…t interest rate to …rms that endogenously separate from their insiders.
This rate will di¤er from the R1 o¤ered to new (i.e., exogenously separated) …rms because
outsiders understand they are being adversely selected by endogenously separated …rms.
    The game ends at the end of the second stage. To generate the same …rst-stage interest
rate R1 in the …rst and second periods, we model a third period where agents exogenously
separated at the beginning of the second period play the second-stage game with probability
1   s, after having played the …rst-stage game during the second period.


3.2    Equilibrium Loan Rates

The equilibrium of the model for a given policy rate r can be described with reference to two
             e and !
cuto¤ types: !     b , de…ned by p (e
                                    ! ) R (e
                                           !)        r and qR (b
                                                               !)                         e<!
                                                                    r respectively, where ! b.
We refer the reader to Hachem (2011) for a detailed proof and only describe here the results
we will build on in Section 3.3.
              e is the type on which an insider breaks even by charging R ( ) while !
    In words, !                                                                     b is the
lowest type that chooses production if charged qr . Types !         e move to outsiders and are
                                                                    !
charged a pooled interest rate qr , prompting them to choose the speculative project. Types
    e stay with their insiders and are charged interest rates that lead them to choose
! > !


                                                16
                                                                                        r
production. Speci…cally, insiders match the prevailing outsider rate                    q
                                                                                            if !   b but charge
                                                                                                   !
R ( ), which does not vary with r, if ! 2 (e  b ). If types ! 2 (e
                                           !; !                     b ) were instead charged qr ,
                                                                 !; !
they would choose the speculative project. Insiders are therefore using their soft information
to mitigate risk-shifting, incentivizing higher repayment rates and better project selection
by not passing through increases in r to some of the borrowers they retain. The economy
thus bene…ts from continuing relationships.
   For a given r, we can integrate over the type space to get the average interest rate charged
in the second stage:
                                   Z   e
                                       !            Z   b
                                                        !                Z   1
                                           r                                     r
                            R2 =             d! +           R (!) d! +             d!
                                   0       q        e
                                                    !                    b
                                                                         !       q

The region of policy-invariant loan rates is captured by the second integral. While the limits
of integration (e     b ) depend on r, the interest rates R ( ) do not.
                ! and !
   Now imagine that fraction ' of the economy follows the model just described while
fraction 1     ' is characterized by transactional lending. We de…ne a transactional loan to
be a one-period contract where the bank and …rm exogenously separate with certainty at
the end of the period. A transactional loan is similar to a …rst-stage loan, except that the
transactional lender has a continuation value of zero with the …rm. Transactional lenders
are perfectly competitive and o¤er the same zero-pro…t interest rate RT L which equates to
zero the expected pro…t from playing the …rst-stage game with a …rm of unknown type (sans
second-stage continuation value). In contrast, the …rst-stage interest rate R1 equates to zero
the sum of the expected pro…t from playing the …rst-stage game with a …rm of unknown
type and the expected continuation value from playing the second-stage game if the …rm’s
             e . Exact formulas for R1 and RT L appear in Appendix A.12
type exceeds !
  12
       Our modeling of transactional loans resembles the brokers’ loans in Section 2 in that
information is not acquired despite an information asymmetry existing between the borrower
and lender. In the commercial paper market, information was not acquired because there
was no such asymmetry. We model transactional loans more like brokers’loans because any
transactional lending by banks beyond brokers’ loans would have involved an information

                                                        17
3.3     Elasticity Prediction

The following proposition, proven in Appendix A, shows that the average interest rate on
second-stage relationship loans is less elastic with respect to the policy rate than either the
interest rate on …rst-stage relationship loans or the interest rate on transactional loans:

                             dRi r
Proposition 1 Let ei          dr Ri
                                      denote the elasticity of the interest rate Ri with respect to
the policy rate r. The elasticities satisfy e2 < min fe1 ; eT L g.


   Consider now the weighted average loan rate in the economy during the second period,
which is the main period in the model:


                             R     ' [sR1 + (1        s) R2 ] + (1   ') RT L


Assuming the exogenous separation rate s and the transactional fraction 1                 ' do not vary
in a …rst-order way with the policy rate r, we can derive:

                      dR r       'sR1      ' (1 s) R2      (1          ') RT L
                                      e1 +            e2 +                     eT L                  (1)
                      dr R        R            R                       R

        dR r                                                                    'sR1
where   dr R
               is the elasticity of R with respect to the policy rate,           R
                                                                                       is the fraction of
                                                                          '(1 s)R2
interest income that comes from …rst-stage relationship loans,               R
                                                                                     is the fraction from
                                          (1 ')RT L
second-stage relationship loans, and         R
                                                      is the fraction from transactional lending.
   Taken together with Proposition 1, Eq. (1) implies that the weighted average loan rate in
the economy will be less elastic with respect to the policy rate when banks are more heavily
engaged in continuing relationships, as measured by a higher fraction of interest income
coming from second-stage relationship loans. For our purposes, this means that areas with
less elastic loan rates are areas where continuing relationships are more substantial, other
things the same. It is this crucial insight that we exploit next in Section 4.
asymmetry given the small and private nature of bank-dependent borrowers. We refer the
reader to Hachem (2011) for a discussion of interest rates when …rm types are public.


                                                  18
4         Empirical Implementation for the 1920s

We have demonstrated that the elasticity of the weighted average loan rate with respect to
bank funding costs will be lower in areas where continuing relationships are more substantial.
We now translate our theoretical prediction into an empirical indicator of continuing lending
relationships using the type of data available for the 1920s and 1930s in the U.S., namely the
balance sheets and income statements of national banks aggregated by geographic region.13


4.1           Methodology
          `
Let       i   denote the elasticity of loan returns with respect to the discount rate in location i,
calculated prior to the Great Depression. As discussed in Section 2, the discount rate was
the marginal cost of funds for banks in the period we study. Discount rates di¤ered across
the twelve Federal Reserve districts, with each location i belonging to only one district d.
                                                   `
For location i in district d, we estimate          i   by running the regression:

                                               `       ` dec       `
                  log (ReturnOnLoans i;t ) =   i   +   i It    +   i   log (DiscountRate d;t ) + "`i;t   (2)


where t denotes time. The sample period is 1923 to 1929 and the frequency of observations in
the regression is dictated by the availability of commercial bank data in the 1920s, discussed
in more detail in Section 4.2. The dependent variable, ReturnOnLoans i;t , is calculated by
dividing the interest earnings of banks on loans in location i during date t by the stock of
bank loans in location i at the end of date t. Appendix B shows that loan returns tended
to be higher in the second half of the year. This pattern does not appear for the discount
    13
         There is little micro data on how Depression-era banks adjusted loan rates charged to
repeat customers. A survey by Ford (1928) of country banking practices in Northern Texas
is the only study we found on the issue. Interestingly, Ford did …nd that relationship lenders
often maintained a constant loan rate for borrowers they wanted to keep, even in times when
the discount rate was changing.


                                                        19
rate, the interest paid on deposits, or the return on securities discussed below. We therefore
include a dummy variable Itdec in Eq. (2) to control for seasonality in loan returns, with
Itdec = 1 if t corresponds to a six-month period ending in December.
                      `
   The intercepts     i   in Eq. (2) control for any heterogeneity across locations that was con-
stant over time. To also control for the possibility of time-varying heterogeneity unrelated to
                          `
relationship lending,     i   can be de…ned relative to the elasticity of other returns in location i
that would have been similarly a¤ected by such heterogeneity. The returns on …nancial secu-
rities held by banks provide a natural candidate. These securities portfolios had a substantial
local component, hence their returns would have moved with local conditions but not been
re‡ective of relationship lending as securities were not relationship-based. Accordingly, we
estimate the elasticity of securities returns with respect to the discount rate in each location
i prior to the Great Depression by running the regression:

                                                    s           s
                log (ReturnOnSecurities i;t ) =     i   +       i   log (DiscountRate d;t ) + "si;t          (3)


The variable ReturnOnSecurities i;t is calculated by dividing the interest earned by banks on
securities in location i during date t by the securities holdings of banks in location i at the
                                                                          s                           ` 14
end of date t. The sample period for the estimation of                    i   is the same as for      i.

   We then de…ne the net elasticity for location i in the 1920s as:

                                                            s         `
                                           N E20i           i         i



If N E20i > N E20j for two locations i and j, it means that loan rates responded less in
location i than in location j, relative to interest rates on other …nancial products, when the
discount rate changed in the 1920s. We thus take N E20i > N E20j to indicate the presence
of more continuing relationships in location i than in location j on the eve of the Great
Depression.
  14
       From Appendix B, securities returns may be lower in the second half of the year outside
of reserve cities. Our results are robust to adding Itdec to Eq. (3) when i is not a reserve city.


                                                    20
4.2    Data Sources

The dependent variables in Eq. (2) and (3) are constructed from the annual reports of
the Comptroller of the Currency. For June and December of each year, the Comptroller
published data on the earning assets of commercial banks aggregated by Fed district, state,
and major municipality (reserve cities). Earning assets include loans, government bonds,
and other …nancial securities. Data are reported separately for banks with national charters
and banks with state charters. The Comptroller also published earnings and expense tables
for nationally-chartered banks aggregated by district, state, and city.
   The earnings and expense tables are essentially income statements. They were published
as at June 30 of each year until 1925 when the Comptroller also began publishing separate
tables for the last six months of the year. Earnings and expense tables were not published for
state-chartered banks. Since these tables are necessary to construct the dependent variables
in Eq. (2) and (3), we limit our sample to national banks. To the best of our knowledge,
the literature has made little use of the income statement data in the Comptroller’s reports.
   The Comptroller began tabulating earnings on loans separately from earnings on gov-
ernment bonds and other securities in the second half of 1926. Prior to that, we estimate
earnings on publicly-traded securities by applying market yields to the securities held on
national bank balance sheets. We also estimate interest earned from balances at other banks
and interest earned on Fed stock. We then subtract these estimates from the total amount
of interest income in the Comptroller’s table to isolate loan income.
   Dividing loan income by the stock of loans at the end of each period and securities income
by the stock of securities, we obtain the average returns needed to run Eq. (2) and (3). We
then construct the discount rates in e¤ect for each period as time-weighted averages of the
discount rates reported in Board of Governors (1943). The …nal sample that we use in our
subsequent analysis contains 82 locations each fully contained within a single Fed district:
33 reserve cities, 31 states (net of any of the 33 reserve cities), 12 split states (2 observations
each for 6 states, again net of the reserve cities), and 6 district remainders. We focus on fully


                                                21
contained locations to use the appropriate discount rate when running Eq. (2) and (3).15


4.3       Net Elasticity Estimates
                          `    s
The distributions of      i,   i,   and N E20i , as estimated from the data, are plotted in Figure
2, with summary statistics reported below the plot. Overall, the distribution of the net
elasticities is roughly normal with mean slightly greater than zero. We are interested in the
relative ranking of locations (e.g., whether N E20i is above or below N E20j , as explained in
Section 4.1) and do not infer much from the mean of the distribution.16 The main takeaway
from Figure 2 is that there is signi…cant dispersion in net elasticity across locations in the
1920s, which is exactly what we need for our analysis. On average, net elasticity was lower
in cities, but dispersion is clearly visible for both cities and states.
   Table 3 reports cross-sectional correlations between N E20i and a variety of demographic
and economic indicators from the 1920 population census. Net elasticity tended to be higher
in areas that were more rural, as measured by a smaller urban population and/or more
  15
       Split states arise because district boundaries run through some states. For a district with
only one split state, we subtract from district-level data the fully contained states and reserve
cities. Subtracting this result from the split state’s total then recovers the part contained in
another district. As long as the other district does not have more than two split states, we
can repeat the process to back out any additional splits. We de…ne remainders for districts
where there are too many split states to be fully identi…ed by this iterative procedure.
  16
     If anything, the approximation used to separate loan income from securities income
before the Comptroller began tabulating them separately (see Section 4.2) lowers the mean.
Market yields average over di¤erent issues and thus tend to be smoother than the yields in any
individual location. This will lead the approximation to understate (overstate) ‡uctuations
in securities income (loan income), but its precision should not vary systematically across
locations, particularly in the early 1920s when institutional investing was less advanced, so
comparisons of net elasticity across locations and relative to the mean remain informative.


                                                   22
farming activity, regardless of whether we look at cities, states, or the entire sample. The
correlation between the urbanization rate and the log of average bank size is 0.86 in our
sample, meaning that more rural areas also tended to have smaller banks.17 These charac-
teristics arise frequently in historical anecdotes about relationship lenders (e.g., Ford (1928))
and can be intuited from theory. In contrast to big banks in urban centers, small rural banks
were not relied upon to be liquidity providers to other …nancial institutions in emergencies
or on short notice, making them less likely to have to suddenly sever relationships with non-
…nancial borrowers for reasons unrelated to the borrower’s health. This maps into Section
3 as a lower probability of exogenous separation s in the middle of a potential relationship.
More relationships with policy-invariant loan rates would then be fostered in these areas,
suggesting that we should indeed observe a higher net elasticity. The regressions we run in
Section 5 will control for all of the local characteristics listed in Table 3.
   We rule out concentration of the local banking market as an alternative explanation for
cross-sectional variation in N E20i . Neumark and Sharpe (1992) have argued that deposit
rates are slower to rise in concentrated markets; related arguments also appear in Drechsler
et al (2017). One may therefore worry that loan rates are stickier in some areas because
market concentration makes deposit rates in those areas stickier, not because there are more
continuing relationships. Using deposit shares compiled from the Rand McNally Bankers’
Directory, we calculate a standard Her…ndahl index (HHI) for each county in 1929. We assign
to each reserve city in our sample the HHI of its county and to each state, split state, and dis-
trict remainder the weighted average of its county-level HHIs. The correlation between loan
rate elasticity ( `i ) and HHI is only -0.12 and the correlation between net elasticity (N E20i )
and HHI is only 0.16, indicating that our price-based measure of continuing relationships
does not confound relationship lending and market power.
   The relevance of deposit rates beyond market power can also be tested formally. We
  17
       This correlation is around 0.7 when the sample is restricted to only cities or only states.
In both subsamples, then, the correlation between urbanization and bank size is high.


                                                 23
use semi-annual data from 1925 to 1929 to explore the dynamics between deposit rates, as
imputed from the expense tables published by the Comptroller, and loan returns.18 For each
location in our sample, we calculate the p-value for the null hypothesis that deposit rates
did not Granger-cause loan rates. There is zero correlation between that p-value and net
elasticity, indicating that the relationship between deposit rates and loan rates did not di¤er
systematically across regions with more or less continuing relationships. We also …nd little
evidence of deposit-driven loan pricing in our sample: we accept the null hypothesis that
loan rates were not Granger-caused by deposit rates in almost 50% of our locations, and,
of the locations where we reject this hypothesis, 67% are locations where we also reject the
hypothesis that deposit rates were not Granger-caused by loan rates.
   We also rule out di¤erential demand for credit as a confounding factor. One may worry
that loan rates appear stickier in some areas because loan demand moves in the same direction
as loan supply following a discount rate change. Graphically, any comovement of demand
and supply curves that neutralizes the response of prices ampli…es the response of quantities,
giving rise to an intuitive test of whether or not such movements in the demand for credit are
re‡ected in our elasticity estimates.19 For each location in our sample, we run a time series
regression of loan growth on the change in the discount rate using semi-annual observations
from 1923 to 1929. The coe¢ cient from this regression (negative on average) is negatively
correlated with loan rate elasticity (-0.25) and positively correlated with net elasticity (0.31).
In other words, locations with stickier loan rates are not locations where lending falls by more
in response to higher discount rates, indicating that our price-based measure of continuing
relationships does not confound relationship lending and credit demand.
  18
       Publication of earnings and expense tables for the second half of each year began in 1925
(see Section 4.2) so we drop 1923 and 1924 here to have equally spaced lags for Granger tests.
   19
      While we believe that the netting of `i from si would absorb this issue if it exists, the
test presented here helps evaluate whether the issue exists independently of whether it is or
can be controlled for by netting.



                                                24
     We conclude this section with two additional sample statistics. First, the cross-sectional
correlation between net elasticity in the 1920s and the average fraction of national bank
loans made on little to no collateral over the same period is 0.35. While the sign of this
correlation is what one would expect given historical accounts that relationship building
rarely ever occurred outside of unsecured lending (see Section 2), the magnitude suggests
that not all unsecured loans evolved into continuing relationships. Second, the change in net
elasticity from the 1920s to the 1930s is negative for many locations and has a cross-sectional
correlation of -0.91 with net elasticity in the 1920s, suggesting that the Great Depression
destroyed continuing relationships in areas where such relationships existed.20



5         The E¤ects of Banking Distress in the Early 1930s

We now use our new measure of continuing lending relationships to explore the transmission
of banking distress to the real economy during the Great Depression. While many have
found that the collapse of commercial banking in the early 1930s adversely impacted the real
economy, it remains unexplored whether propagation occurred through relationship lending.


5.1        Empirical Speci…cation

Our …rst step is to de…ne an indicator of banking distress that provides an accurate represen-
tation of its nature in the early 1930s. Conceptually, suspensions capture a broader notion
of distress than failures. Many bank suspensions are permanent in that they culminate in
failure; other suspensions are only temporary.21 However, banks that temporarily suspend
payments cannot extend loans while suspended and may change their lending activities when
    20
         For comparison, the correlation between unsecured lending in the 1920s and the change
in unsecured lending from the 1920s to the 1930s (also negative on average) is -0.46.
   21
      On average, 25% of bank suspensions during the Great Depression were temporary with
a mean suspension length of 102 days.



                                                25
doors reopen (e.g., cut credit to bolster cash and head o¤ further suspension). Both tempo-
rary and permanent suspensions are thus relevant forms of distress. We consider suspensions
…rst then check the robustness of our results to using only failures.
   Suppose bank suspensions in location i amounted to 10% of deposits. This could have
been caused by the suspension of one bank with a 10% market share or by the suspension
of ten banks each with a 1% market share. Although the size of the banking shock is the
same in both cases – 10% of deposits – the suspension of many small banks more closely
approximates the nature of the banking panics documented by Friedman and Schwartz (1963)
and Wicker (1996) for the early 1930s. Accordingly, two separate indicators are needed to
accurately describe distress during this period: one that captures the dispersion of distress
across banks and another that controls for the size of the shock. We measure the dispersion
of banking distress in location i by the fraction of banks suspended in the early 1930s:

                              X
                              1932
                                    number_of _suspended_national_banksi;t
               SuspN um32i =
                             t=1930
                                       number_of _national_banksi;1929

The size of the shock is then measured using the share of deposits in suspended banks:

                               X
                               1932
                                     deposits_in_suspended_national_banksi;t
                SuspV al32i =
                              t=1930
                                         deposits_in_national_banksi;1929

We use SuspN um32i as our main indicator of banking distress in each location i, with
SuspV al32i as a control. Both variables are constructed from county-level data on bank
suspensions compiled retrospectively by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation.
   Next, we need a measure of the change in economic activity from 1929 to 1933 in each
location i. Since our locations include reserve cities, states, split states, and district remain-
ders, we need county-level information that we can aggregate into the appropriate units.
This narrows our search to census data. The most precisely measured county-level outcome
for the period we study is retail sales, collected as part of the Census of Business.22 Retail
  22
       We refer the reader to the end of Appendix C for a discussion of other indicators.


                                               26
sales provide a general gauge of economic activity. In the 1920s and 1930s, well before the
advent of mainstream consumer credit, the ability of households to purchase retail goods
depended on labor income, which itself depended on the ability of …rms in the local economy
to pay those incomes. The struggles of local …rms would thus be re‡ected in retail sales,
regardless of whether or not the median …rm was a retailer.
   Letting Salesi;t denote retail sales in location i in year t, we run regressions of the form:

        Salesi;1933
                    =     0   +   1 N E20i   +   2 SuspN um32i   +   3 SuspN um32i       N E20i        (4)
        Salesi;1929
                        + 4 SuspV al32i +         5 SuspV   al32i N E20i + Xi +      i




where Xi is a vector of controls. Appendix B reports summary statistics for all variables. We
…rst estimate Eq. (4) by ordinary least squares then use a two-stage procedure to address
the possibility of endogeneity between economic activity and banking distress.
   If banking panics had real e¤ects because they arrested or otherwise impaired soft yet
valuable information embodied in continuing lending relationships, we should …nd                  3   < 0.
That is, the negative e¤ect of bank suspensions on economic activity should have been more
pronounced in locations with more continuing relationships, all else the same. Intuitively,
…rms in continuing relationships lose a critical source of working capital when their banks are
suddenly suspended. If the soft information accumulated over the course of a relationship is
either unimportant or easy to redeploy, then the credit challenges faced by these …rms should
be the same as those faced by …rms in otherwise similar locations and we should …nd no
cross-sectional di¤erence in the impact of bank suspensions on economic activity. If instead
soft information does matter and is di¢ cult to redeploy across lenders, then it will be harder
and/or take longer for these …rms to regain access to credit on the terms they had prior to
suspension, leading to a more noticeable impact on the local economy.
   Our empirical measure of continuing relationships, N E20i , is as derived and implemented
in Sections 3 and 4. It is based on the idea that …rm funding costs respond less to bank



                                                   27
funding costs when loans are made through continuing relationships. From this, one could
also derive that continuing relationships reduce the response of economic activity to …nancial
shocks that map broadly into shocks to bank funding costs (Hachem (2011)). However,
this insulatory property of continuing relationships would be conditional on banks being
operational, as was the case in the 1920s. If banks are instead suspended, their relationships
are also suspended and locations dependent on those relationships will su¤er to the extent
that soft information matters and cannot be redeployed. It does not matter why exactly
banks were suspended in the early 1930s as long as the suspensions were not driven by the
relationships themselves. The correlation between N E20i and SuspN um32i is only 0.15,
the correlation between N E20i and SuspV al32i is only 0.21, and, conditioned on other
explanatory variables, both of these correlations are near zero.23 In other words, suspensions
were not more common in locations with more continuing relationships, removing the concern
that banking distress was driven by these relationships.
   Setting N E20i = 0 in Eq. (4) returns the type of regression typically run in the literature
on the Great Depression to make statements about the e¤ect of banking distress on economic
activity. A major shortcoming of the typical regression is its silence on the channels through
which banking distress ‡owed to the real economy. By introducing our new measure of
continuing relationships into Eq. (4), along with a battery of controls to absorb other
di¤erences across locations, we are able to use     3   to study whether the real e¤ects of banking
distress were propagated through relationship lending.


5.2       Baseline Results

Results from the estimation of Eq. (4) by ordinary least squares are reported in Table 4. In
all columns, the control vector Xi includes district …xed e¤ects, a dummy variable for whether
location i is a reserve city, and the 1920 census controls listed in Table 3. Standard errors
  23
       The coe¢ cient on N E20i is near zero and not statistically signi…cant at any reasonable
level when added to the …rst-stage regressions for banking distress in Appendix C.


                                               28
are bootstrapped, with block bootstrapping at the district level to account for clustering.
   Column (1) presents the baseline regression with controls Xi as just described. The
estimate of    3   is negative and statistically signi…cant. Given the mean (0.057) and standard
deviation (0.482) of the net elasticity distribution plotted in Figure 2, the magnitude of      3

in the …rst column of Table 4 indicates that suspending 10% of national banks in the early
1930s would have led to a 4.62% decline in retail sales between 1929 and 1933 in locations
where net elasticity in the 1920s was one standard deviation above the mean. This is in
contrast to only a 0.49% decline in comparable locations where net elasticity was at the
mean. In other words, the marginal impact of banking distress on retail sales during the
Great Depression was markedly more severe in areas with more continuing relationships.24
   We also …nd that        5,   the coe¢ cient on the interaction between SuspV al32i and N E20i
in Eq. (4), is positive and, in the …rst column of Table 4, statistically signi…cant. Increas-
ing SuspV al32i without also increasing SuspN um32i is akin to considering the e¤ects of
suspending larger banks. Receivership data for 1931 and 1932 reveal that large banks were
liquidated quite rapidly, both in absolute terms and relative to smaller banks.25 In practice,
deposits in large banks could be redeemed even more quickly than the receivership data sug-
gest because clearinghouses often provided advances to depositors of failed members, which
would typically be the largest failures in the municipality. The suspension of a large bank
  24
       As a placebo test, we replaced N E20i with the average fraction of national bank loans
made on little to no collateral in location i during the 1920s. The results were not statistically
di¤erent from zero by any reasonable metric, underscoring the importance of extracting
continuing relationships from the broader pool of potential relationship loans.
  25
     Using the sources described in Richardson (2008), we …nd that depositors in national
banks with more than $6 million in deposits on the date of failure received an average of
4.2 cents per month for each dollar of deposits during the initial year of liquidation. The
monthly disbursement was only 3.0 cents for banks that failed with $2-6 million in deposits
and 2.0 cents for those that failed with less than $2 million in deposits.



                                                  29
would have thus created space in the business landscape for a surviving bank to attract
deposits and make loans. The net e¤ect of this reallocation would not exceed zero if the
banks were otherwise identical, so we interpret the positive estimate for           5   as an indication
that large banks tended to be less relationship-intensive than small banks in areas where
business was overall more dependent on continuing relationships.26
   Column (2) in Table 4 adds controls for concentration of the local banking market,
speci…cally HHI as de…ned in Section 4.3 and its interactions with the banking distress
indicators SuspN um32i and SuspV al32i . The estimate of            5   is still positive but no longer
statistically signi…cant. The estimate of      3,   however, remains negative and statistically
signi…cant, con…rming that the marginal e¤ect of banking distress on retail sales was more
negative in areas with more continuing relationships.27
   Column (3) uses an alternative formulation of N E20i in which we replace the discount
rate on the right-hand side of Eq. (2) with the deposit rate in location i, as imputed from the
                                               `
Comptroller’s expense tables, to recalculate   i    as the elasticity of loan returns with respect to
the average cost of deposits. The estimate of       3   in Table 4 is still negative and statistically
signi…cant. That said, we prefer the formulation of N E20i where loan rate elasticity is
calculated with respect to the discount rate. In addition to in‡uencing other funding costs
through the yield curve, the discount rate was a direct cost of funds for commercial loans
  26
       In unreported results, we reran the baseline regression without controlling for
SuspV al32i . The coe¢ cient on the interaction between SuspN um32i and N E20i was still
negative, but its magnitude was much smaller ( 0:315 instead of               0:857) and not statisti-
cally signi…cant. Running the baseline without SuspN um32i similarly muted the coe¢ cient
on the interaction between SuspV al32i and N E20i . By including both SuspN um32i and
SuspV al32i in the same regression, we capture di¤erent dimensions of banking distress and
obtain sharper and more informative coe¢ cients.
  27
     This result is also robust to controlling for the deposit market share of national banks
relative to all other banks (e.g., state banks) in 1929.



                                               30
that banks could discount at their district Fed. The discount rate was also reported directly
by the Fed (i.e., we do not need to impute it) and it captures the component of funding
costs that commercial banks did not set for themselves, which is also more consistent with
the cost of funds in our theoretical model. We therefore revert to the original formulation of
N E20i for the remainder of the paper.
     Columns (4) and (5) in Table 4 consider alternative measures of banking distress con-
structed from original sources. We still separate dispersion of distress from the size of the
shock to re‡ect the nature of the banking panics in the early 1930s. However, instead of
using national bank suspensions to calculate SuspN um32i and SuspV al32i , we use national
bank failures in column (4) and national bank mergers under duress in column (5).
     The estimate of   3   in column (4) is negative and statistically signi…cant. It is somewhat
less negative than the estimate in column (2), possibly due to di¤erences in the redeployment
of soft information under various forms of distress. As described in Section 5.1, suspensions
include both temporary suspensions and permanent suspensions (i.e., failures). Loan o¢ cers
at failed banks would have had to look for new employment and may have taken their rela-
tionship borrowers with them to healthier …nancial institutions, in contrast with temporary
suspensions where loan o¢ cers did not have to move but also could not operate as normal.
Failures may therefore have been more conducive to the redeployment of soft information.
There were, however, major impediments to redeploying soft information from failed banks
in the early 1930s. First, new employment was not easy to …nd. Second, outside of a few big
cities, failures were typically resolved through the court system, not through purchase and
assumption. Many records were therefore trapped in the courts during the Depression, mak-
ing it di¢ cult for loan o¢ cers to transfer them to new banks. This would have delayed the
reformation of old relationships, particularly if managers at the new banks wanted written
records to con…rm that the relationships were true and sound. On net, then, the estimate of

 3   is negative and statistically signi…cant, regardless of whether banking distress is measured
using failures or suspensions.


                                                 31
   The use of mergers under duress in column (5) provides a placebo test. By virtue of
being under duress, these mergers indicate banking distress. However, the act of merger,
as opposed to suspension or failure, bypasses the labor market frictions that loan o¢ cers
would face looking for new jobs and avoids the trapping of records that would occur in
the courts during bankruptcy proceedings, thus facilitating the transfer of soft information
from a distressed bank to a successor. Accordingly, we should not expect a negative and
statistically signi…cant estimate of   3   when banking distress is measured using mergers under
duress. This is con…rmed in the …fth column of Table 4.


5.3      Additional Results

We conclude this section by discussing the results from a two-stage procedure to address the
possibility of endogeneity between retail sales and banking distress in Eq. (4). Speci…cally,
we want to make sure that we have isolated the drop in economic activity caused by the
inability of relationship lenders to supply credit, not reverse causality from economic activity
to bank distress through decreased demand for credit.
   A series of surveys conducted during the Great Depression lend credence to the impor-
tance of credit supply shocks. The National Industrial Conference Board found that 22%
of industrial …rms that normally relied on commercial banks for working capital curtailed
operations because of the refusal or restriction of bank credit (NICB 1932, pp. 5, 62).28
Even …rms that “would have readily commanded bank credit in normal times”because their
credit ratings were positive, cash ‡ows substantial, and balance sheets liquid and solvent
were unable to obtain loans in the early 1930s (NICB 1932, pp. 94, 96, 98-99). Refusals
often occurred because lenders’ di¢ culties – typically withdrawals by depositors – forced
them to curtail credit or call loans (NICB 1932, p. 111). A survey of small manufacturing
  28
       The percentages were 31.1% for …rms with 100 or fewer employees, 21.8% for …rms with
101 to 250 employees, 19.0% for …rms with 251 to 500 employees, 10.2% for …rms with 501
to 1,000 employees, and 6.5% for …rms with over 1,000 employees (NICB 1932, p. 69).


                                                  32
…rms conducted by the Department of Commerce reached similar conclusions: 45% of small
manufacturers reported an inability to borrow su¢ cient funds to …nance all of their poten-
tial projects (DOC 1935, pp. 16-29) despite a majority of these manufacturers being liquid,
solvent, and well-regarded by credit rating agencies (DOC 1935, pp. 41-61).
   A simple test based on prices and quantities also indicates that credit supply shocks
were of …rst-order importance in the early 1930s. In contrast to demand-driven decreases
in bank lending, which should be accompanied by decreases in loan rates, supply-driven
decreases in bank lending should be accompanied by increases in loan rates. Since the
income statements described in Section 4.2 allow us to impute average loan returns in various
locations during the Great Depression, we overcome the paucity of disaggregated data on
loan pricing that would otherwise impede the implementation of this test. For each location
in our sample, we compute the correlation between semi-annual loan growth and semi-annual
changes in seasonally-adjusted loan returns over the period June 1930 to December 1932.
The correlation is negative for 77% of our locations, indicating that loan supply shocks
dominated loan demand shocks in the majority of the locations in our sample.
   Both the survey evidence and the simple test just described lead us to interpret the results
in Table 4 as being largely causal from banking distress to economic activity. However, to
provide more formal identi…cation, we use a two-stage strategy similar to the one used by
Calomiris and Mason (2003) to identify loan supply shocks in the face of the loan demand
critique in Hardy and Viner (1935) and Kimmel (1939). Appendix C provides details on
the …rst-stage estimation and collects the second-stage regression tables. In addition to the
speci…cations in columns (1) and (2) of Table 4, Appendix C runs second-stage regressions
that control for interactions between the instrumented indicators of banking distress and
variables from the 1920 census. Appendix C also runs regressions that interact N E20i and
the instrumented banking distress indicators with the reserve city dummy to explore whether
our results di¤er across types of locations. Finally, Appendix C runs regressions using the
change in retail sales from 1929 to 1935 as the dependent variable, as well as regressions that


                                              33
use alternative measures of economic activity constructed from the Census of Manufactures.
    The coe¢ cient on the interaction between the instrumented SuspN um32i variable and
N E20i is negative and statistically signi…cant in all speci…cations considered in Appendix C,
indicating, as before, that the marginal impact of banking distress on retail sales was more
severe in areas with more continuing relationships. The null hypothesis that this coe¢ cient
does not di¤er across the types of locations that comprise our sample cannot be rejected and
the coe¢ cient remains negative and statistically signi…cant when the dependent variable
is measured in 1935. Thus, the real e¤ects of banking distress were propagated through
relationship lending in both cities and states and lingered into the recovery period.
    Appendix C also uses the estimated coe¢ cients to make statements about the aggregate
implications of banking distress in the early 1930s. We …nd that retail sales in the U.S. would
have been almost 4% higher in 1933 had there been no banking distress. We present aggregate
evidence that a 4% drop in retail sales is consistent with a 6-7% drop in nominal GNP and
a 3-4% drop in real GNP. This is about one-eighth of the economic contraction experienced
during the Great Depression, underscoring the economic signi…cance of our results.



6     Conclusion

We proposed a novel measure of continuing lending relationships that resolves the data limi-
tations of the 1920s and 1930s and pinpoints the non-monetary e¤ects of banking distress in
a way that the existing literature on the Great Depression has been unable to do. Our mea-
sure is based on the idea that longer relationships reveal to banks the highest interest rates
they can charge their borrowers without inducing moral hazard, leading to loan rates that
are less responsive to changes in bank funding costs. We presented historical and theoretical
arguments in support of our measure then implemented it to study the transmission of bank
suspensions to economic activity through the disruption of long-term lending relationships.
    We found that cross-sectional di¤erences in continuing relationships in the 1920s played



                                              34
a fundamental role in determining the real e¤ects of banking distress in the early 1930s. Our
new measure revealed that the marginal impact of bank suspensions on economic activity
was much more severe in areas with more continuing relationships, other things the same.
In other words, the destruction of continuing relationships ampli…ed the Great Depression,
providing the …rst formal evidence that relationship lending propagated the real e¤ects of
banking sector distress in the early 1930s.
   In keeping with Bernanke (1983) and others, we focused on the Great Depression. The
dimensions of the downturn and the largely unfettered nature of the banking panics make
it ground zero for studying the real e¤ects of …nancial crises. However, our …ndings are of
interest beyond the historical context as relationship lending remains a principal source of
working capital in many parts of the world. Our method is also useful for analysis of modern
economies when loan-level data are either unavailable or available only with long lags.
   By connecting the economic contraction to the collapse of long-term lending relationships,
our results also suggest a new avenue for future work on the speed of economic recoveries.
When business is dependent on the soft information that banks acquire over time, it is not
enough for new banks to replace distressed ones. These banks also need time to interact
with …rms, learn about them, and rebuild continuing relationships, so, on top of contributing
to the severity of the Great Depression, the banking panics of the early 1930s are likely to
have contributed to what some believe was a surprisingly slow recovery in the wake of such
a catastrophic economic collapse. Relationship rebuilding and the time to recovery from the
Great Depression would therefore be an interesting extension for future work.



References

Berger, Allen and Gregory Udell. 1995. “Relationship Lending and Lines of Credit in Small
  Firm Finance.”Journal of Business, 68(3), pp. 351-382.

Bernanke, Ben. 1983. “Nonmonetary E¤ects of the Financial Crisis in the Propagation of


                                              35
  the Great Depression.”American Economic Review, 73(3), pp. 257-276.

Board of Governors. 1943. Banking and Monetary Statistics, 1914 to 1941. Washington.

Bolton, Patrick, Xavier Freixas, Leonardo Gambacorta, and Paolo Emilio Mistrulli. 2016.
  “Relationship and Transaction Lending in a Crisis.”Review of Financial Studies, 29(10),
  pp. 2643-2676.

Calomiris, Charles and Joseph Mason. 2003. “Consequences of Bank Distress During the
  Great Depression.”American Economic Review, 93(3), pp. 937-947.

Carlson, Mark and Jonathan Rose. 2015. “Credit Availability and the Collapse of the Bank-
  ing Sector in the 1930s.”Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking, 47(7), pp. 1239-1271.

Chodorow-Reich, Gabriel. 2014. “The Employment E¤ects of Credit Market Disruptions:
  Firm-Level Evidence from the 2008-9 Financial Crisis.” Quarterly Journal of Economics,
  129(1), pp. 1-59.

Cole, Harold and Lee Ohanian. 2007. “A Second Look at the U.S. Great Depression from a
  Neoclassical Perspective.” In Kehoe, T. and E. Prescott (eds.), Great Depressions of the
  Twentieth Century, Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis, pp. 21-57.

Currie, Lauchlin. 1931. “The Decline of the Commercial Loan.” Quarterly Journal of Eco-
  nomics, 45(4), pp. 698-709.

Department of Commerce. 1935. Survey of Reports of Credit and Capital Di¢ culties Sub-
  mitted by Small Manufacturers. Washington: Government Printing O¢ ce.

Drechsler, Itamar, Alexi Savov, and Philipp Schnabl. 2017. “The Deposits Channel of Mon-
  etary Policy.”Quarterly Journal of Economics, 132(4), pp. 1819-1876.

Elsas, Ralf. 2005. “Empirical Determinants of Relationship Lending.” Journal of Financial
  Intermediation, 14(1), pp. 32-57.


                                           36
Ford, A.W. 1928. “Country Banking Practices in Northern Texas.” Journal of Business,
  1(4), pp. 468-484.

Foulke, Roy and Herbert Prochnow. 1939. Practical Bank Credit. New York: Prentice-Hall.

Friedman, Milton and Anna Schwartz. 1963. A Monetary History of the United States, 1867-
  1960. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.

Gambacorta, Leonardo and Paolo Emilio Mistrulli. 2014. “Bank Heterogeneity and Interest
  Rate Setting: What Lessons Have We Learned since Lehman Brothers.”Journal of Money,
  Credit and Banking, 46(4), pp. 753-778.

Gobbi, Giorgio and Enrico Sette. 2015. “Relationship Lending During a Financial Crisis.”
  Journal of the European Economic Association, 13(3), pp. 453-481.

Hachem, Kinda. 2011. “Relationship Lending and the Transmission of Monetary Policy.”
  Journal of Monetary Economics, 58(6-8), pp. 590-600.

Hardy, Charles and Jacob Viner. 1935. Report on the Availability of Bank Credit in the
  Seventh Federal Reserve District. Washington: Government Printing O¢ ce.

Kimmel, Lewis. 1939. The Availability of Credit, 1933-1938. New York: Conference Board.

Langston, L.H. 1921. Practical Bank Operation. New York: Ronald Press.

Miller, Mahlon. 1927. Bank Loans on Statement and Character. New York: Ronald Press.

National Industrial Conference Board. 1932. The Availability of Bank Credit. New York.

Neumark, David and Steven Sharpe. 1992. “Market Structure and the Nature of Price Rigid-
  ity: Evidence from the Market for Consumer Deposits.”Quarterly Journal of Economics,
  107(2), pp. 657-680.

Ongena, Steven and David Smith. 2001. “The Duration of Bank Relationships.” Journal of
  Financial Economics, 61(3), pp. 449-475.

                                             37
Petersen, Mitchell and Raghuram Rajan. 1994. “The Bene…ts of Lending Relationships:
  Evidence from Small Business Data.”Journal of Finance, 49(1), pp. 3-37.

Rajan, Raghuram and Rodney Ramcharan. 2016. “Crises and the Development of Economic
  Institutions: Some Microeconomic Evidence.” American Economic Review P&P, 106(5),
  pp. 524-527.

Richardson, Gary. 2008. “Quarterly Data on the Categories and Causes of Bank Distress
  during the Great Depression.”Research in Economic History, Vol. 25, pp. 37-115.

Richardson, Gary and William Troost. 2009. “Monetary Intervention Mitigated Banking
  Panics During the Great Depression: Quasi-Experimental Evidence from the Federal Re-
  serve District Border in Mississippi.”Journal of Political Economy, 117(6), pp. 1031-1073.

Romer, Christina and David Romer. 1989. “Does Monetary Policy Matter? A New Test in
  the Spirit of Friedman and Schwartz.”NBER Macroeconomics Annual, Vol. 4, pp. 121-170.

Romer, Christina and David Romer. 2004. “A New Measure of Monetary Shocks: Derivation
  and Implications.”American Economic Review, 94(4), pp. 1055-1084.

Romer, Christina and David Romer. 2015. “New Evidence on the Impact of Financial Crises
  in Advanced Countries.”NBER Working Paper No. 21021.

Thomas, Woodlief. 1935. “Use of Credit in Security Speculation.” American Economic Re-
  view, 25(1), pp. 21-30.

Wicker, Elmus. 1996. The Banking Panics of the Great Depression. Cambridge: Cambridge
  University Press.

Ziebarth, Nicolas. 2013. “Identifying the E¤ects of Bank Failures from a Natural Experi-
  ment in Mississippi during the Great Depression.” American Economic Journal: Macro-
  economics, 5(1), pp. 81-101.



                                            38
      Table 1: Contemporaneous Interest Rate Responses to Discount Rate Changes

                          (1)        (2)          (3)      (4)          (5)         (6)
                          All        All           0:5   External   No Collude     1920s



  Dependent Variable:      Comm. Loan Rate, NYC

    Discount Rate       0.185*** 0.181*** 0.187*** 0.180*** 0.182***             0.141***
                        (0.041)   (0.039)    (0.060)     (0.042)    (0.039)      (0.044)


  Dependent Variable:      Brokers’Loan Rate

    Discount Rate       0.789*** 0.777*** 0.530*** 0.742*** 0.777***             0.864***
                        (0.135)   (0.128)    (0.125)     (0.060)    (0.129)      (0.186)


  H 0 : Equality of Coe¢ cients

  Chi-squared            26.51      27.76      10.40      53.64        27.04       13.30
  P-value                0.0000    0.0000      0.0013     0.0000      0.0000      0.0003


  Observations            239        239          231       34         234          96
  Month FE                NO        YES           YES      YES         YES         YES
Notes: Top and middle panels regress monthly changes in the indicated interest rate on
contemporaneous changes in the NY Fed discount rate. Bottom panel tests whether the
coe¢ cients in the top and middle panels are equal. Column (1) uses all observations from
January 1919 to December 1938. Column (2) adds dummies for month of the year.
Column (3) excludes observations where the discount rate changed by more than 50 bps.
Column (4) uses only months where NY Fed decisions are known to have been driven by
external considerations. Column (5) excludes the period of possible rate collusion after the
collapse of Creditanstalt in Austria. Column (6) uses only observations from the 1920s.
Robust standard errors are in brackets. ***p<0.01, **p<0.05, *p<0.1


                                             39
           Table 2: Lagged Interest Rate Responses to Discount Rate Changes

                               (1)         (2)           (3)         (4)           (5)
 Months Since Change         Brokers’             Commercial Loan Rate            Comm.
   in Discount Rate        Loan Rate      NYC        N/E Cities S/W Cities Paper Rate



           0               0.781***     0.177***     0.093***    0.086***      0.507***
           1               0.108        0.118**      0.098***    0.072***      0.260***
           2               0.041        0.072**      0.070**     0.059***      0.067**
           3               -0.078       0.028        0.082**     0.057***      0.022
           4               -0.039       -0.011       0.093***    0.117***      0.001
           5               -0.023       0.078***     0.059**     0.030         -0.013
           6               0.010        -0.036       -0.017      0.019         0.003


      Cumulative            0.800***     0.425***     0.479***    0.440***      0.847***
    Discount Rate          New York     New York Boston          Richmond      New York

Notes: Sample period is January 1919 to December 1938. Each column regresses monthly
changes in the indicated interest rate on contemporaneous and lagged changes in the
indicated discount rate. All columns include six months of lagged changes and dummies for
month of the year. N/E and S/W are averages constructed by the Fed. N/E includes
Chicago, Boston, Philadelphia, Pittsburgh, Bu¤alo, Cleveland, Detroit; S/W includes San
Francisco, Los Angeles, St. Louis, Dallas, Minneapolis, Kansas City, New Orleans, Seattle,
Atlanta, Baltimore, Richmond (Board of Governors 1943, p. 427). ***p<0.01, **p<0.05,
*p<0.1




                                            40
              Table 3: Net Elasticity and 1920 Census Variables, Correlations

                                                                        Correlation with NE20
                                                                          All    Cities   States

 LogArea         log(area in square miles)                               0.426    0.237       0.220
 LogPop          log(population in 1920)                                 0.132 -0.278         0.024
 Urban           % population urban in 1920                             -0.521 -0.374     -0.449
 Nwnp            % population with native white parents in 1920          0.302    0.467       0.128
 Age1844         % population aged 18 to 44 in 1920                     -0.414 -0.051     -0.351
 School1620      % of aged 16 to 20 in school in 1920                    0.284    0.377       0.155
 LogMfgEstPc     log(no. of mfg establishments per capita in 1920)      -0.410 -0.217     -0.419
 MfgWork         mfg workers as % of population in 1920                 -0.365 -0.241     -0.438
 LogMfgVa        log(value added per mfg establishment in 1920)         -0.268    0.061   -0.336
 LogFarmsPc      log(no. of farms per capita in 1920)                    0.521    0.401       0.431
 Acres           farmland as % of area in 1920                           0.251    0.402       0.182
 LogAvgCrop      log(crop value per farm in 1920)                        0.175    0.271       0.064
 LogAvgValue     log(value of farmland, equip, etc per farm in 1920) -0.099       0.054       0.040
 HomeOwnClr home ownership rate in 1920                                  0.431    0.290       0.307

Notes: Manufacturing is abbreviated mfg. “All”calculates the cross-sectional correlation
between the indicated variable and NE20 using the full sample (82 locations), “Cities”uses
only the 33 reserve cities, and “States”uses only the 49 states, split states, and district
remainders.




                                              41
                    Table 4: OLS Estimates, Retail Sales Ratio, 1933/29

                                    (1)        (2)        (3)        (4)        (5)
         VARIABLES                           Control      Alt.      Using      Using
                                 Baseline      HHI       NE20      Failures Mergers



         NE20                      0.024      0.029      0.008      0.031      0.001
                                  (0.024)    (0.028)    (0.021)    (0.029)    (0.023)
         SuspNum32                -0.170      -0.116     0.021      -0.213    -0.240
                                  (0.105)    (0.229)    (0.261)    (0.296)    (0.895)
         SuspNum32 x NE20 -0.857*** -0.804** -0.544**              -0.530*     0.848
                                  (0.304)    (0.350)    (0.242)    (0.287)    (1.608)
         SuspVal32                 0.107      -0.170     -0.229     -0.044    -0.721
                                  (0.125)    (0.279)    (0.332)    (0.363)    (0.929)
         SuspVal32 x NE20         0.883*      0.609      0.461      0.096     -1.667
                                  (0.453)    (0.525)    (0.346)    (0.378)    (1.551)
         HHI                                  0.005      0.037      0.019      0.034
                                             (0.124)    (0.128)    (0.125)    (0.126)
         SuspNum32 x HHI                      -0.297     -0.828     -0.062    -0.394
                                             (0.928)    (0.980)    (1.127)    (4.092)
         SuspVal32 x HHI                      1.249      1.457      0.997      6.866
                                             (1.028)    (1.136)    (1.253)    (5.300)


         Observations               82          82         82         82        82
         Adjusted R-squared        0.596      0.621      0.608      0.582      0.459
         District FE               YES         YES        YES       YES        YES
         Census Controls           YES         YES        YES       YES        YES

Notes: In all columns, the dependent variable is retail sales in 1933 as a fraction of retail

                                              42
sales in 1929. NE20 is the measure of continuing relationships on the eve of the Great
Depression. With the exception of column (3), where the loan rate elasticity component of
NE20 is calculated with respect to the average cost of deposits, NE20 is always calculated
with respect to the discount rate. SuspNum32 and SuspVal32 measure respectively the
number and deposits of distressed national banks from 1930 to 1932 relative to the number
and deposits of all national banks in 1929. Distress is de…ned using suspensions in columns
(1)-(3), failures in column (4), and mergers under duress in column (5). HHI measures
local banking market concentration in 1929. Bootstrapped standard errors clustered at the
district level are in brackets. ***p<0.01, **p<0.05, *p<0.1




                                            43
                      Figure 1: Illustrative Example from NYC Rates




Notes: Data from Board of Governors (1943) and the NBER Macrohistory database. All
interest rates are monthly for New York City. Black dots plot the average interest rate on
new 90-day brokers’loans, gray dots plot the average interest rate on one-to-six month
loans to commercial clients, and the black line plots the discount rate set by the Federal
Reserve Bank of New York.




                                             44
                          Figure 2: Elasticity Estimates in the 1920s

                                 (a) Kernel Density Estimates




                                     (b) Summary Statistics

                       All                          Cities                       States
            Mean Median         Sd        Mean      Median       Sd      Mean Median         Sd
 NE20       0.057     0.062    0.482     -0.161     -0.033      0.509    0.204   0.188      0.406
 LE20       0.268     0.219    0.281      0.415     0.318       0.337    0.169   0.160      0.182
 SE20       0.326     0.266    0.398      0.254     0.224       0.457    0.374   0.293      0.348


Notes: LE20 is the elasticity of loan returns ( `i ), SE20 is the elasticity of securities returns
( si ), and NE20 is the net elasticity (N E20i =    s
                                                    i
                                                         `
                                                         i ).   The table reports summary
statistics for the full sample (“All”), the 33 reserve cities (“Cities”), and the 49 states, split
states, and district remainders (“States”). The …gure plots kernel density estimates from
an Epanechnikov kernel using the full sample (82 locations).




                                               45
                        Online Appendix for
“Relationship Lending and the Great Depression”

     Jon Cohen               Kinda Hachem        Gary Richardson

University of Toronto     UVA Darden and NBER   UC Irvine and NBER



                             December 2019




                                   1
Appendix A –Proof of Proposition 1
To get the …rst-stage interest rate R1 , de…ne R1 R ( ) so that denotes the …rm type that
is exactly indi¤erent between production and speculation when charged R1 . In equilibrium,
  is pinned down by the zero-pro…t condition for lenders with new …rms, namely:
          Z   1                                                Z    b
                                                                    !                                    Z      1
                                                                                                                             r
    q +           p (x) dx R ( )       r+ (1           s)                   p (x) R (x)         r dx +               p (x)       r dx = 0
                                                                e
                                                                !                                           b
                                                                                                            !                q
|                    {z                } |                                                      {z                                   }
     expected pro…t from …rst stage                                expected present discounted continuation value


where 2 (0; 1) is the lender’s discount factor. The lender’s continuation value comes from
playing the second-stage game with the …rm and earning pro…t on types above !   e.
   To get the transactional interest rate RT L , de…ne RT L R ( ) so that denotes the …rm
type that is exactly indi¤erent between production and speculation when charged RT L . In
equilibrium, is pinned down by the zero-pro…t condition for transactional lenders, namely:
                                                       Z   1
                                             q +               p (x) dx R ( )                   r=0


There is no second-stage continuation value because transactional loans are one-period con-
tracts where the bank and …rm separate with probability 1 at the end of the period.
    The elasticities of the relationship lending interest rates, R1 as de…ned above and R2 as
de…ned in the main text, are:
                             h         R1         i 0              0    R !b
                                 q +      p (x) dx R ( ) + (1 s) RR(( )) !e p (x) R (x) dx
                      e1 =              h      R1        i 0
                                         q + p (x) dx R ( ) [p ( ) q] R ( )

and:                                              h                                    i
                                                                                  q              r
                                         1    b+!
                                              ! e+ 1                            p(e
                                                                                  !) p0 (e
                                                                                         ! )R(e
                                                                                              ! )+p(e
                                                                                                        0
                                                                                                    ! )R (e
                                                                                                          !)
                                  e2 =                                              R b
                                                                                      !
                                                                                 1
                                                  1        b+!
                                                           ! e+                   !) !
                                                                                R(b   e
                                                                                         R (!) d!

respectively. The elasticity of the transactional interest rate RT L is:
                                                  h            R1           i 0
                                                      q +           p (x) dx R ( )
                         eT L = h            R1                 i       0
                                                                                                                    f( )
                                      q +         p (x) dx R ( )                       [p ( )    q] R ( )

The denominators of e1 and eT L are positive under minimal conditions on p ( ); see the online
appendix of Hachem (2011) for a formal proof. Accordingly, e1 > f ( ) and it will su¢ ce to



                                                                            2
show e2 < f (z) for any z 2 (0; 1) satisfying:
                                                          Z    1
                                            qz +                   p (x) dx R (z)               r                                           (A.1)
                                                           z


The de…nitions of and above imply that (A.1) holds with strict equality at z = and
strict inequality at z = . Use the expressions for e2 and f (z) to rewrite e2 < f (z) as:
                   Z                                  "                                                            Z                    #
                        1                                                                                              b
                                                                                                                       !
                                        0                          [p (e
                                                                       !)          q] R (e
                                                                                         !)                  1
            qz +            p (x) dx R (z)                                                      0                          R (!) d!
                   z                                      p0 (e
                                                              ! ) R (e
                                                                     ! ) + p (e
                                                                              ! ) R (e
                                                                                     !)                    R (b
                                                                                                              !)   e
                                                                                                                   !
                                 "                                                                         #
                                                                         [p (e
                                                                             !)            q] R (e
                                                                                                 !)
       < [p (z)        q] R (z) 1       b+!
                                        ! e+                                                          0                                     (A.2)
                                                               p0 (e
                                                                   ! ) R (e
                                                                          ! ) + p (e
                                                                                   ! ) R (e
                                                                                          !)

Linearity of p (!) implies p (!) = p (0) + [p (1)                              p (0)] ! so we can write (A.2) as:
                                                                               Z      b
                                                                                      !
                       [p (e
                           !)     q] R (e
                                        !)                            1
                                                  0                                       R (!) d!
               p0 (e
                   ! ) R (e
                          ! ) + p (e
                                   ! ) R (e
                                          !)                        R (b
                                                                       !)         e
                                                                                  !
                                                                   "                                                                #
            [p (z) q] z  p (z) q                                                                     [p (e
                                                                                                         !)    q] R (e
                                                                                                                     !)
          <                R          1                                      b+!
                                                                             ! e+                                           0
              p (0) q qz + 1 p (x) dx                                                        p0 (e
                                                                                                 ! ) R (e
                                                                                                        ! ) + p (e
                                                                                                                 ! ) R (e
                                                                                                                        !)
                             z


where we have also used p (0)           1   = q 2 . From (A.1):

                                        p (z) q                              [p (1)         p (0)]    1z
                                          R1
                                     qz + z p (x) dx                                        r

so a su¢ cient condition for (A.2) is:
                                                                              Z     b
                                                                                    !
                       [p (e
                           !)    q] R (e
                                       !)                            1
                                              0                                           R (!) d!
              p0 (e
                  ! ) R (e
                         ! ) + p (e
                                  ! ) R (e
                                         !)                        R (b
                                                                      !)        e
                                                                                !
                                                                   "                                                                #
            [p (z) q] z 2 [p (1) p (0)]                        1                                      [p (e
                                                                                                          !)   q] R (e
                                                                                                                     !)
          <                                                          1        b+!
                                                                              ! e+                                              0
              p (0) q            r                                                            p0 (e
                                                                                                  ! ) R (e
                                                                                                         ! ) + p (e
                                                                                                                  ! ) R (e
                                                                                                                         !)

Going through the algebra, we can rewrite the su¢ cient condition as:

                        p (e  e2
                           !) !                                    q (b
                                                                      ! !e) !
                                                                            e
                                            p(0) q                  p (e
                                                                       !) q
         [p (1)       e + p (e
               p (0)] !      !)             p(e
                                              !) q
                     "                                           # R !b
       [p (z) q] z 2                         ! ) q] R (e
                                         [p (e           !)              R (!) R (e ! ) d!
     <                 1 !b+!   e+                          0     + !e
         p (0) q                   p0 (e
                                       ! ) R (e
                                              ! ) + p (e
                                                       ! ) R (e
                                                              !)        [p (1) p (0)] q1

The right-hand side is positive so it will be enough for the left-hand side to be negative.

                                                                         3
What we want to show is therefore:

                                           p (e  e
                                              !) !                      q (b
                                                                           ! !e)
                                                           p(0) q
                                                                    <                           (A.3)
                           [p (1)              e + p (e
                                        p (0)] !      !)                p (e
                                                                           !) q
                                                           p(e
                                                             !) q


Use p (e
       ! ) R (e         ! ) to isolate:
              ! ) = qR (b

                                              [p (0) q] p (e  e
                                                           !) !
                             b=
                             !
                                    q [p (e
                                          ! ) q] [p (1) p (0)] p (e  e
                                                                  !) !

We can then rewrite (A.3) as:

                     ! ))2 + q [p (e
                 (p (e             !)     q] [p (1)              e > p (e
                                                          p (0)] !      ! ) q [p (e
                                                                                  !)   p (0)]

This simpli…es to p (e
                     ! ) > q, which is true.


References
Hachem, K. 2011. “Relationship Lending and the Transmission of Monetary Policy.”Journal
  of Monetary Economics, 58(6-8), pp. 590-600.




                                                      4
Appendix B –Summary Statistics
Table B.1 reports summary statistics for the variables used in Eq. (2) and (3), namely the
return on loans, the return on securities, and the discount rate. We also report summary
statistics for the interest paid on (demand and time) deposits.
    There are 82 locations in our …nal sample: 33 reserve cities, 31 states (net of the reserve
cities), 12 parts of states (that aggregate up to 6 states net of the reserve cities), and 6
district remainders. The earnings and expense tables used to construct the time series
dimension of the panel are available annually to semi-annually. As explained in Section 4.2,
the Comptroller of the Currency began publishing a July-to-December table in 1925, where
July-to-December means that the table aggregates over the last six months of the year. Prior
to that, the Comptroller published annual earnings and expense tables with June 30 as the
year-end. The table ending June 30 naturally became a January-to-June table after the
publication of the …rst July-to-December table.
    Starting with the July-to-December table for 1926, the Comptroller also began separat-
ing earnings by asset class (i.e., loan income reported separately from securities income).
For prior observations, we use market yields and data on the composition of the securities
portfolios of national banks in each location to impute an income breakdown between loans
and securities. Detailed data on securities portfolios is reported by the Comptroller for states
and reserve cities but not for districts. Constructing the split states and district remainders
requires district-level data (see again Section 4.2) so, for these locations, we do not impute
income breakdowns prior to the second half of 1926.
    Tables B.2 to B.5 report summary statistics for the variables used in Section 5 and
Appendix C. We present means, medians, and standard deviations …rst for the full sample
(82 locations) then separately for the 33 reserve cities and 49 states, split states, and district
remainders.
    Table B.2 reports summary statistics for the dependent variable in Eq. (4). Retail33/29
is the ratio of retail sales in 1933 to retail sales in 1929. This is the dependent variable used
in Table 4, as well as in Table C.2 and column (1) of Table C.3 in Appendix C. Retail35/29
is the ratio of retail sales in 1935 to retail sales in 1929. This is the dependent variable used
in column (2) of Table C.3.
    Table B.3 reports summary statistics for the control variables used in various estimations
of Eq. (4), speci…cally the 1920 census variables de…ned in Table 3 and banking sector HHI
as de…ned in Section 4.3.
    Table B.4 reports summary statistics for the banking distress indicators de…ned in Section
5.1. SuspNum32 is the number of national banks suspended from 1930 to 1932 as a fraction


                                                5
of the number of national banks in 1929. SuspVal32 is deposits in national banks suspended
from 1930 to 1932 as a fraction of deposits in national banks in 1929.
    Table B.5 reports summary statistics for the variables used to instrument banking distress
in Appendix C. The variable names are as de…ned in the notes to Table C.1.
    Table B.6 reports summary statistics for alternative measures of economic activity based
on the Census of Manufactures. Table C.5 in Appendix C runs two-stage versions of Eq.
(4) with these measures as the dependent variable instead of the change in retail sales. Mfg-
Prd33/29 is the value of products manufactured in 1933 as a fraction of the value of products
manufactured in 1929. MfgVa33/29 is value added by manufacture in 1933 as a fraction of
value added by manufacture in 1929. MfgPrd35/29 and MfgVa35/29 are constructed simi-
larly but using the relevant manufacturing outcomes from 1935 instead of 1933.
    Table B.7 presents cross-sectional correlations between our net elasticity measure (NE20)
and the variables in Tables B.2 to B.6. Cross-sectional correlations between NE20 and the
census controls in Table B.3 are reported in Table 3 so we do not repeat them here.




                                              6
                                               Table B.1:
                                              Returns Panel
                            a) Itdec = 0                 b) Itdec = 1               p-value (H0 : a=b)
                         Obs Mean        Sd           Obs Mean        Sd            H1 : a<b H1 : a>b
  Discount Rate
      All                502    0.0423    0.0036       392    0.0426    0.0054        0.1978      0.8022
      Cities             231    0.0423    0.0034       165    0.0423    0.0052        0.4904      0.5096
      States             271    0.0423    0.0038       227    0.0428    0.0056        0.1479      0.8521
  Paid on Deposits
      All                502    0.0214    0.0047       392    0.0210    0.0043        0.9074      0.0926
      Cities             231    0.0192    0.0037       165    0.0189    0.0033        0.7739      0.2261
      States             271    0.0233    0.0046       227    0.0225    0.0043        0.9729      0.0271
  Return on Loans
      All                502    0.0622    0.0094       392    0.0647    0.0101        0.0001      0.9999
      Cities             231    0.0586    0.0082       165    0.0598    0.0067        0.0601      0.9399
      States             271    0.0653    0.0093       227    0.0683    0.0106        0.0005      0.9995
  Securities Return
      All                502    0.0436    0.0074       392    0.0433    0.0076        0.6956      0.3044
      Cities             231    0.0440    0.0074       165    0.0448    0.0074        0.1541      0.8459
      States             271    0.0432    0.0074       227    0.0423    0.0076        0.9212      0.0788

Notes: Itdec = 0 restricts the sample to periods ending in June; Itdec = 1 restricts the sample to periods
ending in December. “All” indicates that summary statistics are calculated using all 82 locations. “Cities”
uses only the 33 reserve cities while “States” uses only the 49 states, split states, and district remainders.
The last two columns test for seasonality in interest rates. For each rate, the null hypothesis is that its
mean is equal in the …rst and second halves of the year. The alternative hypothesis in column “H1 : a<b”
is that the interest rate is lower in the …rst half of the year. The alternative hypothesis in column “H1 :
a>b” is that the interest rate is lower in the second half of the year. A p-value below 0.1 indicates that the
null hypothesis is rejected in favor of the alternative at the 10% signi…cance level.




                                                      7
                                                  Table B.2:
                                              Retail Sales Ratios
                                    All                        Cities                   States
                          Mean     Med.      Sd       Mean     Med.       Sd      Mean Med.          Sd
       Retail33/29        0.515    0.517    0.058     0.523    0.517     0.053    0.509 0.506       0.061
       Retail35/29        0.685    0.676    0.075     0.670    0.658     0.070    0.695 0.680       0.078

Notes: Retail33/29 is the ratio of retail sales in 1933 to retail sales in 1929. Retail35/29 uses retail sales in
1935 instead of 1933. Data from the Census of Business.




                                                  Table B.3:
                                           Census Controls and HHI
                                   All                          Cities                        States
                       Mean        Med.      Sd       Mean       Med.      Sd       Mean        Med.     Sd
   LogArea             8.670       9.047    2.447      6.155     6.413    1.105     10.363    10.845    1.419
   LogPop              13.309     13.449    1.254     12.437    12.228    1.009     13.897    13.873    1.049
   Urban               0.567       0.554    0.286      0.842     0.831    0.117      0.381     0.311    0.204
   Nwnp                 0.563      0.568    0.154      0.543     0.544    0.159      0.576     0.594    0.151
   Age1844              0.434      0.427    0.040      0.473     0.476    0.026      0.408     0.402    0.024
   School1620          0.277       0.269    0.062      0.268     0.261    0.064     0.283      0.272    0.061
   LogMfgEstPc         -5.986     -5.972    0.375     -5.841    -5.849    0.301     -6.084     -6.059   0.390
   MfgWork              0.080      0.065    0.054      0.087     0.083    0.040     0.075      0.047    0.062
   LogMfgVa            11.075     11.112    0.575     11.263    11.294    0.411     10.949    10.872    0.637
   LogFarmsPc          -3.690     -3.312    1.632     -4.959    -4.320    1.754     -2.835     -2.618   0.769
   Acres                0.560      0.604    0.269      0.579     0.684    0.305     0.548      0.583    0.245
   LogAvgCrop           7.653     7.717     0.476     7.622      7.773    0.529      7.673      7.677   0.442
   LogAvgValue         9.452       9.429    0.652      9.741     9.665    0.538      9.258     9.168    0.654
   HomeOwnClr           0.268      0.268    0.083      0.214     0.219    0.058     0.305      0.324    0.077
   HHI                  0.217      0.203    0.107      0.179     0.167    0.093      0.243     0.250    0.110

Notes: HHI measures local banking market concentration in 1929. All other variables are from the 1920
population census and are as de…ned in Table 3.




                                                       8
                                                Table B.4:
                                         Banking Distress Indicators

                                   All                       Cities                    States
                        Mean      Med.       Sd      Mean    Med.      Sd     Mean      Med.     Sd
       SuspNum32        0.096     0.077     0.104    0.057     0      0.115   0.123    0.100    0.087
       SuspVal32        0.060     0.030     0.091    0.027     0      0.082   0.081    0.047    0.091

Notes: SuspNum32 and SuspVal32 measure respectively the number and deposits of national banks
suspended from 1930 to 1932 relative to the number and deposits of all national banks in 1929.




                                             Table B.5:
                                   Instruments for Banking Distress

                                 All                         Cities                     States
                     Mean        Med.      Sd       Mean      Med.     Sd     Mean       Med.      Sd
    LogAsset29       11.909     11.859    1.143     11.761   11.669   1.181   12.008    11.968    1.117
    LogNum29         3.523      3.882     1.477      2.223    2.079   0.740   4.398      4.489    1.171
    RealEst29         0.038      0.038    0.014     0.033     0.033   0.016   0.041      0.041    0.011
    Capital29         0.123      0.121    0.029     0.111     0.102   0.027   0.130      0.126    0.028
    DueTo29           0.110      0.084    0.082     0.189     0.174   0.069   0.058      0.053    0.034
    DueFrom29         0.120     0.124     0.047     0.157     0.162   0.037   0.095      0.100    0.036
    DemDep29          0.395      0.396    0.088     0.413     0.439   0.079   0.383      0.377    0.093
    Cash29            0.064     0.063     0.010     0.067     0.067   0.012   0.062      0.063    0.008

Notes: All variables as de…ned in Table C.1 (see Appendix C) and based on data for national banks in 1929.




                                                      9
                                             Table B.6:
                                         Manufacturing Ratios

                                  All                      Cities                     States
                         Mean    Med.     Sd       Mean    Med.      Sd       Mean     Med.     Sd
      MfgPrd33/29        0.444   0.435   0.085     0.435   0.433    0.056     0.450   0.442    0.100
      MfgPrd35/29        0.626   0.611   0.150     0.657   0.623    0.163     0.605   0.604    0.139
      MfgVa33/29         0.478   0.471   0.084     0.490   0.484    0.073     0.470   0.456    0.091
      MfgVa35/29         0.592   0.588   0.123     0.635   0.598    0.131     0.562   0.570    0.109

Notes: MfgPrd33/29 (MfgPrd35/29) is the value of products manufactured in 1933 (1935) as a fraction of
the value of products manufactured in 1929. MfgVa33/29 (MfgVa35/29) is value added by manufacture in
1933 (1935) as a fraction of value added by manufacture in 1929. Data from the Census of Manufactures.




                                            Table B.7:
                                    Cross-Sectional Correlations
                                                  Correlation with NE20
                                                    All   Cities States
                              HHI                  0.164 0.160 -0.007
                              SuspNum32            0.151 -0.081 0.171
                              SuspVal32            0.206 0.056 0.151
                              LogAsset29          -0.074 -0.188 -0.067
                              LogNum29             0.309 -0.082 0.136
                              RealEst29            0.140 -0.099 0.204
                              Capital29           -0.115 -0.324 -0.229
                              DueTo29             -0.180 0.331 -0.011
                              DueFrom29           -0.116 0.321 0.059
                              DemDep29            -0.121 -0.042 -0.080
                              Cash29              -0.059 0.134 -0.091
                              Retail33/29         -0.271 -0.297 -0.218
                              Retail35/29         -0.202 -0.288 -0.294
                              MfgPrd33/29         -0.061 -0.225 -0.054
                              MfgPrd35/29         -0.107 -0.084 -0.010
                              MfgVa33/29          -0.155 -0.051 -0.175
                              MfgVa35/29          -0.274 -0.115 -0.256

Notes: NE20 is the measure of continuing relationships on the eve of the Great Depression. All other
variables are as de…ned in Tables B.2 to B.6. Cross-sectional correlations between NE20 and the census
controls in Table B.3 appear in Table 3 and are hence omitted here.




                                                   10
Appendix C –Two-Stage Estimation Results
This appendix provides details on the two-stage estimation results discussed in Section 5.3
of the main text.


First-Stage Regression
Calomiris and Mason (2003) argue that the following variables, all measured in 1929, are valid
instruments for loan supply during the Great Depression: average bank size, the fraction
of non-cash banking assets in real estate, and the ratio of bank capital to total banking
assets. They explain that real estate and capital would have di¤ered across locations in 1929
mainly because of di¤erences in exposure to earlier agricultural crises while average bank size
would have di¤ered mainly because of di¤erences in pre-existing regulations that restricted
where banks could open and branch. Their identifying assumption is that the shocks of the
Great Depression were not just a continuation of the shocks that produced cross-sectional
di¤erences in the instruments in 1929.
    We follow the same approach, adding interbank linkages in 1929 to the list of instruments.
Recent work by Mitchener and Richardson (2019) shows that banks that normally received
large amounts of interbank deposits cut lending to …rms in the early 1930s when those
deposits were withdrawn. Interbank linkages thus ampli…ed the contraction in bank lending
through loan supply, providing an additional instrument. A longer list of instruments is
useful for us given that we need to instrument both the number and value of national bank
suspensions in a sample that includes a mix of states and reserve cities.
    We measure interbank linkages using data on deposits received from other banks (due-tos)
and deposits held at other banks (due-froms). We add demand deposits and cash holdings
of national banks in 1929 as controls to ensure that dues proxy for the channels in Mitchener
and Richardson (2019), not for liquid assets and liabilities more generally. We also interact
all instruments with the dummy variable for reserve cities to allow for the possibility that
the instruments predict loan supply di¤erently in cities versus states.
    Table C.1 reports the …rst-stage regression results in which the instruments are used to
predict banking distress. We use a Tobit regression since SuspN um32i and SuspV al32i as
de…ned in Section 5.1 are censored from below at zero. In e¤ect, our two-stage procedure
uses the latent variables behind SuspN um32i and SuspV al32i as the indicators of banking
distress in Eq. (4). The instrumented indicators are then linear predictions from the Tobit
estimation.1
  1
   We therefore refrain from comparing the magnitudes of the estimated second-stage coe¢ cients to the
OLS estimates in Table 4.


                                                 11
    Average bank size helps predict banking outcomes, consistent with the …rst-stage results
of Calomiris and Mason (2003). Holding constant the total value of banking sector assets in
Table C.1, distress is increasing in the total number of banks, and, holding constant the total
number of banks, distress is decreasing in the total value of banking sector assets, especially
outside reserve cities. The capital ratio of banks also enters Table C.1 with the expected
negative sign and is a statistically signi…cant predictor of the suspension rate. Due-tos and
due-froms are statistically signi…cant as well. More due-tos predict more banking distress
in reserve cities but less distress elsewhere; more due-froms predict less banking distress
in reserve cities but more distress elsewhere. These are the signs one would expect to …nd
based on the pyramid structure of interbank deposits described in Mitchener and Richardson
(2019). Lastly, Table C.1 shows that a higher fraction of banking assets …nanced by demand
deposits (i.e., highly runnable retail liabilities) predicts more banking distress unless cash
holdings are also a larger share of assets. These signs are again as expected, along with being
statistically signi…cant.2


Second-Stage Regressions
Second-stage results are presented in Tables C.2 and C.3. In all speci…cations, we use
suspensions-based measures of distress, as we believe they provide a more broad-based notion
of distress than outright failures, and we include district …xed e¤ects, the reserve city dummy,
and the variables from the 1920 census as controls.
    Column (1) of Table C.2 adds no further controls, as in the …rst column of Table 4.
Column (2) controls for concentration of the local banking market, as in the second column
of Table 4. The rest of Table C.2 provides further evidence of the economic content of
net elasticity over and above other local characteristics by including interactions between
the census variables and banking distress in the control vector Xi . The size of our sample
does not permit including all interactions at once so we interact distress (speci…cally the
instrumented indicators of banking distress predicted by the …rst-stage regressions in Table
C.1) with one census variable at a time.
    As discussed in Section 4.3, net elasticity tended to be higher in areas that were more
rural, as measured by a smaller urban population and/or more farming activity. More rural
areas also tended to have smaller banks, as indicated by a very high correlation between the
urbanization rate and the log of average bank size. Columns (3) and (4) in Table C.2 run
   2
    The F-statistic for the …rst-stage estimation in Table C.1 is 6.93. This is below the magic number of
10 targeted by some papers, but, in our opinion, not that far below and actually quite sensible given our
application and the fact that we have only 82 data points in the cross-section. Thus, while we do not want
to overstate the two-stage estimates, we do trust them to be informative.



                                                   12
the two-stage version of Eq. (4) when Xi interacts instrumented banking distress with either
Urban or LogFarmsPc, both as de…ned in Table 3. In column (5), instrumented distress is
instead interacted with the log of average bank size in 1920. Columns (6) to (17) repeat
the exercise for each of the remaining census variables in Table 3. In all regressions, Xi still
includes district …xed e¤ects, the reserve city dummy, and the other controls in Table 3.
    In all columns in Table C.2, the coe¢ cient on the interaction between the instrumented
SuspN um32i variable and N E20i is negative and statistically signi…cant and the magnitude
of this coe¢ cient is stable across columns. Our results are therefore robust to controlling for
interactions between banking distress and local characteristics from the 1920 census.
    Column (1) in Table C.3 extends the speci…cation in the second column of Table C.2 by
interacting N E20i and the instrumented banking distress indicators with the reserve city
dummy to explore whether the results di¤er across the types of locations that comprise our
sample. The coe¢ cient on the interaction between the instrumented SuspN um32i variable
and N E20i remains negative. The unconditional estimate is -1.460 and statistically sig-
ni…cant. The estimate for reserve cities is -0.426 (-1.460+1.034) and we cannot reject the
null hypothesis that the di¤erence relative to the unconditional estimate is simply driven by
noise. Column (2) in Table C.3 repeats the analysis using the change in retail sales from
1929 to 1935 as the dependent variable. We …nd similar results as in the …rst column.


Aggregate Implications
The estimated coe¢ cients can be used to make statements about the aggregate implications
of banking distress in the early 1930s. Speci…cally, we can predict what retail sales would
have been had there been no bank suspensions (e.g., SuspN um32i = SuspV al32i = 0 for
all locations i) then compare this to the …tted values when all regressors are as observed in
the data. We …nd that retail sales in the U.S. would have been almost 4% higher in 1933
had there been no banking distress. If we set only the SuspN um32i variable to zero to
try to isolate the impact of the initial distress without the mitigating e¤ect from the rapid
liquidation of large suspended banks, we …nd that total retail sales would have been on the
order of 10% higher.
    Although geographically disaggregated measures of total economic activity (e.g., GNP)
are not available for the period we study, we can perform a back-of-the-envelope calculation
to translate the total retail sales decline into an aggregate GNP e¤ect. The “multiplier”
we use is the coe¢ cient from a simple regression of GNP growth on retail sales growth
and a constant. We use annual data aggregated at the national level to run the regression,
instrumenting retail sales growth by its one period lag. The coe¢ cient on instrumented


                                              13
retail sales growth constitutes a rough multiplier that we can use for our back-of-the-envelope
calculation. The sample period for the regression is 1920 to 1929. We start in 1920 because
that is when the Federal Reserve began publishing its monthly index of retail sales. We
seasonally adjust this index using Census software then take annual averages to match the
frequency of the GNP estimates available from Romer (1989) and Balke and Gordon (1989).
We end in 1929 to ensure that our results are not distorted by the Great Depression, the
1937-38 recession, or WWII. We also eliminate the post-WWII period since the ratio of retail
sales to GNP declines markedly after the war.
    The multipliers from various speci…cations are reported in the second row of Table C.4.
Using the GNP estimates from Romer (1989), a 1% increase in retail sales is consistent with
a 1.7% increase in nominal GNP and a 0.7% increase in real GNP. Using the GNP estimates
from Balke and Gordon (1989), a 1% increase in retail sales is consistent with a 1.6% increase
in nominal GNP and a 0.9% increase in real GNP. Overall, then, a 4% drop in retail sales is
consistent with a 6-7% drop in nominal GNP and a 3-4% drop in real GNP, which is about
one-eighth of the economic contraction experienced during the Great Depression.


Manufacturing Outcomes
We now consider alternative measures of economic activity as the dependent variable in Eq.
(4), speci…cally changes in manufacturing outcomes from the Census of Manufactures instead
of changes in retail sales from the Census of Business.
     The locations for which we can calculate N E20i include reserve cities, states, split states,
and district remainders, so, to run regressions with the change in manufacturing outcomes
as the dependent variable, we need county-level manufacturing data that can be aggregated
into the appropriate units i. We consider manufacturing outcomes here since other measures
of economic activity, such as unemployment rates, are not available at the county level until
1937. Construction contracts and business failures are also unavailable by county.
     The Census of Manufactures is the go-to source for county-level manufacturing data, but
it involves substantially more top-coding than the retail sales data in the Census of Business.
Top-coding occurs when two or more counties in a state are aggregated into a state residual.
Top-coding is common for counties with few manufacturers or one dominant manufacturer
that would otherwise be revealed. It is also a function of the precision of the survey. The
number of top-coded counties is notably high in the 1933 Census of Manufactures. The issue
also exists in 1929 and 1935 but to a lesser extent. Our measures of manufacturing activity
will therefore be noisier than our measure of retail sales, particularly in 1933. We present
the following results with this caveat in mind.


                                               14
    We run two versions of Eq. (4) using a two-stage procedure as above. In the …rst version,
the dependent variable is the value of products manufactured in 1933 as a fraction of the
value of products manufactured in 1929. In the second version, the dependent variable is
value added by manufacture in 1933 as a fraction of value added by manufacture in 1929.
Value added captures the value of products net of the cost of materials, fuel, purchased
energy, and contract work used in production. Both versions are also run using data from
1935 instead of 1933. The banking distress indicators are instrumented as described earlier
and the second-stage regression controls for district …xed e¤ects, the reserve city dummy,
the variables from the 1920 census, and HHI of the local banking market.
    The results are reported in Table C.5. They echo the results obtained using retail sales.
In all columns of Table C.5, the coe¢ cient on the interaction between the instrumented
SuspN um32i variable and N E20i is negative, indicating that the marginal impact of bank-
ing distress on manufacturing activity was more severe in areas with more continuing re-
lationships. This interaction is statistically signi…cant for 1935 but not 1933, which is not
surprising given the noise introduced into the manufacturing data by the top-coding issues
discussed above.


References
Balke, N. and R. Gordon. 1989. “The Estimation of Prewar Gross National Product: Method-
  ology and New Evidence.”Journal of Political Economy, 97(1), pp. 38-92.

Calomiris, C. and J. Mason. 2003. “Consequences of Bank Distress During the Great De-
  pression.”American Economic Review, 93(3), pp. 937-947.

Mitchener, K. and G. Richardson. 2019. “Network Contagion and Interbank Ampli…cation
 during the Great Depression.”Journal of Political Economy, 127(2) pp. 465-507.

Romer, C. 1989. “The Prewar Business Cycle Reconsidered: New Estimates of Gross Na-
  tional Product, 1869-1908.”Journal of Political Economy, 97(1), pp. 1-37.




                                             15
                                           Table C.1:
                     First Stage Tobit Regressions for Two-Stage Procedure
                                                              (1)          (2)
                          VARIABLES                       SuspNum32     SuspVal32

                          LogAsset29                       -0.089***      -0.094**
                                                             (0.031)       (0.036)
                          LogNum29                          0.072**       0.079**
                                                             (0.031)       (0.036)
                          RealEst29                            2.219         2.035
                                                             (1.527)       (2.336)
                          Capital29                          -1.234*        -1.049
                                                             (0.694)       (0.791)
                          DueTo29                          -1.474***       -1.028*
                                                             (0.470)       (0.608)
                          DueFrom29                        2.580***         1.944*
                                                             (0.752)       (1.057)
                          DemDep29                           1.383*         1.078
                                                             (0.706)       (0.908)
                          Cash29                          12.300***          1.179
                                                             (4.519)       (5.760)
                          DemDep29 x Cash29               -29.364***       -16.509
                                                            (10.034)      (12.688)
                          City                                -0.807        -1.102
                                                             (1.044)       (1.162)
                          LogAsset29 x City                   0.100*        -0.002
                                                             (0.055)       (0.058)
                          LogNum29 x City                      0.049         0.096
                                                             (0.055)       (0.062)
                          RealEst29 x City                    -3.581        -4.760
                                                             (2.409)       (3.096)
                          Capital29 x City                    -0.335        -0.115
                                                             (1.194)       (1.026)
                          DueTo29 x City                    2.093***      2.479***
                                                             (0.563)       (0.747)
                          DueFrom29 x City                 -3.161***     -3.974***
                                                             (1.147)       (1.448)
                          DemDep29 x City                     -0.429       3.967**
                                                             (1.773)       (1.907)
                          Cash29 x City                       -1.533        18.748
                                                            (10.282)      (12.674)
                          DemDep29 x Cash29 x City            3.783       -57.817*
                                                            (25.217)      (30.498)

                          Observations                        82            82
                          District FE                        YES           YES
Notes: All regressors from national bank data in 1929. LogAsset29 is logged banking assets; LogNum29 is
logged number of banks; RealEst29 is fraction of non-cash assets in real estate; Capital29 is capital-to-asset
ratio; DueTo29 is deposits received from other banks as a share of assets; DueFrom29 is deposits held at
other banks as a share of assets; DemDep29 is ratio of demand deposits to assets; Cash29 is cash-to-asset
ratio. City is a dummy for reserve cities. Robust standard errors in brackets. ***p<0.01, **p<0.05, *p<0.1


                                                     16
                                          Table C.2:
                        Two-Stage Estimates, Retail Sales Ratio, 1933/29

                                     (1)         (2)         (3)            (4)       (5)
                                               Control:    Control:       Control:  Control:
     VARIABLES                    Baseline      HHI         Urban       LogFarmsPc LogBkSize

     NE20                   0.055    0.051    0.047                          0.058            0.055
                          (0.036)  (0.040)  (0.040)                        (0.042)          (0.041)
     SuspNum32             -0.027   -0.065   -0.248                         0.095            -0.200
                          (0.123)  (0.251)  (0.496)                        (0.486)          (1.113)
     SuspNum32 x NE20    -0.909** -0.838** -0.899**                       -1.001**         -1.008**
                          (0.393)  (0.419)  (0.413)                        (0.459)          (0.455)
     SuspVal32             -0.115   -0.304    0.389                         -0.083            0.650
                          (0.114)  (0.246)  (0.646)                        (0.517)          (1.400)
     SuspVal32 x NE20    0.802**   0.709*   0.747*                         0.877*           0.882**
                          (0.395)  (0.419)  (0.423)                        (0.455)          (0.447)
     Control                         0.076    0.039                          0.065           -0.001
                                   (0.127)  (0.135)                        (0.041)          (0.025)
     SuspNum32 x Control            -0.256    0.213                         0.030             0.013
                                   (1.192)  (0.585)                        (0.108)          (0.118)
     SuspVal32 x Control             1.464   -0.585                          0.007           -0.080
                                   (1.323)  (0.753)                        (0.110)          (0.147)

     Observations                    82            82          82             82              82
     Adjusted R-squared             0.518        0.549       0.523          0.508           0.508
     District FE                    YES          YES         YES            YES             YES
     Census Controls                YES          YES         YES            YES             YES

Notes: The dependent variable is retail sales in 1933 as a fraction of retail sales in 1929. NE20 is the
measure of continuing relationships on the eve of the Great Depression. The indicators of banking distress,
SuspNum32 and SuspVal32, are de…ned using national bank suspensions and instrumented as per Table
C.1. The heading of each column speci…es the control variable interacted with instrumented distress: in
column (2), HHI measures local banking market concentration in 1929; in column (5), LogBkSize is the log
of average bank size in 1920; variables in all other headings are as de…ned in Table 3. All columns include
the remaining variables in Table 3 as controls. Bootstrapped standard errors clustered at the district level
are in brackets. ***p<0.01, **p<0.05, *p<0.1




                                                    17
                                   Table C.2 (Continued):
                       Two-Stage Estimates, Retail Sales Ratio, 1933/29

                            (6)        (7)        (8)        (9)         (10)         (11)
                          Control:   Control:   Control:   Control:    Control:      Control:
 VARIABLES                LogArea    LogPop      Nwnp      Age1844    School1620   LogMfgEstPc

 NE20                        0.054    0.065*       0.066      0.055       0.060        0.060
                           (0.038)    (0.039)    (0.042)    (0.041)     (0.039)       (0.042)
 SuspNum32                   0.217      1.112     -0.217     -0.823      -0.225        -1.051
                           (0.472)    (1.545)    (0.428)    (1.610)     (0.677)       (2.890)
 SuspNum32 x NE20         -0.985**   -1.037**   -1.047**   -0.932**    -0.965**      -1.014**
                           (0.417)    (0.441)    (0.462)    (0.445)     (0.422)       (0.455)
 SuspVal32                  -0.579     -1.103     -0.146      0.936      -0.125        0.377
                           (0.517)    (1.705)    (0.451)    (2.002)     (0.676)       (3.267)
 SuspVal32 x NE20          0.868**    0.943**    0.915**    0.814*      0.815*        0.906**
                           (0.415)    (0.447)    (0.454)    (0.450)     (0.422)       (0.457)
 Control                    -0.041   0.047**    -0.235**     0.894        0.079        -0.047
                           (0.028)    (0.024)    (0.105)    (0.899)     (0.276)       (0.046)
 SuspNum32 x Control        -0.039     -0.086      0.362      1.654       0.689        -0.176
                           (0.064)    (0.116)    (0.757)    (3.451)     (2.263)       (0.498)
 SuspVal32 x Control         0.074      0.074      0.000     -2.200       0.009        0.087
                           (0.076)    (0.131)    (0.795)    (4.203)     (2.230)       (0.564)

 Observations                82        82         82         82          82            82
 Adjusted R-squared        0.527      0.510      0.515      0.506       0.509         0.503
 District FE               YES        YES        YES        YES         YES           YES
 Census Controls           YES        YES        YES        YES         YES           YES

Notes: See previous.




                                                18
                                   Table C.2 (Continued):
                       Two-Stage Estimates, Retail Sales Ratio, 1933/29

                            (12)       (13)            (14)         (15)         (16)      (17)
                          Control:    Control:        Control:     Control:    Control:   Control:
 VARIABLES                MfgWork    LogMfgVa          Acres     LogAvgCrop   LogAvgVal   H.Own

 NE20                       0.058        0.044           0.056       0.054       0.058       0.055
                           (0.043)     (0.039)         (0.043)     (0.037)      (0.038)    (0.040)
 SuspNum32                   0.066       0.186          -0.052       1.226       1.014      -0.038
                           (0.328)     (2.878)         (0.334)     (2.448)      (2.666)    (0.438)
 SuspNum32 x NE20         -1.011**    -0.854**         -0.914*    -0.918**     -0.930**   -0.936**
                           (0.456)     (0.423)         (0.523)     (0.414)      (0.422)    (0.461)
 SuspVal32                  -0.111       1.328          -0.092      -2.257       -1.802     -0.182
                           (0.317)     (2.780)         (0.325)     (2.321)      (2.948)    (0.460)
 SuspVal32 x NE20          0.911**     0.777*            0.805    0.811**       0.828*      0.823*
                           (0.457)     (0.423)         (0.499)     (0.404)      (0.426)    (0.462)
 Control                     0.444      -0.020        -0.169**      0.025        0.011     0.419**
                           (0.592)     (0.034)         (0.080)     (0.032)      (0.031)    (0.211)
 SuspNum32 x Control        -1.051      -0.020           0.050      -0.158       -0.104     -0.007
                           (3.284)     (0.255)         (0.554)     (0.316)      (0.273)    (1.805)
 SuspVal32 x Control        -0.194      -0.128          -0.047      0.273        0.170       0.304
                           (3.084)     (0.246)         (0.469)     (0.299)      (0.299)    (2.088)

 Observations                82         82               82         82            82         82
 Adjusted R-squared         0.514      0.528           0.498       0.520        0.507      0.499
 District FE                YES        YES             YES         YES          YES        YES
 Census Controls            YES        YES             YES         YES          YES        YES

Notes: See previous. LogAvgVal abbreviates LogAvgValue; H.Own abbreviates HomeOwnClr.




                                                 19
                                         Table C.3:
                       Two-Stage Estimates, Retail Sales Ratio, Extended

                                                               (1)         (2)
                         VARIABLES                           1933/29     1935/29

                         NE20                       0.102                   0.121
                                                  (0.064)                 (0.093)
                         SuspNum32                 -0.336                  0.016
                                                  (0.511)                 (0.824)
                         SuspNum32 x NE20        -1.460**                 -1.939*
                                                  (0.737)                 (1.145)
                         SuspVal32                  0.183                  -0.061
                                                  (0.629)                 (0.931)
                         SuspVal32 x NE20         1.424*                    1.931
                                                  (0.814)                 (1.199)
                         HHI                        0.089                   0.275
                                                  (0.130)                 (0.221)
                         SuspNum32 x HHI           -0.013                  -0.059
                                                  (1.410)                 (2.458)
                         SuspVal32 x HHI            1.023                   0.782
                                                  (1.619)                 (2.550)
                         NE20 x City               -0.123                  -0.136
                                                  (0.085)                 (0.133)
                         SuspNum32 x City           0.234                  -0.066
                                                  (0.382)                 (0.615)
                         SuspNum32 x NE20 x City    1.034                   1.314
                                                  (1.087)                 (1.750)
                         SuspVal32 x City          -0.442                  -0.165
                                                  (0.473)                 (0.711)
                         SuspVal32 x NE20 x City   -1.328                  -1.523
                                                  (1.096)                 (1.752)

                         Observations                           82           82
                         Adjusted R-squared                   0.637        0.487
                         District FE                          YES          YES
                         Census Controls                      YES          YES

Notes: In column (1), the dependent variable is retail sales in 1933 as a fraction of retail sales in 1929.
Column (2) uses retail sales in 1935 instead of 1933. NE20 is the measure of continuing relationships on
the eve of the Great Depression. The indicators of banking distress, SuspNum32 and SuspVal32, are
de…ned using national bank suspensions and instrumented as per Table C.1. HHI measures local banking
market concentration in 1929. City is a dummy for reserve cities. Bootstrapped standard errors clustered
at the district level are in brackets. ***p<0.01, **p<0.05, *p<0.1




                                                     20
                                         Table C.4:
                                GNP Multipliers for Retail Sales

                                  (1)      (2)       (3)      (4)
                              Nominal  Nominal      Real     Real
                               Romer Balke-Gordon Romer Balke-Gordon
             Constant           -0.010   -0.006   0.028*** 0.025***
                               (0.010)  (0.012)    (0.005)  (0.006)
             % Retail         1.690*** 1.565***   0.696*** 0.896***
                               (0.242)  (0.299)    (0.163)  (0.242)

Notes: The dependent variable is nominal GNP growth in columns (1)-(2) and real GNP growth in
columns (3)-(4). GNP estimates from Romer (1989) are used in columns (1) and (3). GNP estimates from
Balke and Gordon (1989) are used in columns (2) and (4). % Retail is retail sales growth instrumented
using its one period lag. Robust standard errors are in brackets. ***p<0.01, **p<0.05, *p<0.1




                                                 21
                                         Table C.5:
                         Two-Stage Estimates, Manufacturing Outcomes

                                             (1)            (2)        (3)     (4)
                                           MfgPrd         MfgPrd      MfgVa   MfgVa
                 VARIABLES                 1933/29        1935/29    1933/29 1935/29

                 NE20                         0.043          0.141    -0.016      0.069
                                            (0.084)        (0.129)   (0.073)    (0.100)
                 SuspNum32                   0.157          0.026     0.110      -0.279
                                            (0.478)        (0.894)   (0.474)    (0.647)
                 SuspNum32 x NE20            -1.176       -2.808**    -0.596    -2.090*
                                            (0.853)        (1.410)   (0.833)    (1.097)
                 SuspVal32                   -0.583         -0.643    -0.476     -0.241
                                            (0.492)        (0.828)   (0.488)    (0.612)
                 SuspVal32 x NE20             0.939          1.936     0.267      1.395
                                            (0.878)        (1.416)   (0.831)    (1.106)
                 HHI                          0.208          0.120    -0.013     -0.233
                                            (0.222)        (0.356)   (0.225)    (0.296)
                 SuspNum32 x HHI             -2.296         -2.381    -1.607      0.331
                                            (2.389)        (3.732)   (2.282)    (2.820)
                 SuspVal32 x HHI             3.404           4.164     2.825      0.833
                                            (2.708)        (4.066)   (2.714)    (3.041)

                 Observations                  82            82         82         82
                 Adjusted R-squared          0.025         0.135      0.121      0.260
                 District FE                 YES           YES        YES        YES
                 Census Controls             YES           YES        YES        YES

Notes: In column (1), the dependent variable is the value of products manufactured in 1933 as a fraction of
the value of products manufactured in 1929. Column (2) uses the value of products manufactured in 1935
instead of 1933. In column (3), the dependent variable is value added by manufacture in 1933 as a fraction
of value added by manufacture in 1929. Column (4) uses value added in 1935 instead of 1933. NE20 is the
measure of continuing relationships on the eve of the Great Depression. The indicators of banking distress,
SuspNum32 and SuspVal32, are de…ned using national bank suspensions and instrumented as per Table
C.1. HHI measures local banking market concentration in 1929. Bootstrapped standard errors clustered at
the district level are in brackets. ***p<0.01, **p<0.05, *p<0.1




                                                     22
