                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                           STIMULATING HOUSING MARKETS

                                         David Berger
                                        Nicholas Turner
                                          Eric Zwick

                                      Working Paper 22903
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w22903


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                  December 2016




We thank Andrew Abel, Jediphi Cabal, Paul Goldsmith-Pinkham, Erik Hurst, Anil Kashyap, Ben
Keys, Adam Looney, Matt Notowidigdo, Christopher Palmer, Jonathan Parker, Amit Seru, Isaac
Sorkin, Johannes Stroebel, Amir Sufi, Joe Vavra, Rob Vishny, Owen Zidar and seminar and
conference participants for comments, ideas, and help with data. Tianfang Cui, Prab Upadrashta,
and Iris Song provided excellent research assistance. The views expressed here are ours and do
not necessarily reflect those of the US Treasury Office of Tax Analysis, nor the IRS Office of
Research, Analysis and Statistics, nor of the National Bureau of Economic Research. Zwick
gratefully acknowledges financial support from the Neubauer Family Foundation, Initiative on
Global Markets, and Booth School of Business at the University of Chicago.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2016 by David Berger, Nicholas Turner, and Eric Zwick. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Stimulating Housing Markets
David Berger, Nicholas Turner, and Eric Zwick
NBER Working Paper No. 22903
December 2016
JEL No. E62,E65,G18,H31,R38

                                         ABSTRACT

This paper studies temporary policy incentives designed to address capital overhang by inducing
asset demand from buyers in the private market. Using variation across local geographies in ex
ante program exposure and a difference-in-differences design, we find that the First-Time
Homebuyer Credit induced a cumulative increase in home sales of 397 to 546 thousand, or 7.8 to
10.7 percent, nationally. We find little evidence of a sharp reversal of the policy response;
instead, demand comes from several years in the future. The program likely sped the process of
reallocating homes from distressed sellers to high value buyers, which stabilized house prices.
The response is concentrated in the existing home sales market, implying the stimulative effects
of the program were less important than its role in accelerating reallocation.


David Berger                                    Eric Zwick
Department of Economics                         Booth School of Business
Northwestern University                         University of Chicago
2001 Sheridan Road                              5807 South Woodlawn Avenue
Evanston, IL 60208                              Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER                                        and NBER
david.berger@northwestern.edu                   ezwick@chicagobooth.edu

Nicholas Turner
Office of Tax Analysis
U.S. Department of the Treasury
1500 Pennsylvania Avenue, NW
Washington, D.C. 20220
Nicholas.Turner@treasury.gov
       A classic debate in economics concerns how policy should respond to periods of capital
overhang following investment booms (Hayek, 1931; Keynes, 1936). When booms coincide
with credit expansions, high-valuation potential buyers often cannot finance distressed asset
purchases in the subsequent slump (Shleifer and Vishny, 1992). In this case, an overhang leads
to fire sales and inefficient liquidation, amplifying the slump through debt-deflation dynam-
ics and creating a role for welfare-improving policy intervention (Fisher, 1933; Kiyotaki and
Moore, 1997; Lorenzoni, 2008; Eggertsson and Krugman, 2012).
       This problem reemerged in the aftermath of the Great Recession, with the housing market
suffering extraordinary distress as shown in Figure 1. As house price growth slowed, a shortage
of prospective buyers for new homes caused housing inventory to double from 2004 to mid-
2006 and remain at historic levels in 2007 and 2008. The boom coincided with a rapid and
widespread increase in household debt secured by real estate (Mian and Sufi, 2015). When
house prices began to fall, defaults, foreclosures, and further downward pressure on prices
ensued (Campbell, Giglio and Pathak, 2011; Mian, Sufi and Trebbi, 2015; Guren and McQuade,
2015). By mid-2008, a dramatic shift in the composition of home sales had taken place, with
nearly forty percent of home sales classified as distressed or foreclosure sales and vacancies at
or near all-time highs.
       The debt-induced overhang in the housing market prompted many policy proposals and re-
sponses, primarily in the form of debt renegotiation interventions designed to repair household
balance sheets, government asset purchase programs designed to support financial markets,
and monetary and fiscal policy designed to spur demand growth.1 However, these policies do
not directly target the problem of capital overhang, nor do they promote reallocation when
assets are no longer in the hands of their first-best users. And despite a large theoretical litera-
ture describing the welfare costs of capital overhang induced fire sales, there is little empirical
work evaluating policies which target overhang.
       This paper evaluates an $11 billion policy designed to induce demand for housing through
providing temporary tax incentives for buyers in the private market. The policy we study,
the First-Time Homebuyer Credit (FTHC), was a temporary tax incentive for new homebuy-
ers between 2008 and 2010. We combine data from administrative tax records with trans-
action deeds data to measure program exposure and housing market outcomes for approxi-
mately 9,000 ZIP codes, which account for 69 percent of the US population in 2007. We use
   1
   Diamond and Rajan (2011), French et al. (2010), Shleifer and Vishny (2010a), Hanson, Kashyap and Stein
(2011), and Eberly and Krishnamurthy (2014) discuss potential policy solutions. A recent empirical literature
aims to evaluate some of the programs that address debt overhang in the Great Recession (Agarwal et al., 2012,
2015).



                                                      2
a difference-in-differences research design to estimate the effect of the policy on home sales
and the housing market more broadly. We then ask whether the policy induced reallocation of
underutilized homes and whether this reallocation stabilized housing market health.
   We present four main findings. First, the policy proved effective at spurring home sales.
We estimate the FTHC raised home sales during the policy period by 163 to 224 thousand
within sample and 397 to 546 thousand nationally. Second, we find little evidence that the
surge in home sales induced by the credit reversed immediately following the policy period.
Instead, demand appears to come from several years in the future. Third, the policy response
came primarily in the form of existing home sales, implying the direct stimulative effects of
the program were small ($4.5 to $5.2 billion). Fourth, we present evidence that the program
likely accelerated the process of reallocation from low-value sellers to high-value buyers, and
the health of the housing market, as reflected in house prices, improved accordingly. A back-
of-the-envelope calculation suggests the consumption response to the increase in house prices
was much larger than the policy’s direct stimulus effect.
   The first part of the paper documents the effect of the FTHC on home sales and presents a
number of robustness tests. The research design compares ZIP codes at the same point in time
whose exposure to the program differs. We define program exposure based on the number of
potential first-time homebuyers in a ZIP code, proxied by the share of people in that ZIP in
the year 2000 who are first-time homebuyers. We assume places with few potential first-time
homebuyers serve as a “control group” because the policy does not induce many people to buy
in these places. The key threat to this design is the possibility that time-varying, place-specific
shocks are correlated with our measures of program exposure.
   We assess this threat in six ways. First, graphical inspection of parallel trends indicates
smooth pre-trends, clear breaks during the policy period and spikes at policy expiration, and a
reversion to pretrends in the post-policy period. Second, estimates are robust to the inclusion
of CBSA-by-time fixed effects, which is our default specification. Third, our results are consis-
tent across different specifications, with varying control sets, weighting schemes, and sample
definitions. Fourth, our results are driven by activity in the “starter home” market, with sales
in homes with 1 to 3 bedrooms responding strongly while sales in the 4+ bedrooms market
respond little. This test provides a within-time placebo that complements the pre- and post-
policy trends in confirming the design’s robustness. Fifth, we exploit the fact that the subsidy
is less generous in more expensive areas: our results are driven by low price ZIP codes where
the value of the subsidy is greatest. Last, the age distribution of first-time homebuyers shifts
considerably toward younger buyers in 2009 and subsequently reverts to its long run average,



                                                3
a pattern that cannot be explained by place-by-time trends.
       In the second part of the paper, we explore the value of the FTHC program as housing
market stabilizer. Relying on the detail available in housing transaction data, we show that
many transactions during the policy period involved sales by investors and institutional sellers,
who were likely to be low-value users of the assets. More than a quarter of the homes sold
during this time came out of foreclosure or real estate owned (REO) portfolios from financial
institutions and government sponsored entities. Similarly, sixteen percent of homes were built
in the preceding one to three years and sold by builders or developers during the policy period,
and thus were likely vacant before being sold.
       Furthermore, many buyers induced by the program were constrained by down payment
requirements that the credit helped relax.2 During 2009 alone, more than 780,000 homebuyers
took advantage of low down payment loans insured by the Federal Housing Administration
(FHA), despite these loans carrying significantly higher net present value costs. Down payment
constraints can also explain why we fail to find evidence of a sharp reversal after the policy
expires: absent the policy, induced buyers must wait until they have accumulated the necessary
down payment as savings. These facts are consistent with the idea that debt-induced capital
overhangs are times when potential high value buyers are unable to finance welfare-improving
reallocations in the absence of policy intervention.
       Last, we examine the stability of the policy-induced reallocation and find that, although
many policy period buyers bought with high loan-to-value ratios, they were not more likely to
default in the subsequent three years than other cohorts of homebuyers. Also consistent with
a reallocation toward higher value users, the program slowed house price declines in places
with higher exposure. The fact that housing demand was being pulled from years rather than
months in the future lends further evidence of the program’s medium run stabilizing effects.
       Our paper contributes to the empirical literature on policy responses to distress in debt
markets, especially policies motivated by the Great Recession (Agarwal et al., 2012, 2015).
Relative to these, we focus on how policy can stabilize prices during potential fire sales and
address capital overhangs by accelerating reallocation, which is typically slow during peri-
ods of industry decline or macroeconomic weakness (Ramey and Shapiro, 2001; Eisfeldt and
Rampini, 2006; Rognlie, Shleifer and Simsek, 2014). Our paper complements studies that esti-
mate the effects of fiscal stimulus by contributing a new analysis of an important durable goods
stimulus program (Adda and Cooper, 2000; House and Shapiro, 2008; Mian and Sufi, 2012;
Green et al., 2014; Berger and Vavra, 2015; Zwick and Mahon, Forthcoming). Taken together,
   2
   We explore this fact and the implications for theories of intertemporal demand for durables in a companion
paper (Berger et al., 2016).


                                                     4
these studies demonstrate how the reversal of durable goods stimulus programs depends on
which activity is targeted and who the marginal buyers are.
    There is also a literature that studies the effect of temporary tax incentives in housing
markets. Perhaps mostly closely related are Brogaard and Roshak (2011), Hembre (2015), and
Dynan, Gayer and Plotkin (2013), who conduct policy evaluations of the FTHC and find mixed
or small effects. Brogaard and Roshak (2011) find that quantity was not noticeably affected and
that prices rose only temporarily. In contrast, Hembre (2015) finds large quantity responses
and negligible price effects. Dynan, Gayer and Plotkin (2013) conclude that the credit had
“at best, small and mostly temporary effects on housing activity,” identifying small positive
effects on home sales and prices. While we also exploit the FTHC as a natural experiment, our
approach yields stronger results, which are likely driven by the more granular data and sharper
design we use. Most substantively, we emphasize and study the market-stabilizing role of the
program and provide evidence suggesting this role was first order. Best and Kleven (2015)
study the effect of stamp duty taxes notches and temporary tax holidays on housing sales in
the UK and find similar effects on home sales. Their study does not explore the broader effects
on housing market health and does not consider the question of policy responses to capital
overhang.
    Section 1 provides background information on the FTHC program. Section 2 describes
the tax and housing market data. Section 3 describes our main empirical strategy. Section 4
provides evidence on the effect of the policy on home sales, and Section 5 explores the effect
of the policy on reallocation and prices. Section 6 concludes.



1    Policy Background
The First-Time Homebuyer Credit (FTHC) was a temporary stimulus policy introduced in the
US between 2008 and 2010 with the aim of supporting weak housing markets. There were
three versions of the program. The first version, enacted on July 30, 2008, in the Housing
and Economic Recovery Act, provided an interest-free loan of up to $7,500 on qualifying home
purchases made between April 9, 2008, and June 30, 2009. To be eligible for this version of the
credit, a single (married) taxpayer needed a modified adjusted gross income below $75,000
($150,000) and must not have owned a principal residence during the 3-year period preceding
the purchase date.
    The second version of the credit was enacted on February 17, 2009, as part of the Amer-
ican Recovery and Reinvestment Act. The policy window was extended to include purchases


                                              5
made up to November 30, 2009. Importantly, the maximum credit increased to $8,000 and
was changed from an interest-free loan to a refundable tax credit. This feature significantly
increased the value of the credit to potential homebuyers.
       The third version of the credit was enacted on November 7, 2009, as part of the Worker,
Homeownership, and Business Assistance Act. The policy window was extended to include
purchases closing before July 1, 2010.3 The third version also raised the income limits so that
eligibility began to phase out for a single (married) taxpayer with modified adjusted gross
income above $125,000 ($225,000).
       To claim the credit, tax filers needed to note the FTHC on their income tax returns (Form
1040) and attach an additional credit claim (Form 5405). Claimants also needed to provide
documentation demonstrating the purchase of a home during the policy window, together
with mailing documents supporting the claim’s eligibility for the credit to the appropriate IRS
office.4 To accelerate payment, filers could amend previously filed tax returns, for example by
amending the 2008 tax return for a home bought in 2009.
       We focus on the second and third versions of this policy. We do so for two reasons. First,
these versions of the credit were considerably more generous and thus more likely to induce
new purchases. Assuming a 3 percent real rate of return, the interest free loan was worth
$1,400 dollars in present value; the later versions were worth 5.7 times as much. Second, the
later versions of the policy were more broadly publicized at the time of enaction and thus were
more likely to induce changes in behavior rather than retrospective claims for past purchases.
       Figure 2 presents time series plots that justify our focus on the second and third versions.
Panel (a) presents existing home sales on a seasonally adjusted annual basis from the National
Association of Realtors and shows that there were significant aggregate spikes at the end of
the second and third extensions of the policy. Panels (b) and (c) confirm these spikes within
our analysis sample, using seasonally adjusted home sales from DataQuick. Panel (d) plots
Google search trend data for the terms “first time home buyer” and “home buyer credit” along
with vertical markers for policy events. Interest in these credits spiked at the beginning of the
second extension, remained elevated throughout both policy periods, and then declined after
the end of the third version.
       Congress introduced and passed the FTHC with the explicit purpose of inducing demand
for home purchases at a time of unusual weakness and helping to spur the economic recovery.
   3
     The expanded policy also added a $6,500 Long-Time Homebuyer Credit (LTHC). To qualify for the LTHC, an
individual must have owned and used the residence as his or her principal residence for a consecutive five year
period during the eight years prior to the date of the new purchase.
   4
     Such documents could include the settlement statement (typically Form HUD-1), executed retail sales contract
(for mobile homes), or certificate of occupancy (for new construction).


                                                       6
In the respective words of Senators Cardin, Shelby, and Salazar, the program would “help the
housing market,” it would “help get homebuilders and the housing industry back on track,”
and it would “help us get rid of the glut we currently have in the market.”5 We evaluate this
policy as both housing market stabilizer and fiscal stimulus. As stabilizer, the key questions
are whether the policy promoted reallocation of underutilized assets from distressed sellers to
more productive owners, and whether this reallocation affected market prices. As stimulus,
the key question is whether the policy contributed to economic activity by inducing new home
sales or through the transaction fees and complementary purchases that accompany an existing
home sale. The non-random timing of the policy necessitates the cross-sectional approach we
pursue to separate the effect of the program from the other factors affecting housing markets
at the same time.



2     Data
This section presents an overview of the data sources for our analysis, discusses construction
of key variables, and presents summary statistics. Appendix A presents additional information
on the data build process, detailed variable definitions, and supplementary sample statistics.


2.1     Data Sources
We develop our measure of ex ante program exposure using the population of de-identified
individual tax return data, available over the time period between 1998 and 2013. These data
include information about the age, earnings, marital status, number of dependents, and tax
filing ZIP code reported on the income tax return.
    We measure homeownership in the tax data through itemized deductions of mortgage inter-
est, mortgage insurance premiums, and property taxes on Form 1040, Schedule A, or through
information return Form 1098 submitted by lenders (which includes interest payments and
points paid).6 The panel structure of the data is critical because it allows us to measure whether
a taxpayer owned a home in the past. We also use tax data to measure claims of the homebuyer
credit filed on Form 5405. This form records the date of purchase, which we use to study the
    5
      Congressional Record, Vol. 154, No. 52 (April 3, 2008) and Congressional Record, Vol. 154, No. 124 (July
26, 2008).
    6
      The information return helps identify homeowners who do not itemize their tax returns. Lenders are required
to file Form 1098 for all borrowers who pay at least $600 of mortgage interest, points, or insurance premiums
during the year.




                                                       7
time series of claims. Masked identifiers allow us to link these claims to the individual’s tax
return, which we use to measure the ZIP code associated with that person’s claim.
      There are two potential measurement issues with our approach to measuring homeowner-
ship. First, we will miss those who own their homes outright and use the standard deduction
or do not file a tax return. These groups likely make up a very small portion of first-time
homebuyers, who typically buy with a mortgage.7 And non-filers primarily comprise poor and
elderly people. Second, in measuring first-time homebuyers, we may mistakenly label refi-
nance events as purchase events. This will only be the case for homeowners who previously
owned their homes without a mortgage. This issue introduces measurement error in predicting
program responses but is not an obvious confound.
      We collect data on monthly home sales and house prices from DataQuick and CoreLogic.
Our measure of home sales comes from the recorder and assessor data from DataQuick. This
data set is deed-level data that measures home sales with dates of transfer for each property.
The records provide detailed information on the characteristics of the transacted homes, in-
cluding price, size, age, bedrooms and bathrooms, and so on, as well as detailed information
on the type of transaction, including short sales, financial institution-owned sales (REO), fore-
closure auctions, and an indicator for whether the transaction is made between related parties
or at arm’s length.
      We use information between 2004 and 2013, which yields a consistent sample of covered
places over time. Figure 2 shows that the Dataquick housing data closely match the time-series
patterns for publicly available data published by the National Association of Realtors (NAR).
On average, the aggregate counts in our filtered data represent between 40 and 50 percent of
the levels reported by NAR.
      We use house price data from the Federal Housing Finance Agency (FHFA), CoreLogic, and
DataQuick. FHFA’s price indices are available at the yearly level for the largest set of ZIPs in
our sample and are based on repeat sales.8 CoreLogic’s price indices are available monthly and
are also based on repeat sales. We compute median price levels for ZIPs within our DataQuick
home sales sample, which we use in cross sectional tests based on pre-policy price levels and
for back-of-the-envelope calculations.
      We construct geographic-level controls from the Census, IRS public use files, the American
Community Survey (ACS), and Equifax. From the Census we draw the fraction of census blocks
classified as urban. From the ACS we draw population in 2007 and compute the average
  7
     Based on survey evidence from 8,449 consumers who purchased a home between July 2009 and June 2010,
96 percent of first-time buyers used mortgage financing (National Association of Realtors, 2010).
   8
     Bogin, Doerner and Larson (2016) describe the construction and source data for these price indices.


                                                   8
unemployment rate, the average of ZIP-level median age, the average of median rent, and
the average fraction below the poverty line between 2006 and 2010. From the IRS we draw
average gross income in 2005. Using aggregated ZIP-level counts from Equifax, we follow Mian
and Sufi (2009) and define the subprime share as the fraction of consumers in a ZIP code in
1996 with credit scores below 660.


2.2    Analysis Samples, Variable Definitions, and Summary Statistics
We construct a ZIP-by-month panel by aggregating individual transactions from the deeds
records into counts for various transaction types. We define the primary analysis sample begin-
ning with counts at the ZIP-by-month level for non-distress sales of existing homes. To ensure
estimates are not biased by changes in geographical coverage, only ZIPs with more than 90
percent of their transaction time series complete from 2006 onwards are included. This fil-
tering will tend to exclude very small ZIPs that have many months during which there are
no transactions. All other datasets are filtered to restrict the analysis sample to the same set
of ZIPs. The primary sample contains 1,018,976 ZIP-months for 8882 ZIPs across 47 states.
These ZIPs account for 69 percent of the US population in 2007. Appendix Figure A.1 presents
a shaded map illustrating the geographic coverage of our sample.
    We seasonalize home sales counts using a within-place transformation for each month. For
each ZIP, we also compute the mean of monthly house sales in 2007, which is our primary
scaling and weighting variable. Our main outcome variable is scaled monthly sales of existing
homes, excluding distressed or forced sales. We censor this variable at the 99 percent level
to remove outliers. We define program exposure as the ratio of first-time homebuyers to total
tax filers in a place in 2000. In all regressions, we normalize exposure by its cross sectional
standard deviation to aid interpretation of coefficients.
    Table 1 collects summary statistics for the sample in the home sales analysis. The average
observation has 19.6 sales per month. This varies from 3.7 sales at the 10th percentile to 41.6
at the 90th. The 10th percentile of the scaled variable is 0.44, the median is 0.92, and the 90th
percentile is 1.73.



3     Empirical Approach
Our empirical strategy exploits cross-sectional variation across geographies in ex ante expo-
sure to the FTHC program to isolate the effect of the program from aggregate macroeconomic
shocks. This empirical approach has been used by Mian and Sufi (2012) and Chodorow-Reich

                                                9
et al. (2012) to estimate the effect of fiscal policy. The main advantage of this approach is that
it allows us to construct a counterfactual that can be used to estimate what would have hap-
pened in the absence of the policy. Areas with few potential first-time homebuyers act as the
“control group” because the credit does not apply to most residents or houses. The difference
between treatment and control areas provides an estimate of the causal impact of the program.
       We measure exposure to the FTHC by identifying places with more first-time buyers in a
time period prior to the policy. Higher exposure may reflect local amenities, such as schools
or social attractions, that attract first-time buyers. Or it may reflect a local housing stock
that is better suited to these buyers, in terms of affordability, lot size, and so on. The policy
primarily targeted first-time homebuyers, so we should expect larger effects in places where
the proportion of first-time homebuyers is higher. We build the instrument at the ZIP level
because we are interested in the effect of the policy on market-level outcomes such as house
prices. These local general equilibrium effects would be missed if we used a household-level
instrument.
       We use administrative data from individual tax and information returns to measure the
number of first-time homebuyers in each ZIP code in the US. In particular, we mark an in-
dividual as a homeowner if she claims a deduction for mortgage interest, property taxes, or
mortgage insurance on her tax return, or if she receives an information return from a lender
to whom she has paid mortgage interest or points on a new purchase mortgage. First-time
homebuyers are people whom we classify as homeowners but who were not homeowners in
the prior two years. To avoid mistakenly classifying refinance events as homebuyers, we only
use property tax deductions and points paid to identify first-time homebuyers.9 We construct
the instrument at the ZIP level rather than at the individual level because we are interested in
the effect of the policy on market level outcomes such as house prices. These effects would be
missed if we constructed an instrument at the household level.
       Figure 3, panels (a) and (b) show that there is significant variation across areas in this
instrument. For each place, we scale the number of first-time homebuyers by the number of
tax filers in 2007. Darker areas indicate more exposure to the program. For ease of viewing,
panel (a) displays county-level variation because we are showing the entire US, while panel
(b) shows ZIP-level variation for three major cities (Boston, Chicago, and San Francisco). Table
1 shows that there is significant variation in our exposure measure at the ZIP level. Program
exposure varies from 1.92 percent at the 10th percentile to 4.15 percent at the 90th. Mean
   9
    We have confirmed the paper’s results using a less conservative measure of exposure based only on information
returns from lenders, which includes mortgage interest for determining first-time buyers, considers ownership
history going back three years, and applies ownership criteria for both head of household and spouse.


                                                      10
exposure is 3.00 percent.
       Consistent with anecdotal accounts of where first-time homebuyers tend to buy, the instru-
ment is relatively concentrated in suburban areas around cities. Table 2 confirms this with a
set of bivariate regressions of program exposure on ZIP-level observables. ZIPs with high ex-
posure have higher rents and fewer people below the poverty line. The populations are larger
and somewhat younger. Income is weakly correlated with program exposure. Substantial vari-
ation in ex ante exposure within cities allows us to pursue a research design that conditions on
city-by-time fixed effects.10
       Our instrument may not accurately measure exposure to the program, either because the
tax data miss non-filing or non-itemizing households, or because places change over time. To
address this concern, we show that places with higher ex ante exposure indeed saw more
individuals claim the credit. We do so in two ways. Figure 4, panel (a) plots binned bivariate
averages (“binscatters”) of FTHC claims from tax records versus program exposure. Exposure
is strongly correlated with take-up in the cross section. The regression coefficient with CBSA
fixed effects and ZIP-level covariate controls is 0.33 with a t-statistic of 54.11
       Figure 4, panels (b) and (c) show our exposure measure also predicts time series variation in
claims in these areas. In particular, we plot counts of FTHC claims by month of home purchase
for purchases made between February 2009 and September 2010 along with vertical markers
for policy events. The vertical markers correspond to the start of the FTHC loan program,
the start of version two of the credit, the scheduled expiration of version two, and the actual
expiration of version three, respectively. Panel (b) plots national claim counts month-by-month,
while panel (c) plots claim counts for high- and low-exposure quintiles of ZIP codes sorted by
ex ante exposure.12 Not only does our exposure-based instrument predict that high exposure
places claim more credits, but the exposure measure also predicts the spikes in claims that we
observe in the national claims data.
       While our instrument is strongly correlated with FTHC take-up, a concern is that unob-
servable characteristics unrelated to the FTHC program are responsible for any differential
purchase patterns we observe. Table 2 shows that places where first-time homebuyers typi-
cally buy are not random, which poses a potential challenge to our empirical approach. For
example, a risk to our design is that our measure is correlated with the expansion in subprime
credit documented by Mian and Sufi (2009), leading to different ZIP-by-time trends within
  10
     We use Core-Based Statistical Areas (CBSA) to define city boundaries. Though our instrument varies at the
ZIP level, we cluster standard errors at the CBSA level to permit within-city correlation in error terms.
  11
     Clustering at the CBSA level yields a t-statistic of 22.
  12
     Quintiles are formed using weights that ensure each quintile has equal population in 2007.



                                                     11
cities as the cycle corrected. We deal with this specific threat in our baseline analysis by mea-
suring the number of first-time homebuyers in a pre-subprime period, the year 2000, to ensure
that our instrument is not conflated with the increased purchases by subprime borrowers later
in the decade.13
       We employ multiple strategies to mitigate these threats. First, our baseline analysis always
conditions on city-by-time fixed effects and we report results with and without observable
controls. This approach removes many potential confounds from our analysis. Second, we
explicitly test for parallel trends in the pre-period and perform a within-ZIP placebo test to
further assess this concern. Third, we exploit information in the age distribution of first-time
homebuyers over time, showing that the median age of first time homeowners falls during the
policy period and the age distribution reverts immediately after the policy expires. Moreover,
the highest exposure ZIPs account for the largest share of the shift in first-time homebuyer age
observed in the aggregate data. Finally, we exploit the short-lived nature of the policy to argue
against potential alternative stories. In particular, the sharp increase in housing sales before
the expiration of both the second and third versions of the program is difficult to explain by
confounding trends that operate at lower frequencies.



4       The Effect of FTHC on Home Sales

4.1       Main Result
We begin with a simple graphical analysis that demonstrates our main finding: home sales
respond strongly to the FTHC program but do not show a sharp, immediate reversal once the
program ends.
       Figure 5, panel (a) plots the monthly home sales series between July 2007 and September
2011 for ZIPs divided into 100 quantiles and sorted based on ex ante program exposure. We
present these data in the form of a calendar time heatmap, which is analogous to the traditional
two-group calendar time graph but allows us to plot visually discernible time series for many
more groups. In the graph, columns correspond to months and rows correspond to groups of
ZIPs sorted by exposure. Exposure is the number of first-time homeowners in a ZIP in 2000
scaled by the number of tax-filing units in 2000. Each cell’s shading corresponds to a level
of the key outcome variable, which is monthly home sales scaled by average monthly home
sales in 2007. The quantiles are formed using weights that ensure each quantile has an equal
  13
     The year 2000 is the earliest year for which at least one year of information returns from lenders are available
to classify past homeownership.


                                                        12
number of home sales in 2007.
       The heatmap yields four conclusions. First, high- and low-exposure series closely track
each other every month prior to the policy, deviating only during the policy window. Note
that every sequence of consecutive months in the pre-period provides a placebo test that fails
to reject the design’s core identification assumption of parallel trends. Second, the smoothly
increasing gradient visible at each policy expiration date shows the policy response is monotone
in ex ante exposure and not driven by a few outlier ZIP codes. Third, the gradient does not
reverse significantly in the fifteen months following the second policy expiration, rather the
series return to a pattern of parallel trends; thus the data do not indicate a sharp reversal
of the policy response. Last, we will use the lowest exposure quantile as a counterfactual to
estimate the cumulative number of sales induced by the program. The heatmap shows that
this group is a credible counterfactual, as it indicates no response to the program during the
policy period.
       Figure 5, panel (b) plots coefficients from regressions estimating the monthly effects of the
program. Specifically, we run month-by-month regressions of the form,

                          Home Salesi
                                                = αCBSA + βExposurei + γX i + "i ,                            (1)
                    Average Monthly Salesi,2007

where Exposurei is the geographic measure of program exposure for place i and αCBSA is a
CBSA-specific constant.14 In controls specifications, X i is a control set that includes log pop-
ulation, the average unemployment rate from 2006 through 2010, log average gross income
in 2005, and the subprime share in 1996. All regressions are weighted by average monthly
home sales in 2007. Note that this approach is approximately equivalent to a panel regres-
sion with time-specific coefficients on exposure and the control variables and with ZIP, month,
and CBSA-by-time fixed effects.15 To aid interpretation, we normalize exposure by its cross
sectional standard deviation.
       Panel (b) plots coefficients for these regressions both with and without controls. The pat-
terns are consistent with those in the heatmap. Exposure patterns do not predict differences in
sales activity until the policy window begins and the coefficients spike in accord with the aggre-
gate series. The coefficient of 0.06 for November 2009 implies that a one standard deviation
  14
    For the 129 ZIPs without an associated CBSA, we assign them a state-specific constant.
  15
    This cross sectional approach closely matches the approach taken by Mian and Sufi (2012) to evaluate the
Cash for Clunkers program, which aids comparison to their findings. We have also pursued the more stan-
dard difference-in-differences approach in a panel regression, as advocated by Bertrand, Duflo and Mullainathan
(2004), and considered specifications of the left hand side variable that scale by average sales in 2005 and 2006.
These alternatives do not affect the key conclusions.



                                                       13
increase in program exposure produces a 6 percent increase in monthly home sales relative to
the average level in 2007. This is approximately 0.14 standard deviations of the left hand side
variable. Panel (c) plots coefficients for regressions which replace monthly sales with cumula-
tive monthly sales beginning seventeen months prior to the policy. The series is approximately
flat prior to the policy window, increases monotonically through the window, and flattens in
the post period. The cumulative effects are between 50 and 60 percent relative to the average
level of monthly sales in 2007. Note these should not be confused for aggregate estimates,
which we provide below. Again, we see no evidence of a sharp, negative relationship between
sales and exposure in the seventeen months following the policy. Regressions with controls do
not alter this interpretation.
   There is some evidence of reversal starting at the end of 2011 and accelerating in the
middle of 2012. At these horizons—between a year and quarter and two years after the policy
expired—our cumulative regressions begin to lose statistical power because each subsequent
month of home sales adds noise and increases standard errors. Thus we draw more measured
conclusions over longer time frames. At the 95 percent level, we can no longer reject a full
reversal starting in mid 2012. The balance of the evidence thus shows no reversal for the first
fifteen months after the policy ended followed by a gradual reversal.
   Table 3 presents the average monthly effects of the FTHC on home sales pooled over dif-
ferent policy windows for a variety of specifications. We run cross sectional regressions of the
form,
                   Average Monthly Salesi,t→T
                                                 = α + βExposurei + γX i + "i ,              (2)
                   Average Monthly Salesi,2007
where yi is average monthly home sales in place i over the relevant time period. We use
the same control set, weighting, and specification for exposure as in Figure 5, panels (b) and
(c). All regressions are clustered at the CBSA level, or for ZIPs that are not associated with a
CBSA, at the state level. Note that each row reports estimates from a separate cross sectional
regression.
   The time windows are defined as follows. Pre-policy includes the seventeen months prior to
the second version of the FTHC passed in February 2009. Policy includes the seventeen months
from February 2009 through June 2010. Post-policy includes the seventeen months beginning
in July 2010. We then focus on specific intervals of interest within the policy period. Early
policy includes the eight months from February 2009 through September 2009. Spike one
includes the three months from October 2009 through December 2009. Spike two includes
the three months from March 2010 through May 2010.
   The results of the pooled regressions confirm the patterns from the figures. In the pre-policy

                                                14
period, there is little sign of differential trends. The policy period shows a significantly greater
average effect on monthly sales, and this effect is most pronounced during the two windows
leading up to policy expiration. The first spike shows a somewhat stronger but statistically in-
distinguishable effect relative to the second spike. One potential explanation for this is that the
second period included the long-time homebuyer credit, which our instrument is not designed
to predict. Last, the post-policy period shows little to no reversal in the seventeen months after
the policy ends.
   Quantitatively, the results indicate that the average monthly effect of the program was 2.0
to 3.2 percent relative to average 2007 sales for a one standard deviation increase in program
exposure. The post-policy coefficients are approximately zero with inconsistent signs and are
statistically insignificant. This suggests that the policy was able to significantly increase sales
during the policy period and that these sales were not reversed for at least one and a half years.
   The lack of a significant reversal for over a year and a half is surprising, since standard
intertemporal theory suggests that temporary price subsidies for durable goods simply reallo-
cate demand across time. Consistent with this view, Mian and Sufi (2012) and Green et al.
(2014), who both study the Cash for Clunkers (CARS) program, find that while the program
was able to stimulate excess demand for automobiles during the policy period, these sales were
completely reversed after seven to twelve months.
   There are two major reasons for the difference. First, in contrast to CARS, the FTHC tar-
geted new potential homeowners allowing for a second, extensive margin effect to be at work.
These are home purchases that would not have taken place absent the FTHC. Consistent with
our results, Best and Kleven (2015) study a similar policy in the U.K. and find that the exten-
sive margin can be large in the short run. Second, the long duration of the policy relative to
CARS and the ability to pair the credit with a low down payment loan (discussed further in
Section 5.2) meant that FTHC brought durables demand from much farther in the future than
the CARS program, potentially causing a slower reversal. In a companion paper (Berger et al.,
2016), we use an estimated structural model to explore the quantitative magnitudes of these
two effects, as well as how policy design can affect the relative size of the intertemporal and
the extensive margin effects.


4.2    Robustness and Placebo Tests
Table 3 presents a number of tests to confirm the robustness of our key findings, including the
absence of trends prior to the policy, the effect estimates during the policy period, the estimates
at the two spikes, and the non-reversal in the post-policy window.

                                                15
   Column (1) estimates the specification in equation 2 without CBSA fixed effects and con-
trols. Column (2) adds a control set that includes log population, the average unemployment
rate from 2006 through 2010, the log of average gross income, and the subprime share in
1996. Column (3) adds CBSA fixed effects. Columns (3) through (6) all use the same control
set as column (2) and all include CBSA fixed effects. Estimates are similar with and without
CBSA fixed effects, though somewhat more precise in the former specification. In column (4),
we respecify the left-hand-side variable in logs. Coefficient estimates mostly do not change in
this specification, though there is modest evidence of a partial post-period reversal.
   In our main specification, we weigh regressions by average monthly home sales in 2007
in order to provide macroeconomically relevant estimates. Column (5) presents regressions
without weights. Unweighted regressions lead to modestly larger estimates during the policy
window. Regressions with population weights, which we do not report for brevity, lead to
similar conclusions. Following Mian and Sufi (2012), column (6) excludes the sand states:
Arizona, California, and Nevada. Excluding sand states only slightly weakens the size of policy
period estimates. In general, estimates are very similar across states.
   Importantly, the parallel pre-policy trends assumption is rejected in none of the six spec-
ifications, and we find very weakly negative or null average post-policy effects. Appendix
Figure A.2 presents a placebo test that further confirms these findings. The test estimates the
month-by-month regressions and plots coefficients from the non-control specification in Figure
5, panel (b), emphasized with a bold line, along with equivalent regressions shifted backward
in time to start in 2005, 2006, and 2007, and shifted forward to start in 2009 and 2010. These
placebo series show that the policy coefficients are unusually high while pre- and post-policy
coefficients coincide with placebo series. The figure also suggests that seasonal confounds not
captured by our seasonality adjustment do not influence our estimates for the spikes.
   The pre-policy coefficients provide strong evidence that our design is valid and low ex-
posure areas can serve as a counterfactual to high exposure areas. The sharp timing of the
policy addresses many concerns about omitted variables because most potential confounds are
moving more slowly. Yet some concerns might remain. One concern is that time-varying, place-
specific shocks are correlated with our exposure measure. For example, suppose our exposure
measure is highly correlated with the share of subprime borrowers, which peaked during the
years from 2004 to 2007. If true then the increase in sales we witness during the policy pe-
riod could be driven by “pent-up” subprime demand and not the causal effect of the FTHC.
While the inclusion of CBSA-by-time fixed effects helps mitigate these concerns, there is still
significant variation in subprime borrowing within CBSAs. However, Table 2 shows that our



                                               16
exposure measure is essentially uncorrelated with the share of subprime borrows (those with
FICO scores below 660) suggesting that our main results are not driven by a subprime pent-up
demand effect.16
       An additional concern is that place-specific trends beginning in 2009 might confound our
estimates. We address this threat in a variety of ways. First, we consider an alternative ap-
proach to validating our design with a within-time placebo test. The idea motivating this test
is simple: first-time buyers are more likely to buy smaller homes than larger homes, so smaller
homes should respond more strongly to the program. If place-specific (i.e., ZIP-level) shocks
are driving our results, we should see similar patterns across all types of homes.
       Appendix Table A.1 presents regressions of the same form as those in Table 3. We divide
the home sales series into “starter” homes—defined as those with 1, 2, or 3 bedrooms—and
large homes—defined as those with 4 or more bedrooms. We run the ZIP-level specifications
separately for each series. Because of incomplete reporting across places, the analysis sample
here is the subset of the main analysis sample where fewer than 5% of transactions between
2004 and 2013 have missing bedrooms data.
       Estimates for the starter home sample closely match those in our full sample, while those
for larger homes are weakly negative and statistically insignificant. Thus our main results are
concentrated among the starter homes, while larger homes show little response to the program.
This provides further evidence in support of the parallel trends assumption in our design.
       Next, we explore whether the effects are larger in places where initial price levels are low.
For homes with prices above $80,000, the FTHC is fixed at $8,000. Thus the subsidy is less
generous in more expensive places. In the first row of Table 4, we present these results by
estimating a differenced version of equation 2, specified as

                         ∆Average Home Salesi
                                                        = α + βExposurei + γX i + "i ,                        (3)
                      Average Monthly Salesi,2007

where ∆Average Sales equals the average number of home sales in place i during the policy
period minus the average number of home sales in place i during the seventeen-month pre-
period. We first reproduce the results using specifications from Table 3 to confirm the estimates
  16
    DataQuick expanded coverage significantly in 2004 and incrementally between 2004 and 2006—the number
of ZIPs with complete histories increases by 28 percent between 2003 and 2004 and another 8 percent between
2004 and 2006—which prevents us from exploring trends prior to the subprime boom in many of the sample ZIPs
and makes it difficult to interpret estimates from the period prior to 2007. Estimates from 2005 and 2006 suggest
weakly higher sales in high exposure ZIPs relative to low exposure ZIPs. Controlling for the subprime share and
ZIP-level correlation with the national housing cycle further weakens this relationship in 2005 and 2006, but does
not affect policy period or post period estimates.



                                                       17
are unchanged.
   Columns (6) and (7) in the first row of Table 4 divide the sample of ZIPs into the bottom
three (“Low p”) and top three (“High p”) deciles in median house prices during 2008. The
effects are concentrated in the low price ZIPs, which yield a coefficient of 0.028, while the high
price ZIPs show no discernible effect with a coefficient of 0.005. These split sample findings
provide further evidence that our results are indeed due to the FTHC policy.


4.3    The Age Distribution of First-Time Buyers
The non-reversal of the policy period response following the program’s expiration raises the
question of where these buyers came from. To address this question, Figure 6 presents direct
evidence indicating that, in the absence of the program, many buyers would not have bought
homes for several years. Panel (a) plots age distributions of first-time homebuyers identified
using information return data for the years between 2002 and 2013. We highlight the age
distribution for 2009, which shifts substantially to the left relative to the other years. The
median age for all first-time buyers in 2009 was 35 in the non-policy years and 33 in 2009.
Among those that claimed the credit, the median was 32.
   To explore whether the FTHC explains this pattern, panel (b) shows the correlation between
the shift in the age distribution in 2009 and program exposure. We decompose the national
shift in the age distribution in 2009 into contributions from each ZIP. For each ZIP, we compute
the difference between the ratio of buyers aged 30 or younger to total new homebuyers in 2009
versus the average ratio of buyers aged 30 or younger to total new homebuyers in other years.
We then plot binned bivariate sums of these ZIP-level contributions against average exposure in
each bin. The highest exposure ZIP codes account for the largest share of the shift in first-time
homebuyer age observed in the aggregate data.
   Thus a noticeably younger cohort of first-time buyers appears in 2009 alone, driven by the
temporary policy incentive to accelerate the transition into homeownership. These facts also
assuage concerns that place-by-time cyclicality, pent-up demand, or secular trends can explain
the slow reversal.


4.4    New Home Sales
Our analysis thus far has focused on non-distress sales of existing homes. This is the largest
category of transactions and is the most reliably recorded in the DataQuick database. Both of
these features permit the high-frequency analysis we use to validate our research design. Yet


                                               18
in examining the policy as fiscal stimulus intended to spur GDP growth, existing home sales
are not the ideal category to study, as they only contribute to output through transaction fees
and complementary purchases (such as furniture) made by homeowners.
   In Table 4, we explore the effects of the program on new home sales, using the new con-
struction data recorded by DataQuick. To do so, we estimate a differenced version of equation
2, specified as

                     ∆Average Constructioni
                                                       = α + βExposurei + γX i + "i ,         (4)
            Average Monthly New Constructioni,2007

where ∆Average Construction equals the average number of new home sales in place i during
the policy period minus the average number of new home sales in place i during the seventeen-
month pre-period. We seasonally adjust the new home sales series prior to averaging. All
specifications include CBSA fixed effects.
   The results indicate the program had approximately no effect on new home sales. The
point estimate is -0.004 and not statistically distinct from zero, as compared to 0.021 for ex-
isting home sales. We confirm this finding in several robustness checks. Column (2) equally
weighs observations and column (3) excludes the sand states: Arizona, California, and Nevada.
Columns (4) and (5) confirm that the results are not driven by outliers or small geographies.
Column (4) estimates the relationship on a subsample that censors the left-hand-side variable
at the 5th and 95th percentiles. Column (5) restricts the sample to places with average home
sales in 2007 above the 10th percentile.
   All specifications point to the conclusion that FTHC did not induce additional construction.
This finding is not surprising for a time when the national market suffered a significant over-
hang of recently built homes. Nevertheless, the result implies that the direct stimulative effects
of the program were likely second order, despite the substantial increase in existing home sales
caused by the program.


4.5    Aggregate Estimates
Following Mian and Sufi (2012), we compute an estimate of the total number of sales caused
by the program, exploiting only differences in cross sectional exposure and using the group
receiving the smallest shock as a counterfactual. We choose the bottom one percent of ZIPs as
the counterfactual group, which corresponds to the bottom row of the heatmap in Figure 5,
panel (a). We then compute the effect of the policy for other groups relative to this group. By
construction, any time series effect of the policy shown by the bottom group is set to zero and


                                               19
removed from the effect computed for other groups.
          Standardized exposure is 0.85 for the bottom group and increases to 7.58 for the highest
group. Thus for each exposure group g, the aggregate number of sales induced by the program
is
                                 ∆Sales g = 17 × β × (e g − 0.85) × s g,2007 ,                                   (5)

where β is the coefficient from equation 2 for the seventeen-month policy period, e g and s g,2007
are weighted average program exposure and monthly sales in 2007 for group g, respectively,
where the weights are average monthly sales for the ZIPs in each group. We aggregate ∆Sales g
across all groups to provide an estimate of the aggregate effect within the DataQuick sample.
          We estimate that the FTHC increased existing home sales by 163 thousand within sample
during the policy period, or 7.8 percent of all sales during this period. In 2007, our sample
covers approximately 41 percent of the national existing home sales market. Extrapolating our
estimates to the national market yields an estimated increase of approximately 397 thousand
during the policy period.17 There were 1.58 million claims of the FTHC during this time.18
Thus, under the assumptions that the lowest exposure group is a plausible control group and
that our sample is representative of the national market, 24 percent of claims were made for
induced sales, as opposed to sales that would have happened in the absence of the policy. Note
this is a lower bound estimate if the lowest exposure group also responds to the program. A
less conservative approach, which provides an upper bound by aggregating estimates relative
to a zero exposure baseline, yields an estimate of 224 thousand within sample, or 10.7 percent
of all sales during the policy period. The extrapolated aggregate estimate in this case is 546
thousand and implies that 35 percent of claims were made for induced sales.19
          To produce this aggregate estimate, we have not modeled potential general equilibrium
effects, which are subsumed into time fixed effects. In response to the concern about general
equilibrium effects, it is comforting that the raw aggregate path of home sales provides a clear
demonstration of a policy response. Furthermore, the heatmap does not reveal home sales
     17
      The implied direct fiscal cost per induced sale is $11B/397K≈$28K per sale.
     18
      This figure excludes approximately 250 thousand claims for the Long-Time Homebuyer credit.
   19
      Our primary specification is a reduced form regression of sales on exposure, and so delivers an intent-to-
treat (ITT) estimate. Two-stage estimates with total claims per filing unit as the endogenous first stage variable
yield a first stage coefficient, β1S = 0.293(0.048), and a policy period second stage coefficient, β I V = 9.57(2.70).
This coefficient implies a one standard deviation change in claims (0.012) causes an increase of scaled sales of
0.118; alternatively, this estimate implies 0.26 sales per claim, consistent with our aggregate calculation. As this
estimate corrects for noncompliance with treatment, aggregating the policy effect using this estimate and a ZIP
code sort based on claims yields a larger aggregate estimate: approximately 296 thousand within sample, or 14.2
percent of all sales during this period. We focus on the reduced form estimate for ease of interpretation and to
aid comparison to other work.



                                                         20
falling below pre-policy levels in low exposure areas, which would be predicted by binding
aggregate resource constraints. In addition, because the policy was implemented at a time
when interest rates were at the zero lower bound, the mitigating effect of interest rates was
likely small. Nevertheless, without a full model, our aggregate estimate should be considered
an imperfect approximation of the total effect.
      An additional concern is that spillovers between the treatment and control ZIPs might bias
our aggregate calculation. This could happen if a housing purchase in a high-exposure ZIP
triggers a simultaneous purchase by the previous seller in a low exposure ZIP. Two features of
our analysis suggest these “real estate chain”-induced spillovers are likely not quantitatively
important. First, the inclusion of CBSA fixed effects means that only transactions that take
place within the same city would bias our estimates. Second, many sellers during this time
period were either banks or developers, cases in which these spillover effects are not relevant.
Finally and most importantly, the most plausible sign of the bias is negative since the second
transaction would artificially inflate sales in the lower exposure ZIPs. Thus our aggregate
estimates are likely an underestimate of the true aggregate effect.
      An important motivation for the FTHC policy was to stimulate real economic activity, par-
ticularly in the housing sector. We have seen that the FTHC had a large effect on transaction
volume in the existing home market and little effect on new home construction. Thus the pri-
mary direct stimulative effect on GDP comes through the transaction fees and complementary
purchases associated with the purchase of an existing home.
      We follow Best and Kleven (2015) and provide a back-of-the-envelope calculation of these
amounts using our estimate of induced home sales. The realtor fee ranges from 5 to 5.5 percent
of the purchase price.20 When evaluated at the median purchase price for homes in our sample
during the policy period ($190,000), this implies a GDP contribution of between $3.8 and
$4.1 billion. Best and Kleven (2015) use survey evidence to estimate that complementary
furniture, home improvement, and related expenditures at the time of a new purchase amount
to approximately 1 to 1.5 percent of the purchase price, which implies a contribution to GDP
of approximately $750 million to $1.1 billion. Thus, when compared to the cost of versions
two and three of the program, which amounted to approximately $11 billion, these effects do
not alter our conclusion that the direct GDP effects of the program were relatively modest.
 20
   Based on data collected by the Department of Justice at https://www.justice.gov/atr/
home-prices-and-commissions-over-time. (Last accessed in August, 2016)




                                               21
5       The Effect of FTHC on Reallocation
Traditional policy evaluations primarily focuses on the direct stimulative effects of fiscal policy,
which we saw in the previous section were likely modest in this episode. In this section, we
move beyond the standard view and consider the value of the FTHC program as a housing
market stabilizer. The main result is that, consistent with the prescriptions of the fire sale lit-
erature, we find that the FTHC induced significant beneficial reallocation and increased house
prices.
       The backdrop of the policy was a time of extraordinary weakness in housing markets across
the country. Inventories were at historic highs and nearly forty percent of home sales were
distressed or foreclosure sales. Many prospective homebuyers were financially constrained,
making it difficult to afford required down payments. When combined with high numbers of
unsold homes, this drag on housing demand put significant downward pressure on housing
prices. Against this backdrop came widespread concern that absent government intervention,
fire sale dynamics would continue, leading to more vacancies and foreclosures, more destruc-
tion of housing wealth, and further downward pressure on prices.21
       These economic conditions created several rationales for stabilizing the housing market,
of which we highlight three. The first was to address the pecuniary externality that elevated
foreclosures, short sales, and vacancies impose on nearby homeowners. Campbell, Giglio and
Pathak (2011) show that prices for houses within 0.05 miles of a foreclosure fall by about one
percent. Similarly, Whitaker and Fitzpatrick IV (2013) find that an additional property within
500 feet that is vacant or delinquent reduces a home’s selling price by 1 to 2 percent. Guren
and McQuade (2015) show that these effects can be large in a quantitative, general equilibrium
model. Thus policies that stabilize house prices during a period of market-level distress can
mitigate this market failure.
       A second rationale was to correct a credit market failure due to the simultaneous presence
of constrained buyers and elevated vacancies. In normal times, buyers purchase homes until
the marginal cost and marginal benefit of homeownership equate. During the Great Recession
a wedge between these margins emerged: many natural buyers of homes were constrained
because of elevated unemployment risk, lower incomes, and disruptions in the credit market.
Because the vacant homes had already been built, the marginal cost of delivering a house was
lower than the marginal benefit to a household of living there. The fact that vacant homes
depreciate faster due to lack of maintenance (Gerardi et al., 2015) and may enable crime (Cui
  21
    Consistent with this view, Mian, Sufi and Trebbi (2015) provide empirical evidence that foreclosures led to a
large decline in house prices, residential investment, and consumer demand during the Great Recession.


                                                      22
and Walsh, 2014; Ellen, Lacoe and Sharygin, 2013) further strengthen the case. Thus a policy
like the FTHC—which alleviates credit constraints faced by new homebuyers and potentially
moves people into underutilized homes—could improve welfare.
   Finally, a large literature documents how a decline in house prices can affect the real econ-
omy via balance sheet effects. Falling house prices generate financial accelerator effects by
destroying household net worth and thus affecting whether firms can borrow to invest and
whether households can borrow to consume (Kiyotaki and Moore, 1997; Iacoviello, 2005).
These effects would be particularly strong during a liquidity trap, as was the case during the
FTHC program. There is considerable evidence that these effects were large: falling house
prices led to a large decline in consumption and employment during the Great Recession (Mian
and Sufi, 2011, 2014). Housing prices can also affect the balance sheets of banks and an in-
crease in foreclosures can spill over to the banking sector as losses realized by banks inhibit
their ability to borrow and lend (Shleifer and Vishny, 2010b). A policy which increased housing
prices would have recapitalized households, firms, and banks.
   Taking together, these rationales provide a justification for attempting to stabilize house
prices. In the next section, we present evidence suggesting the additional demand induced
by the FTHC program indeed facilitated a productive reallocation of underutilized assets. We
make this case in three steps. First, many transactions during the policy period involved sales
by investors and institutional sellers, who were likely to be low utility users of the assets.
Second, many buyers induced by the program were likely constrained by down payment re-
quirements that the credit and concurrent federal lending policies helped relax. In addition, a
large fraction of purchased homes were previously vacant or were foreclosures, consistent with
positive reallocation and improved utilization of existing assets. Third, and consistent with a
reallocation toward higher utility users, the program increased house price growth. Finally, we
find the marginal reallocation caused by the program was stable, as program buyers were not
more likely to default than other cohorts and the quantity and price responses reversed slowly
and partially.


5.1    Recently Built Homes and Homes in Distress
We exploit the richness of the DataQuick transaction data, which records the names of buyers
and sellers as well as categories for distressed sales, to explore how likely it was that the FTHC
sped reallocation of houses from low to high utility users. For each property, DataQuick’s county
assessor data provide detailed information on the characteristics of the transacted homes, in-
cluding price, size, age and number of bedrooms and bathrooms. Linked to each property are

                                               23
transaction data that track changes in deed. The data identifies if a transaction is a short sale,
a financial institution-owned sale (REO), a foreclosure auction, or an exchange of deed on a
foreclosed home. DataQuick’s proprietary model classifies whether the transaction is made
between related parties or at arm’s length.
       It is important to distinguish sellers who are homeowners from those left holding assets
they were unable to sell. A number of negative externalities are associated with the latter case.
Empty houses decay more rapidly and can be subject to vandalism or host to other crimes.
Foreclosure spillovers associated with forced sales of distressed homes can depress housing
values for neighbors and, through subsequent reappraisals, amplify barriers to refinancing.
       We divide the total transactions for our main analysis sample during the policy period into
categories based on the likelihood that the sellers were not first-best users of the homes they
were selling. We investigate the following categories:22

   1. Recently Built: Includes homes built between 2005 and 2010.
   2. Short Sale: Includes homes categorized by DataQuick as short sales (i.e., sales involving
         principal forgiveness by lenders).
   3. Foreclosure/Real Estate Owned (REO): Includes homes categorized by DataQuick as
         being sold from a financial institution’s portfolio of homes or through a foreclosure auc-
         tion.
   4. Developer Seller: Includes homes for which the seller is either a home builder or other
         kind of company, based on the seller’s name.
   5. Government Sponsored Enterprise (GSE) Seller: Includes homes for which the seller
         is a federal entity—Fannie Mae, Freddie Mac, Ginnie Mae, the Federal Home Loan Banks,
         or the Veterans Administration.

Figure 7 displays weighted average shares of total transactions for the policy period for these
categories. Weighted averages equal the average share of sales in a category in a ZIP with
average monthly sales in 2007 as the weight. During this period, there were 4.3 million total
transactions for our sample.
       During the policy period, there were approximately 739 thousand homes sold that had been
built in 2005 or later. This compares to 396 thousand homes classified as new construction by
DataQuick. To the extent our new construction marker is too restrictive, these sales indicate
the program may have allowed builders to sell homes from their recent inventories. Consistent
  22
    Appendix A provides more detail on how we categorize transactions, including regular expressions used to
identify builders, developers, and the GSEs.



                                                    24
with this, approximately 1.13 million homes, or 24 percent of all home sales, were sold by
developers or builders. Thus nearly two-thirds of homes sold by developers were not new
construction.
   Recent construction does not contribute to output or employment at the time of sale. How-
ever, the importance of recent construction in aggregate sales during this period highlights
two macroeconomic issues created by investment overhangs. First, an overhang of previously
built assets reduces investment today while the economy redeploys excess inventory. Second,
while GDP correctly measures the delivery of new homes during the period of construction, it
does not correctly measure the initiation of a stream of consumption services if those assets are
subsequently left vacant. The facts suggest programs like the FTHC can work by accelerating
redeployment and initiating use of idle assets.
   Figure 7 also shows the importance of distressed sales and sales from financial institu-
tion portfolios during this time. Within our sample, there were approximately 561 thousand
short sales and 843 thousand foreclosure or REO sales, including 235 thousand sales from
the government entities’ portfolios of repossessed homes. While not mutually exclusive from
the recent construction and developer sales above, these figures again suggest that many of
the homes transacted did not involve transfers from one homeowner to another, but instead
enabled transitions of underutilized assets to more productive use.
   In the last row of Table 4, we focus on foreclosures and short sales and use program expo-
sure to study the effect of the program on distressed sales. As with non-distressed sales and new
construction, we estimate a differenced version of equation 2, where the left-hand-side variable
is the average number of foreclosures and short sales in place i during the policy period minus
the average number of foreclosures and short sales in place i during the seventeen-month pre-
period, scaled by the average in 2007. We seasonally adjust the distressed sales series prior
to averaging. All specifications include CBSA fixed effects. The point estimate is 0.041 and
marginally statistically significant. The magnitude suggests the program induced a modest
shift in the composition of sales toward distressed sales. Columns (2) through (7) confirm
the robustness of this finding. Note that this effect is in addition to the effect on distressed
transactions due to the increase in the level of demand caused by the program.


5.2   Constrained Buyers and Mortgage Finance
A large literature documents the importance of down payment constraints in housing markets.
Stein (1995) shows that modeling down payment constraints is crucial for matching many
empirical features of the housing market. Using the PSID, Engelhardt (1996) shows that young

                                               25
households reduce consumption in years in which they buy a home yet increase consumption
back to long-run levels in subsequent years. This suggests that the down payment constraint
is binding for many young households. Survey evidence confirms this fact. Fuster and Zafar
(2015) administer a survey on the role of down payment constraints on household willingness
and ability to buy housing. They find that a reduction in down payments would have a much
larger effect on household behavior than a decline in mortgage rates. This result reflects the
difficulty many households face in saving for the typical 20 percent down payment, especially
in high home price areas.23
       The FTHC program coincided with an expansion by the Federal Housing Administration
(FHA) of its first-time homebuyer mortgage guarantee program. This program enables mort-
gage loans of up to 96.5 percent of purchase price for eligible buyers. Given the low down
payment requirements, first-time homebuyers make up a significant portion of new origina-
tions supported by the FHA, as the government-sponsored enterprises Fannie Mae and Freddie
Mac typically require larger down payments. According to the Department of Housing and
Urban Development (HUD), FHA supported 781 thousand first-time homebuyers during 2009
and 882 thousand during 2010, or approximately 56 percent of the first-time buyer market
during these years.24
       These low down payment loans are not costless: a lower upfront payment trades for higher
subsequent interest payments plus required mortgage insurance premiums. A simple calcula-
tion highlights the trade-off. Consider three different mortgage contracts for a house which
costs $200,000: (1) a conventional 30-year fixed rate mortgage requiring a 20 percent down
payment, (2) a 96.5 percent loan-to-value (LTV) FHA loan where the household pays off the
Upfront Mortgage Insurance (UMI), 1.75 percent of price, within the down payment, (3) a
96.5 percent LTV FHA loan that shifts the UMI into the principal. The FHA loan also includes a
0.55 percent mortgage insurance premium. Assume the interest rate is 4.8 percent, the average
conventional mortgage rate from November 2009.25
       Under these assumptions and no discounting, the first mortgage would cost $301,000 over
30 years. Notice that to receive this contract the buyer makes a $40,000 down payment at
origination. The second mortgage would cost $368,000 over 30 years but the buyer would
  23
     A recent report by builderonline.com finds that residents making the median income in a state have to save
nearly eight years on average to put 10 percent down for a median price home (builderonline, 2015). Similarly,
a recent survey by Trulia.com finds that a full 47 percent of surveyed renters would consider buying if they had
enough savings for the down payment (Kolko, 2012).
  24
     See Figure 6 in HUD’s “Annual Report to Congress” (Department of Housing and Urban Development, 2011).
  25
     For the sake of simplicity we abstract from mortgage prepayment and exclude the tax benefits of interest
payments and insurance premiums.



                                                      26
only make a $7,000 + $3,500 down payment upfront. Finally, the third mortgage including
UMI would cost about $375,000 over 30 years and the buyer would make a $7,000 down
payment. In 2009, the average interest rate on FHA loans was 1.4% higher than a conventional
mortgage, which increases the cost of the FHA loans to $428,500 and $436,000 respectively.
Thus the FHA mortgages are considerably more expensive over the life of the contract than a
conventional mortgage. That so many households chose an FHA mortgage despite the higher
future cost suggests that down payment constraints were highly relevant for these households
during the sample period.26
       In a follow-up paper, we explore in detail the role of down payment constraints in ampli-
fying the response to the program Berger et al. (2016). The data strongly suggest that many
potential homebuyers face down payment constraints, as these buyers took advantage of low
down payment loans at the expense of higher monthly payments. The FTHC program helped
relax these constraints; as a result, many marginal transactions likely involved purchases by
high-value users of the assets. When combined with the facts about home sellers, this further
suggests that induced sales entailed productive reallocation.


5.3       Vacant Homes and Household Formation
To further assess the likelihood of beneficial reallocation, we complement our exploration of
low utility sellers from Section 5.1 with information from the de-identified tax returns of FTHC
claimers. Unfortunately, the tax data do not record information about the people or entities
from whom FTHC claimers bought their homes. However, it is possible to use information
about mailing addresses to ask two related questions about claimer transitions into homeown-
ership. The first question is whether the home occupied by the claimer at the time of purchase
was occupied in recent years or instead a vacant home. The second question is whether the
transition induced household formation in the sense that claimers move from a multiple occu-
pancy household to a single occupancy household.
       We attempt to measure vacancy and household formation using mailing address informa-
tion reported on an individual’s tax return.27 To measure changes in vacancy status, we ask
whether the new address associated with the FTHC purchase had been occupied two years
prior to the purchase. To measure changes in household formation, we count the number of
tax returns filed from a particular address and compare it to the number of tax returns filed
  26
     Conversations with economists at the Department of Housing and Urban Development confirm that borrowers
were permitted to apply the credit toward the 3.5 percent down payment.
  27
     Specifically, we use the mailable point information encoded in the 12-digit ZIP code. We restrict analysis to
valid ZIP-12s, i.e., ZIP-12s where the last seven digits are not all zeros.


                                                       27
at the FTHC claimer’s address two years prior to the purchase. In both cases, we choose the
period two years prior because the new address may be assigned to the prior year’s tax return if
a tax filer amended the prior return to claim the credit. We focus on claims made for purchases
in 2009 to separate first-time homebuyers from long-time homebuyers.
       From the FTHC claims in 2009, we find that 42 percent move into an address that had no
filers in 2007 and 33 percent transition into a single tax filer address from living in a multiple
filer address in 2007.28 We have also computed these statistics for first-time homebuyers in the
non-policy years between 2002 and 2013. The data suggest that FTHC claimers are not more
likely to move into vacant homes, but are more likely to form new households relative to first-
time buyers in other years (33.1% transition to single family in 2009 relative to 30.5% in other
years). In years prior to the crisis, high vacancy rates may instead reflect new construction.
We assess this issue by dividing first-time homebuyer addresses based on whether the address
appears in previous years. Using this method, on average 13.9% of these addresses between
2002 and 2007 can be classified as new construction. In 2009, only 7.9% of addresses can be
classified this way, lending further support to the notion that FTHC buyers were often buying
recently vacated homes.
       Taken altogether, to the extent the program sped reallocation of underutilized assets, this
reallocation came primarily through increasing the level of home purchases during a time
when the supply of vacant homes was abnormally high. Nevertheless, the data do rule out
the possibility that FTHC purchases merely resulted in people “swapping” houses. In addition,
the data also suggest imputed owner-equivalent rental income as another indirect GDP effect
of the program.


5.4       Default Rates for Policy Period Buyers
Given the high origination loan-to-value ratios of policy period homebuyers and the literature
suggesting such LTVs can lead to distress, it is critical to ask what happened to these buyers
subsequently. We use the DataQuick transaction data to shed light on this question. DataQuick
records track a distressed property as it goes through each step of the default process, as early
as a short sale and as late as the REO disposal following foreclosure. We use chronological
changes in ownership classified as distress sales by DataQuick to identify homebuyers who later
defaulted on their loan. Specifically, we follow policy period cohorts of buyers and compare
  28
    The household formation statistic restricts the sample to those filers for whom we have a valid previous
address. As a validation check of the vacancy data, we have confirmed that the vacancy share of FTHC claims at
the ZIP level is strongly correlated with the share of home sales that are foreclosures or short sales.



                                                     28
them to cohorts both before and after the policy. We restrict analysis to buyers with FHA-
insured mortgages in order to focus on those with high potential default risk.
       Figure 8, panel (b) plots cumulative distress cohorts for purchases made during the policy
period and compares these to cohorts based on 2006, 2007, and 2008 sales as well as cohorts
based on 2011 sales. Our data allow us to compare cohorts for at least 36 months from the
month of purchase. Both the 2009 and 2010 policy cohorts show no difference in default
rates relative to the 2011 post-policy cohort. At 36 months out, each of these groups shows
distress transition rates of approximately ten per thousand purchases. Furthermore, all three
of these groups display considerably lower rates of transition into distressed sales than the
pre-policy groups. Thus the data do not indicate the FTHC program induced unusually risky
buyers into the market, despite the very high LTVs at which these buyers entered. In this sense,
the reallocation of homes appears to have been stable.


5.5       House Prices
To explore the effect of the FTHC on house prices, we use data from the Federal Housing
Finance Agency (FHFA) and CoreLogic. Both datasets rely on a repeat sales methodology
to estimate price indices at the ZIP level from the present to as far back as the mid 1970s.
The FHFA indices use all mortgages guaranteed by Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac, and offer
the greatest geographic coverage but are only estimated annually. CoreLogic’s index uses its
proprietary database to estimate monthly values.
       We follow the same empirical strategy as for the home sales regressions in Table 4, exploit-
ing within-CBSA variation in exposure to the program. For the FHFA data, the left-hand-side
variable is cumulative annual log price differences during 2009 and 2010 minus cumulative
annual log price differences during 2007 and 2008. We present estimates for raw changes in
price growth and for market-adjusted changes. In the case of market-adjusted changes, we
first estimate ZIP-specific housing market betas in the ten-year window from 1997 to 2006 and
then subtract beta times the market return to compute a ZIP-level excess return.29 This allows
us to control for differential exposure of high exposure ZIP codes to the national cycle driven
by higher risk in these areas. For the CoreLogic data, the left-hand-side variable is raw cumu-
lative monthly log price differences during the policy period minus cumulative monthly log
price differences during the 17-month pre-period. In all cases, we multiply the left-hand-side
by 100 so the treatment effect units are percentage points of growth per standard deviation
  29
   For the market return, we use the national annual FHFA house price index, which is estimated using a similar
methodology to the ZIP-level indices.


                                                     29
change in program exposure.
       Table 5 presents results from these regressions. In our preferred specification, which uses
the market-adjusted FHFA series, we find the program caused an increase in cumulative price
growth of 77 basis points per standard deviation increase in exposure. At the median initial
price level of $222,000 in our sample, this implies an increase in prices of $1,720 (≈ .00774 ×
222,000). This figure is plausible given the $8,000 size of the credit and considerable excess
inventory in the market. It also implies that even the highest exposure places did not see house
prices increase by more than the credit.30
       As shown in the table, the estimate is robust to different weights, sample definitions, and
censoring of the left-hand-side variable. In addition, the estimates vary little between the FHFA
and CoreLogic samples and do not depend on the market adjustment for ZIP-specific cyclicality.
As with the quantity results, we estimate more precise and qualitatively larger effects in the
ZIPs with lower initial house prices, though these differences are only statistically significant
in the CoreLogic sample.
       Figure 9 allows us to explore the extent to which the price effects reverse in the years
following the policy. We estimate cross-sectional regressions each year of first differences in
market-adjusted price growth from the FHFA. The coefficients show no pre-trends in years
prior to the program and strong trend breaks during the two program years, which match
both qualitatively and quantitatively the positive long difference effects estimated in Table
5. In the year immediately following the program, price growth retreats somewhat, undoing
approximately one quarter of the increase caused by the program. This evidence is consistent
with our finding an incomplete reversal of the home sales response in the post-policy period.
       A growing empirical literature documents large, causal responses of non-durable consump-
tion to house price movements.31 Using different identification strategies, these studies esti-
mate an elasticity of non-durable consumption in the range of 0.15 to 0.3. Given that the
FTHC had a significant effect on house prices, natural questions to ask are: first, did the FTHC
indirectly stimulate consumption through its effect on house prices, and second, how large are
these effects? While a complete treatment of these questions is beyond this paper’s scope, we
apply the sufficient statistic approach of Berger et al. (2015) to derive a ballpark estimate.
       The central theoretical result of Berger et al. (2015) is that despite the myriad of ways in
which a change in house prices affects an individual’s decision problem, the change in con-
sumption due to an unexpected, proportional change in house prices is given by a simple
  30
     As house prices were falling on average during this time, these effects may be interpreted as saying the
program slowed the rate of price declines.
  31
     See, e.g., Mian, Rao and Sufi (2013), Stroebel and Vavra (2016), and Kaplan, Mitman and Violante (2016).


                                                     30
“sufficient-statistic” formula:

                                       ∆Ci
                                        ∆P
                                              = M P Ci · (P H i−1 (1 − δ)),                                    (6)
                                         P


where M P Ci is the individual marginal propensity to consume out of transitory income shocks
and P H i−1 (1 − δ) is the value of the individual’s home after depreciation. Given estimates of
these objects, we can aggregate them across households and places and evaluate the size of
the indirect effects under a variety of assumptions.
       We proceed as in Section 4.5 by choosing the bottom one percent of ZIPs as the counter-
factual group and computing an aggregate house price effect for other groups relative to this
group. Recall that the standardized exposure is 0.85 for the bottom centile and increases to
7.58 for the highest one. Thus for each exposure group g, the aggregate percentage change in
prices for that group induced by the program is

                                             ∆Pg
                                                   = β p × (e g − e g,l ow )                                   (7)
                                             Pg

where β p is the coefficient (0.00776) from the long difference price regression in Table 5. We
apply this price growth factor to the average median house price in each group and accumulate
over all owner-occupied housing units in each group under an assumed value for the marginal
propensity to consume. We then apply equation 6 to infer the aggregate change in consumption
induced by the policy. These calculations are rough but informative for the magnitude of
potential indirect effects.
       If one assumes that the MPC is 0.1032 and all of the housing stock is affected, then aggre-
gate consumption would have increased by $23 billion on account of the FTHC. If one assumes
instead that only one- to three-bedroom homes are affected by the policy, the effect is approx-
imately $12 billion. This exercise is too coarse to permit emphasis of a particular number; the
key takeaway is that these effects can be as large or possibly much larger than the program’s
direct stimulative effects.



6       Conclusion
This paper asks whether policy can accelerate the process of reallocation in times of debt-
induced capital overhang following an investment boom. We study temporary tax incentives
  32
    This figure is a rough average of estimates from the fiscal transfer literature (0.2-0.3) and the value implied
by the permanent income hypothesis (0.05).


                                                          31
targeted at marginal asset buyers in the housing market. Unlike debt renegotiation programs,
financial market support, and fiscal and monetary stimulus, the policy we study directly tar-
geted the capital overhang, while aiming to keep underused assets in private hands.
   We find that the program proved effective at spurring home sales and that these effects did
not immediately reverse once the program ended. While the research design does not permit us
to say whether there is a permanent component to the increase in home sales, we can conclude
these sales were not reversed for at least one and a half years. This stable demand shock to
the market likely accelerated the process of reallocation of vacant homes from institutional
investors, banks, and the unsold inventories of home builders into the hands of higher value
users. House prices increased and buyers induced by the program were not more likely to
default than previous or subsequent cohorts of buyers. When targeted correctly, these results
suggest policy can accelerate purchases and mitigate the debt-deflation dynamics associated
with capital overhang.
   The FTHC policy also stimulated homeownership. This is notable because the U.S. gov-
ernment spends at least $70 billion a year on the mortgage interest deduction, partly to en-
courage homeownership. While the mortgage interest deduction may have some effect on
inducing marginal households into homeownership, it also induces households already plan-
ning to buy a home into buying larger homes, which has limited social benefits (Glaeser and
Shapiro, 2003; Kirker, Floetotto and Stroebel, 2016). One lesson from the FTHC is that, if
increasing homeownership rates is a policy goal, then directly targeting potential homeowners
and the constraints they face may be a more cost-effective way to achieve this policy goal. Of
course our paper does not speak adequately to this comparison of policies. More research into
the question should be pursued.
   The policy is less appealing when considered as fiscal stimulus since the increase in housing
transactions came largely in the existing home market. While resales do increase GDP through
increased realtor fees and complementary purchases, the effect on GDP was likely less than the
cost of the program, even accounting for high aggregate spending multipliers due to the zero
lower bound. Moreover, the subsequent reversal implies a likely drag on the economy in the
years after the policy ended.
   Given this evidence, was the FTHC a successful policy? The evidence is mixed. If judged
solely on its direct stimulative impact, the policy would receive a low mark. Though the in-
crease in housing demand was large and persistent, the costs of the program considerably
exceeded the potential GDP gains. However, taking a wider view of the policy as a housing
market stabilizer during a time of extreme distress in the housing market leads to a more gen-



                                              32
erous appraisal. The policy enabled beneficial reallocation of unoccupied housing stock toward
higher value users and stabilized house prices. This made the FTHC complementary to other
principal and payment renogotiation programs, such as HAMP and HARP, that aimed to repair
household balance sheets and improve mortgage affordability.33
    Thus policies like the FTHC may prove useful in the policy toolkit used to help the economy
recover from fire sales resulting from debt-induced capital overhang. Nonetheless, significant
caution is warranted: in order for government intervention to be justified it must be the case
that the falling prices induced by the fire sale involve some kind of market failure. This condi-
tion likely held for the housing market during the Great Recession, but these conditions rarely
hold in more normal times or even in less severe recessions. As a result, the virtues of any
future policy intervention must be assessed with caution and on a case-by-case basis.




 33
    The key difference is that the FTHC addresses a later stage in the foreclosure chain, namely, when the house
was already owned by the bank.


                                                      33
References
Adda, Jérôme, and Russell Cooper. 2000. “Balladurette and Juppette: A Discrete Analysis of
  Scrapping Subsidies.” Journal of Political Economy, 108(4): 778–806.

Agarwal, Sumit, Gene Amromin, Itzhak Ben-David, Souphala Chomsisengphet, Tomasz
  Piskorski, and Amit Seru. 2012. “Policy Intervention in Debt Renegotiation: Evidence from
  the Home Affordable Modification Program.” NBER Working Paper No. 18311.

Agarwal, Sumit, Gene Amromin, Souphala Chomsisengphet, Tomasz Piskorski, Amit
  Seru, and Vincent Yao. 2015. “Mortgage Refinancing, Consumer Spending, and Compe-
  tition: Evidence from the Home Affordable Refinancing Program.” NBER Working Paper No.
  21512.

Berger, David, and Joseph Vavra. 2015. “Consumption Dynamics During Recessions.” Econo-
  metrica, 83(1): 101–154.

Berger, David, Tianfang Cui, Nicholas Turner, and Eric Zwick. 2016. “Stimulating Home-
  ownership.” Working paper.

Berger, David, Veronica Guerrieri, Guido Lorenzoni, and Joseph Vavra. 2015. “House Prices
  and Consumer Spending.” NBER Working Paper 21667.

Bertrand, Marianne, Esther Duflo, and Sendhil Mullainathan. 2004. “How Much Should We
  Trust Differences-In-Differences Estimates?” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 119(1): 249–
  275.

Best, Michael Carlos, and Henrik Jacobsen Kleven. 2015. “Housing Market Responses to
  Transaction Taxes: Evidence From Notches and Stimulus in the UK.” Working paper.

Bogin, Alexander N., William M. Doerner, and William D. Larson. 2016. “Local House Price
  Dynamics: New Indices and Stylized Facts.” FHFA Working Paper No. 16-01.

Brogaard, Jonathan, and Kevin Roshak. 2011. “The Effectiveness of the 2008-2010 Housing
  Tax Credit.” SSRN 1882599.

builderonline. 2015. “How Long Does a First-Time Buyer Have to Save for the Down
  Payment on their Dream Home?”          http://www.builderonline.com/money/
  how-long-will-buyers-save-up-for-the-down-payment-of-their-dream-home_
  o, Accessed: 2016-06-15.
Campbell, John, Stefano Giglio, and Parag Pathak. 2011. “Forced Sales and House Prices.”
  American Economic Review, 101(5): 2108–31.

Chodorow-Reich, Gabriel, Laura Feiveson, Zachary Liscow, and William Gui Woolston.
  2012. “Does state fiscal relief during recessions increase employment? Evidence from the
  American Recovery and Reinvestment Act.” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy,
  118–145.


                                            34
Cui, Lin, and Randall Walsh. 2014. “Foreclosure, Vacancy and Crime.” NBER Working Papers
  18353.

Department of Housing and Urban Development. 2011. “Annual Report to Congress
  Regarding the Financial Status of the FHA Mutual Mortgage Insurance Fund Fis-
  cal Year 2011.” http://portal.hud.gov/hudportal/documents/huddoc?id=
  FHAMMIFundAnnRptFY11No2.pdf.
Diamond, Douglas, and Raghuram Rajan. 2011. “Fear of Fire Sales, Illiquidity Seeking, and
  Credit Freezes.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 126(2): 557–591.

Dynan, Karen, Ted Gayer, and Natasha Plotkin. 2013. “An Evaluation of Federal and State
  Homebuyer Tax Incentives.” Washington, DC: The Brookings Institution.

Eberly, Janice, and Arvind Krishnamurthy. 2014. “Efficient Credit Policies in a Housing Debt
  Crisis.” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 2014(2): 73–136.

Eggertsson, Gauti, and Paul Krugman. 2012. “Debt, Deleveraging, and the Liquidity Trap: A
  Fisher-Minsky-Koo Approach.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 127(3): 1469–1513.

Eisfeldt, Andrea, and Adriano Rampini. 2006. “Capital Reallocation and Liquidity.” Journal
  of Monetary Economics, 53(3): 369–399.

Ellen, Ingrid Gould, Johanna Lacoe, and Claudia Ayanna Sharygin. 2013. “Do Foreclosures
  Cause Crime?” Journal of Urban Economics, 59–70.

Engelhardt, Gary V. 1996. “Consumption, Down Payments, and Liquidity Constraints.” ournal
  of Money, Credit and Banking, 255–271.

Fisher, Irving. 1933. “The Debt-Deflation Theory of Great Depressions.” Econometrica, 337–
  357.

French, Kenneth, Martin Baily, John Campbell, John Cochrane, Douglas Diamond, Darrell
  Duffie, Anil Kashyap, Frederic Mishkin, Raghuram Rajan, David Scharfstein, et al. 2010.
  The Squam Lake Report: Fixing the Financial System. Princeton University Press.

Gerardi, Kristopher, Eric Rosenblatt, Paul S Willen, and Vincent Yao. 2015. “Foreclosure
  externalities: Some new evidence.” NBER Working Paper 20593.

Glaeser, Edward L., and Jesse M. Shapiro. 2003. “The Benefits of the Home Mortgage Interest
  Deduction.” Tax Policy and the Economy, 17: 37–82.

Green, Daniel, Brian Melzer, Jonathan A. Parker, and Ryan Pfirrmann-Powell. 2014. “Ac-
  celerator or Brake? Microeconomic Estimates of the ’Cash for Clunkers’ and Aggregate De-
  mand.” Working Paper.

Guren, Adam, and Tim McQuade. 2015. “How Do Foreclosures Exacerbate Housing Down-
 turns?” Working Paper.



                                            35
Hanson, Samuel, Anil Kashyap, and Jeremy Stein. 2011. “A Macroprudential Approach to
 Financial Regulation.” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 25(1): 3–28.

Hayek, Friedrich von. 1931. “The "Paradox" of Saving.” Economica, 32: 125–169.

Hembre, Erik. 2015. “The Price of Homeowners: An Examination of the First-time Homebuyer
 Tax Credit.” Working Paper.

House, Christopher, and Matthew Shapiro. 2008. “Temporary Investment Tax Incentives:
 Theory with Evidence from Bonus Depreciation.” American Economic Review, 98(3): 737–
 68.

Iacoviello, Matteo. 2005. “House Prices, Borrowing Constraints and Monetary Policy in the
  Business Cycle.” American Economic Review, 739–764.

Kaplan, Greg, Kurt Mitman, and Gianluca Violante. 2016. “Consumption and House Prices
  in the Great Recession: Model Meets Evidence.” NBER Working Papers.

Keynes, John Maynard. 1936. The General Theory of Employment, Interest, and Money. London:
  Macmillan.

Kirker, Michael, Max Floetotto, and Johannes Stroebel. 2016. “Government Intervention in
  the Housing Market: Who Wins, Who Loses?” Journal of Monetary Economics, 80: 106–123.

Kiyotaki, Nobuhiro, and John Moore. 1997. “Credit Cycles.” Journal of Political Economy,
  105(21): 211–248.

Kolko, Jed. 2012. “Consumer Optimism: Too Much of a Good Thing?” http://www.trulia.
  com/blog/trends/trulia-american-dream-survey/, Accessed: 2016-06-15.
Lorenzoni, Guido. 2008. “Inefficient Credit Booms.” Review of Economic Studies, 75(3): 809–
  833.

Mian, Atif, Amir Sufi, and Francesco Trebbi. 2015. “Foreclosures, House Prices, and the Real
 Economy.” Journal of Finance, 2587–2634.

Mian, Atif, and Amir Sufi. 2009. “The consequences of mortgage credit expansion: Evidence
 from the US mortgage default crisis.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 124(4): 1449.

Mian, Atif, and Amir Sufi. 2011. “House Prices, Home Equity-Based Borrowing, and the U.S.
 Household Leverage Crisis.” American Economic Review, 2132–2156.

Mian, Atif, and Amir Sufi. 2012. “The Effects of Fiscal Stimulus: Evidence from the 2009 Cash
 for Clunkers Program.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 1107–1142.

Mian, Atif, and Amir Sufi. 2014. “What Explains the 2007-2009 Drop in Employment?” Econo-
 metrica, 2197–2223.

Mian, Atif, and Amir Sufi. 2015. House of Debt: How They (and You) Caused the Great Recession,
 and How We Can Prevent It from Happening Again. University of Chicago Press.

                                             36
Mian, Atif, Kamelesh Rao, and Amir Sufi. 2013. “Household Balance Sheets, Consumption,
 and the Economic Slump.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 1687–1726.

National Association of Realtors. 2010. “Profile of Home Buyers and Sellers 2010.”

Ramey, Valerie, and Matthew Shapiro. 2001. “Displaced Capital: A Study of Aerospace Plant
  Closings.” Journal of Political Economy, 109(5): 958–992.

Rognlie, Matthew, Andrei Shleifer, and Alp Simsek. 2014. “Investment Hangover and the
  Great Recession.” NBER Working Paper No. 20569.

Shleifer, Andrei, and Robert Vishny. 1992. “Liquidation Values and Debt Capacity: A Market
  Equilibrium Approach.” Journal of Finance, 47(4): 1343–1366.

Shleifer, Andrei, and Robert Vishny. 2010a. “Asset Fire Sales and Credit Easing.” American
  Economic Review: Papers and Proceedings, 100(2): 46–50.

Shleifer, Andrei, and Robert Vishny. 2010b. “Unstable Banking.” Journal of Financial Eco-
  nomics, 97(3): 306–318.

Stein, Jeremy. 1995. “Prices and Trading Volume in the Housing Market: A Model with Down-
  Payment Effects.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 379–406.

Stroebel, Johannes, and Joseph Vavra. 2016. “House Prices, Local Demand, and Retail
  Prices.” NBER Working Papers 20710.

Whitaker, Stephen, and Thomas J Fitzpatrick IV. 2013. “Deconstructing Distressed-Property
 Spillovers: The Effects of Vacant, Tax-Delinquent, and Foreclosed Properties in Housing Sub-
 markets.” Journal of Housing Economics, 22(2): 79–91.

Zwick, Eric, and James Mahon. Forthcoming. “Tax Policy and Heterogeneous Investment
  Behavior.” American Economic Review.




                                             37
                                                                   Figure 1: The State of the Housing Market

                                                                                (a) Inventory (NAR)



                                                        4000
                                                        3500
                          Housing inventories (000s)
                                                        3000
                                                        2500
                                                        2000




                                                          2004m1       2006m1       2008m1       2010m1     2012m1      2014m1
                                                                                         Year/Month


                                                                (b) Existing Home Sales Composition (DataQuick)
                             1           .8
                Percent of Monthly Sales
                      .4     .2
                             0 .6




                                                       2004m1         2006m1        2008m1       2010m1      2012m1     2013m9

                                                                   REOs & Foreclosures        Short Sales      Other Resales


Notes: Panel (a) plots seasonally adjusted housing inventory, defined as a the number of homes listed for sale,
from the National Association of Realtors (NAR). Panel (b) plots the month-by-month share of existing home sales
in DataQuick in each of three categories: non-distress resales, short sales, and institution-owned or foreclosures.




                                                                                         38
                                                                 Figure 2: Aggregate Home Sales and the Policy Window

                                                 (a) Existing Home Sales (NAR)                                 (b) Non-Distress Sales Zoomed (DataQuick)




                                                                                                                                    2000
                                         7000
   Annualized Existing Home Sales (000s)




                                                                                                                                               1800
                                                                                                                      Annualized Home Sales (000s)
                             6000




                                                                                                                                     1600
                  5000




                                                                                                                             1400
     4000




                                                                                                                   1200
                         3000




                                                                                                                                    1000
                                 2004m1                 2006m1   2008m1     2010m1      2012m1       2014m1                                             2008m5        2009m1             2009m11     2010m6




                                                (c) Non-Distress Sales (DataQuick)                                                                    (d) Search Engine Trends (Google)
                                                                                                                                         50
                         3500




                                                                                                                                         40
                              3000
      Annualized Home Sales (000s)




                                                                                                                       Search Activity
                                                                                                                                 30
                    2500




                                                                                                                        20
           2000




                                                                                                                                         10
   1500




                                                                                                                                         0




                                                                                                                                                        2008m5           2009m2          2009m11      2010m6
                         1000




                                                  2004m12          2008m5      2010m6            2012m12                                                         first time home buyer         home buyer credit



Notes: Panel (a) plots existing home sales on a seasonally adjusted annual basis from the National Association
of Realtors (NAR). Panels (b) and (c) plot seasonally adjusted, annualized, monthly home sales from DataQuick
along with vertical markers for policy events. These data exclude distress transactions and new construction.
Panel (d) plots Google search trend data for the terms “first time home buyer” and “home buyer credit” along
with vertical markers for policy events. The vertical markers in panels (b) and (d) correspond to the FTHC loan
program, the start of the FTHC grant program, the scheduled expiration of the FTHC grant program, and the
actual expiration of the FTHC grant program, respectively. The markers in panels (a) and (c) correspond to the
FTHC loan program and the actual expiration of the FTHC grant program, respectively.




                                                                                                              39
                                                   Figure 3: Maps of FTHC Program Exposure

                                                                  (a) National Exposure




                                                                                                                      0.025 − 0.045
                                                                                                                      0.022 − 0.025
                                                                                                                      0.017 − 0.022
                                                                                                                      0.004 − 0.017
                                                                                                                      No data



                                                      (b) Exposure in major metropolitan areas
                            Berkeley

  San Francisco                                                                                               Cambridge
                                                                                North Shore
                                       East Oakland




                                                                                                                                 South Boston
                                                             Western
                                                             Suburbs


                                                                                      South Side
                                                                                                                           Dorchester



                                                                                              0.028 − 0.123                   0.028 − 0.123
     Palo Alto & Stanford                    0.028 − 0.123                                    0.023 − 0.028                   0.023 − 0.028
                                             0.023 − 0.028                                    0.019 − 0.023
                                             0.019 − 0.023                                                                    0.019 − 0.023
                                             0.001 − 0.019                                    0.001 − 0.019                   0.001 − 0.019
                                             No data                                          No data                         No data




Notes: Panel (a) presents a county map of program exposure, defined as the number of first-time homebuyers
in a place in the year 2000 divided by the number of tax filers in 2000. Panel (b) presents ZCTA maps for three
metro areas: from left to right, the San Francisco Bay Area, Chicagoland within Cook County and Boston and
Cambridge. Boxes mark particular cities or neighbourhoods in each metro area. Darker shadings reflect higher
exposure.




                                                                           40
                                                                                                      Figure 4: Program Exposure and FTHC Claims

                                                                                                                  (a) Claims versus Exposure, ZIP

                                                                              .025
                                                         Total Credits Claimed/Tax Filers in 2007
                                                               .01         .015         .02




                                                                                                                       Coefficient: 0.33, Clustered t-stat: 22, R2 : 0.42
                                                                              .005




                                                                                                     0                    .02                   .04                                                .06
                                                                                                                             Place-based Exposure




                                               (b) National Claims                                                                        (c) Claims in High and Low Exposure ZIPs
                                                                                                                                                   40000
                    200000




                                                                                                                                                           30000
                                                                                                                                      Monthly Tax Credit Claims
                             150000
       Monthly Tax Credit Claims




                                                                                                                                               20000
                100000




                                                                                                                                    10000
    50000




                                                                                                                                                   0




                                                                                                                                                                   2008m5   2009m2       2009m11   2010m6
                    0




                                      2008m5    2009m2                                              2009m11   2010m6                                                        High Exposure ZIPs           Low Exposure ZIPs



Notes: Panel (a) plots binned bivariate means (i.e., a “binscatter”) of ZIP-level FTHC claims from tax records
scaled by the number of tax filers in 2007 versus program exposure. Exposure is defined as the number of first-
time homebuyers in a place in the year 2000. Panel (b) plots national counts of FTHC claims by month of home
purchase for purchases between February 2009 and September 2010 along with vertical markers for policy events.
The vertical markers correspond to the FTHC loan program, the start of the FTHC grant program, the scheduled
expiration of the FTHC grant program, and the actual expiration of the FTHC grant program, respectively. Panel
(c) plots claim counts for high and low program exposure quintiles of ZIPs sorted using program exposure. The
quintiles are formed using weights that ensure each quintile has equal population in 2007.




                                                                                                                                  41
                                                                                             Figure 5: The Effect of the FTHC on Home Sales

                                                                                     (a) Difference-in-Differences Calendar Time Heatmap
                                                                    100




                                                                     75
                                     Quantile by Ex Ante Exposure




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Scaled Sales

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  1.0
                                                                     50                                                                                                                                                                           0.8

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  0.6




                                                                     25




                                                                                 2008m1                          2009m1                    2010m1                                                        2011m1                      2011m11




                                  (b) ZIP with CBSA Fixed Effects                                                                              (c) Cumulative ZIP with CBSA Fixed Effects
                                                                                                                                                    Sales impact coefficient, cumulative purchases
                  .08




                                                                                                                                                                                               1.5
                            .06
    Sales impact coefficient




                                                                                                                                                                                      1
                   .04




                                                                                                                                                                           .5
     0      .02




                                                                                                                                                               0
                  -.02




                                                                                                                                                     -.5




                       2007m1       2008m1                                   2009m1          2010m1     2011m1      2012m1        2013m1                                             2007m1          2008m1      2009m1          2010m1        2011m1      2012m1        2013m1
                                                                                                Month                                                                                                                               Month

                                                                          With Controls                 95% Confidence Interval                                                                               With controls                    95% Confidence Interval
                                                                          Without Controls              95% Confidence Interval                                                                               Without controls                 95% Confidence Interval




Notes: These figures plot the monthly and cumulative effects of the FTHC on non-distress resales at the ZIP
level. Panel (a) plots a difference-in-differences, calendar time heatmap of monthly sales for ZIPs divided into
100 quantiles and sorted based on program exposure. Columns correspond to months and rows correspond to
groups of ZIPs sorted by exposure. Exposure is the number of first-time homebuyers in a ZIP in 2000 scaled by the
number of tax filing units in 2000. Each cell’s shading corresponds to a level of the key outcome variable, which is
monthly home sales scaled by average monthly home sales in 2007. The quantiles are formed using weights that
ensure each quantile has an equal number of home sales in 2007. Panel (b) plots coefficients for monthly home
sales regressions both with and without controls. Panel (c) plots coefficients for cumulative sales regressions. We
run month-by-month regressions, weighted by total home sales in 2007, of the form:
                                                                                                             yi
                                                                                                                     = αCBSA + βExposurei + γX i + "i
                                                                                                         Salesi,2007

where yi is either monthly home sales in place i or cumulative monthly home sales in place i beginning 17 months
before the program. X i is a control set that includes log population, the average unemployment rate from 2006
through 2010, the log of average gross income, and the subprime share in 1996. Program exposure is normalized
by its cross-sectional standard deviation.
                                                                                                                                           42
                Figure 6: Policy Shift in the Age Distribution of First-Time Buyers

                                                   (a) Distribution of First-Time Buyers, 2002-2013

                                                             2009
                                                                                        Year         Age P50


                                 .05
                                                                                        2009 All       33
                                                                                        2009 FTHC      32
                                                                                        Other          35
                   Share of First-Time Buyers
                     .02        .03
                                 .01     .04




                                                 20           30               40              50              60
                                                                    Age of Primary Taxpayer


             (b) Excess Mass of Young Buyers in 2009 versus Program Exposure, ZIP
                                 .006
                   Excess Mass of Young Buyers
                      .002       0    .004




                                                 .01          .02             .03              .04             .05
                                                                     Place-based Exposure


Notes: Panel (a) plots age distributions of first-time homebuyers identified using income tax return and infor-
mation return data for the years between 2003 and 2013. The FTHC was primarily in effect in 2009, which is
highlighted in the graph. All other years are in gray. Panel (b) shows the correlation between the shift in the
age distribution in 2009 and program exposure. We decompose the national shift in the age distribution in 2009
into contributions from each ZIP. For each ZIP, we compute the difference between the ratio of buyers aged 30
or younger to total new homebuyers in 2009 versus the average ratio of buyers aged 30 or younger to total new
homebuyers in other years. We then plot binned bivariate sums of these ZIP-level contributions against average
exposure in each bin.


                                                                          43
   Figure 7: Transaction Shares for Non-Traditional Sellers During the FTHC Policy Period




                                                                       .25
                                        Share of Policy Period Sales
                                                                       .2
                                                                       .15
                                                                       .1
                                                                       .05
                                                                       0




                                                                                             Recently Built                                      Short Sale
                                                                                             Foreclosure/REO Sale                                Developer Seller
                                                                                             GSE Seller


Notes: The figure displays weighted averages of the share of total transactions in each category in a ZIP, with
average monthly sales in 2007 as the weight. See Section 5 for category definitions.


           Figure 8: Default Rates for Policy Period FHA Buyers versus Other Cohorts

                                                                                                          Policy cohorts with 2011 post cohort
                                                               40
                                                               30
                  Rate of distress sales per 1000 mortgages
                                                               20
                                                               10
                                                               0




                                                                                                              Including pre-policy cohorts
                                                               150
                                                               100
                                                               50
                                                               0




                                                                             0                            20                                40                                   60
                                                                                                          Months elapsed since start of cohort

                                                                                 2011 cohort (N=599581)                2006 cohort (N=151772)           2007 cohort (N=174660)
                                                                                 2008 cohort (N=557685)                2009 cohort (N=798754)           2010 cohort (N=715687)

                                                              Denominator is a running sum of new sales in each month up to the gray line,
                                                              after which it remains constant.


Notes: The figure plots cumulative distress cohorts for FHA-insured purchases made during the policy period and
compares these to cohorts based on 2006, 2007, 2008, and 2011 sales. We measure transitions into distress using
DataQuick by following properties purchased in a given year and computing the share of properties that become
distress sales.



                                                                                                                      44
                                             Figure 9: The Effect of the FTHC on House Prices
                              .6
                              .4
                    Coefficient Estimate
                           0  -.2
                              -.4   .2




                                           2002   2003   2004   2005   2006    2007   2008   2009   2010   2011   2012
                                                                               Year

Notes: The figure plots coefficients for yearly house price growth regressions from market-adjusted house price
indices at the ZIP level from FHFA. We run year-by-year regressions, weighted by total home sales in 2007, of the
form:
                                       ∆r̃i = αCBSA + βExposurei + γX i + "i
where r̃i is the first difference in market-adjusted house price growth in place i. X i is a control set that includes
log population, the average unemployment rate from 2006 through 2010, the log of average gross income, and
the subprime share in 1996. Program exposure is normalized by its cross-sectional standard deviation. The left
hand side is multiplied by 100 so the treatment effects are percentage points of growth per standard deviation in
program exposure.




                                                                              45
                                                    Table 1: Summary Statistics: Home Sales Analyses

                                                                                          Mean        10th     Median          90th             N
                 Housing Transactions
                  Monthly Home Sales (SA)                                                  19.6         3.7       14.3         41.6    1018976
                  Home Sales/Average Monthly Sales in 2007                                 1.02        0.44       0.92         1.73     989181
                 Program Exposure (ZIP)
                   First-Time Buyers/Tax-Filing Units in 2000 (IRS)                        3.00        1.92       2.90         4.15         8882
                 Cross Sectional Characteristics (ZIP)
                   Population, 000s (ACS)                                                23.26        5.58      20.32        45.06          8882
                   Unemployment Rate, 06-10 Average (ACS)                                 7.83        4.30       7.20        12.20          8882
                   Average Gross Income, 2005 (IRS)                                      62.45       32.12      50.43        99.20          8882
                   Subprime Cardholder Fraction, 1996 (Equifax)                           0.30        0.16       0.28         0.46          8732
                   Median Age, 06-10 Average (ACS)                                       38.51       31.70      38.40        45.00          8882
                   Median Rent, 06-10 Average (ACS)                                     970.82      637.00     910.00      1397.00          8882
46




                   Fraction below Poverty Line, 06-10 Average (ACS)                      12.05        3.60       9.80        23.80          8882
                   Fraction of Census Blocks Classified as Urban (Census)                83.30       39.80      99.10       100.00          8882

     Notes: This table presents summary statistics for analysis of the FTHC at the ZIP level. Statistics are presented at both the ZIP-by-month and ZIP levels.
     Monthly Home Sales include non-distress resales. Appendix A provides a detailed description of the data sources used and variable construction and presents
     more statistics.
                                Table 2: Correlates of Program Exposure

                                                                    LHS is Exposure
                                                             Coefficient           R2        N
                  Exposure Correlates:
                    Median Age                                  -.052+       0.0027      8882
                                                               (.0304)
                     Median Rent                                .193**       0.0371      8882
                                                               (.0529)
                     Fraction below Poverty Line                -.28**       0.0784      8882
                                                               (.0334)
                     Fraction Classified as Urban              .0785**       0.0062      8882
                                                               (.0222)
                  Controls:
                    Log(Population)                            .0769**       0.0059      8882
                                                               (.0274)
                     Unemployment Rate                         -.102**       0.0104      8882
                                                               (.0335)
                     Log(Average Gross Income)                   .0247       0.0006      8882
                                                               (.0345)
                     Subprime Cardholder Fraction               -.0161       0.0003      8732
                                                               (.0386)

Notes: This table presents bivariate regressions of program exposure on ZIP-level observables. Variables have been
normalized so the coefficients can be interpreted as a 1 standard deviation change in x produces a β standard
deviation change in exposure, where β is the reported coefficient. Standard errors are clustered at the CBSA
level.




                                                       47
                            Table 3: The Effect of the FTHC on Home Sales

                                 (1)             (2)              (3)         (4)       (5)           (6)
                             No Controls       Controls         CBSA FE      Logs     No wgts       Ex sand
    Pre-policy                   0.001             0.002         0.002       0.005      0.002       0.001
      2007m9-2009m1             (0.005)           (0.005)       (0.003)     (0.004)    (0.003)     (0.003)
    Observations                 8882              8732          8732        8732       8732         7426
    R2                            0.0              0.026         0.369       0.364      0.301        0.391
    Policy                     0.026**         0.026**          0.025**    0.032**     0.032**      0.02**
      2009m2-2010m6             (0.01)         (0.009)          (0.005)    (0.007)     (0.008)     (0.005)
    Observations                 8882              8732          8732        8732       8732         7426
    R2                           0.012             0.035         0.47        0.497      0.431        0.489
    Post-policy                  0.017            0.021+         0.003       -0.004     0.01        -0.003
      2010m7-2011m11            (0.012)           (0.012)       (0.006)     (0.008)    (0.008)     (0.005)
    Observations                 8879              8729          8729        8729       8729         7425
    R2                           0.003             0.049         0.574       0.606      0.516        0.607
    Early policy                 0.013            0.014+        0.018**    0.029**     0.023**     0.014**
      2009m2-2009m9             (0.008)           (0.008)       (0.005)    (0.007)     (0.007)     (0.005)
    Observations                 8881              8731          8731        8731       8731         7426
    R2                           0.004             0.026         0.401       0.432      0.343        0.435
    Spike 1                    0.047**         0.045**          0.041**    0.043**     0.048**     0.036**
      2009m10-2009m12          (0.013)         (0.012)          (0.007)    (0.007)     (0.009)     (0.007)
    Observations                 8844              8694          8694        8694       8694         7421
    R2                           0.022             0.043         0.457       0.452      0.411        0.44
    Spike 2                    0.034**         0.032**          0.032**     0.04**     0.038**     0.027**
      2010m4-2010m6             (0.01)          (0.01)          (0.007)     (0.008)    (0.009)     (0.006)
    Observations                 8857              8708          8708        8708       8708         7423
    R2                           0.013             0.033         0.369       0.386      0.339        0.39
    Controls                       No               Yes           Yes         Yes         Yes          Yes
    CBSA FE                        No               No            Yes         Yes         Yes          Yes

Notes: This table presents the average monthly effects of the FTHB on home sales for ZIPs pooled over different
policy windows with various specifications. We run cross-sectional regressions, weighted by average monthly
home sales in 2007, of the form:

                                     Salesi,t→T
                                                   = α + βExposurei + γX i + "i
                                     Salesi,2007

where yi is average monthly home sales in place i over the relevant time period. In controls specifications, X i is
a control set that includes log population, the average unemployment rate from 2006 through 2010, log average
gross income, and the subprime share in 1996. Exposure is normalized by its cross-sectional standard deviation.
Column (3) includes CBSA fixed effects. In column (4), we respecify the left hand side variable in logs. Column
(5) presents unweighted regressions. Column (6) excludes Arizona, California, and Nevada. All regressions are
clustered at the CBSA level.
                                                           48
                              Table 4: The Effect of the FTHC on Home Sales

                      (1)           (2)          (3)            (4)           (5)             (6)          (7)
                    CBSA FE       No wgts      Ex sand       Trimmed      Sales > P10        Low p        High p
                                                  LHS is Long Difference Sales
 Coefficient         0.021**      0.026**      0.02**        0.013**           0.021**      0.028**       0.005
                     (0.003)      (0.004)      (0.003)       (0.003)           (0.003)      (0.005)      (0.007)
 Observations         8560         8560         7340          7863             7740          2396          2354
 R2                   0.406        0.391        0.373         0.414            0.416         0.598          0.4
                                             LHS is Long Difference Construction
 Coefficient          0.003         0.01        0.004        0.011+             0.003        0.007        0.021
                     (0.007)      (0.007)      (0.008)       (0.006)           (0.007)      (0.016)      (0.016)
 Observations         4631         4631         3922          4249             4435          1138         1112
 R2                   0.13         0.128        0.128         0.161            0.132         0.202        0.191
                                    LHS is Long Difference Foreclosures & Short Sales
 Coefficient         0.041+       0.041*       0.043+        0.036*             0.04+       0.065*        0.013
                     (0.023)      (0.019)      (0.026)       (0.015)           (0.024)      (0.031)      (0.031)
 Observations         8381         8381         7086          7696             7608          2374          2289
 R2                   0.375        0.337        0.361         0.431            0.382         0.459          0.3
 Controls               Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes               Yes           Yes          Yes
 CBSA FE                Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes               Yes           Yes          Yes

Notes: This table presents regressions of the average monthly effects of the FTHC on different categories of home
sales. We run cross-sectional regressions, weighted by average monthly home sales in 2007, of the form:

                                        yi = αC BSA + βExposurei + γX i + "i

where yi is a housing market outcome in place i over the relevant time period. In the first row, the outcome is
the difference in average monthly non-distress home resales for the policy period versus the 17 month pre period.
In the second row, the outcome is the difference in average monthly new construction sales for the policy period
versus the pre period. In the third row, the outcome is the difference in average monthly foreclosures and short
sales for the policy period versus the pre preiod. Exposure is normalized by its cross-sectional standard deviation.
All columns include CBSA fixed effects and controls that include log population, the average unemployment
rate from 2006 through 2010, log average gross income, and the subprime share in 1996. Column (2) presents
unweighted regressions. Column (3) excludes Arizona, California, and Nevada. Column (4) trims the left hand
side variable at the 5th and 95th percentiles. Column (5) restricts the sample to places with average home sales
in 2007 above the 10th percentile. Columns (6) and (7) divide the sample of ZIPs into the bottom three (“Low p”)
and top three (“High p”) deciles in median house prices during 2008. All regressions are clustered at the CBSA
level.




                                                        49
                             Table 5: The Effect of the FTHC on House Prices

                      (1)           (2)         (3)             (4)          (5)             (6)         (7)
                    CBSA FE       No wgts     Ex sand        Trimmed     Sales > P10        Low p       High p
                               LHS is Long Difference Price Growth (FHFA Mkt Adjusted)
 Coefficient        0.776**       0.843**     0.689**        0.568**          0.781**      0.735*       0.437
                    (0.158)       (0.194)     (0.165)         (0.13)          (0.159)      (0.288)     (0.273)
 Observations         8214         8214         7011          7538             7439         2236         2251
 R2                   0.615        0.57         0.611         0.616            0.62         0.601        0.628
                                    LHS is Long Difference Price Growth (FHFA Raw)
 Coefficient        0.808**       0.882**     0.715**        0.595**          0.815**     0.756**       0.491+
                    (0.163)       (0.195)      (0.17)         (0.13)          (0.164)      (0.29)       (0.28)
 Observations         8214         8214         7015          7538            7440          2243         2249
 R2                   0.617        0.573        0.611         0.613           0.622         0.596        0.646
                                     LHS is Long Difference Price Growth (CoreLogic)
 Coefficient        0.681**       0.687**     0.659**        0.553**          0.686**      1.36**       0.414
                    (0.188)       (0.185)     (0.209)        (0.181)           (0.19)      (0.246)     (0.522)
 Observations         5636         5636         4610          5176            5512          1310         1642
 R2                   0.659        0.688        0.595         0.618           0.656         0.686        0.678
 Controls              Yes          Yes          Yes           Yes              Yes          Yes          Yes
 CBSA FE               Yes          Yes          Yes           Yes              Yes          Yes          Yes

Notes: This table presents regressions of the cumulative effects of the FTHC on different measures of house price
growth. We run cross-sectional regressions, weighted by average monthly home sales in 2007, of the form:

                                       yi = αC BSA + βExposurei + γX i + "i

where yi is a housing market outcome in place i over the relevant time period. The first two rows use price index
data from FHFA. In the first row, the outcome is the market-adjusted, cumulative annual log price differences
during 2009 and 2010 minus cumulative annual log price differences during 2007 and 2008. We first estimate
ZIP-specific housing market betas in the ten-year window from 1997 to 2006 and then subtract beta times the
market return to compute a ZIP-level excess return. In the second row, the outcome is the unadjusted version of
the price series from the first row. In the third row, the outcome is raw cumulative monthly log price differences
from CoreLogic during the policy period minus cumulative monthly log price differences during the 17-month
pre-period. In all cases, we multiply the left hand side by 100 so the treatment effect units are percentage
points of growth per standard deviation change in program exposure. All series are seasonally adjusted prior to
aggregation. Exposure is normalized by its cross-sectional standard deviation. All columns include CBSA fixed
effects and controls that include log population, the average unemployment rate from 2006 through 2010, log
average gross income, and the subprime share in 1996. Column (2) presents unweighted regressions. Column
(3) excludes Arizona, California, and Nevada. Column (4) trims the left hand side variable at the 5th and 95th
percentiles. Column (5) restricts the sample to places with average home sales in 2007 above the 10th percentile.
Columns (6) and (7) divide the sample of ZIPs into the bottom three (“Low p”) and top three (“High p”) deciles
in median house prices during 2008. All regressions are clustered at the CBSA level.




                                                        50
For Online Publication

A      Data Build and Discussion
The analysis combines a large number of proprietary and public use data sources. In this
appendix, we describe each source in detail, describe variable construction, and walk step-by-
step through sample selection.


A.1     Data Sources and Sets
    1. Tax records, IRS/OTA: These data are anonymized individual-level data collected by the
       IRS for the purposes of administering the tax collection process. They are made available
       through collaboration with the Office of Tax Analysis in the US Treasury Department and
       the IRS Division of Research, Analysis, and Statistics.
       We compile the following items:

        (a) ZIP-5 level cross sections of FTHC claims from Form 5405. These include claims for
            versions 2 and 3 of the FTHC program (i.e., the grant program) and also claims for
            the Long-Time Homebuyer Credit.
        (b) First-time homebuyer and tax filer counts from individual tax returns and informa-
            tion returns for the years 1998, 1999, and 2000 for measuring program exposure,
            and through 2013 for measuring the age of first-time homebuyers in non-policy
            years.
        (c) Tax filer counts for the year 2007 from individual tax returns.

       Tax credit claims cover 18,073 ZIPs, the homebuyer counts from 2000 cover 24,923 ZIPs,
       and the 2007 records cover 35,647 ZIPs.

    2. DataQuick deed records: We clean and merge data retrieved from DataQuick’s assessor
       file, which contains information on individual properties used to assess property taxes,
       and DataQuick’s recorder file, which tracks ownership changes and loans secured by
       properties.
       We begin with records from 2004 to 2013, up to the company’s acquisition by CoreLogic.
       Assessor data cover 1,819 counties accounting for 91.8% of the US population. While
       not all counties tracked by DataQuick provide recorder data, 942 counties do and these
       match to 88% of all deeds tracked in the assessor data.
       Once the two files are joined, we produce our “canonical” list of transactions by applying
       the following filters:

        (a) Including only resales and new construction (types R and S in SR_TRAN_TYPE)
            which are arm’s length34 ;
  34
     To our knowledge, the arm’s length flag in DataQuick is the output of a “model” that classifies whether
resales are genuine arm’s length transactions. It automatically excludes refinances and intermediate documents
in a distress sale process. It attempts to exclude transactions made between related parties at non-market prices,
for example, because of divorce or bequest.


                                                       51
        (b) Removing transactions between institutional buyers, such as two developers or a
            developer with a GSE;
        (c) Removing middle-man sales where a property buyer sells the property on the same
            day;
        (d) Keeping only the transaction with the highest transfer value if there are duplicates
            with the same property, transaction date, buyer and seller, with the intent of remov-
            ing incomplete duplicate records.

       We use the filtered, merged data to create three output datasets:

        (a) DataQuick transaction counts. We aggregate the transactions in the recorder data
            to the (geographic unit)×(month)×(transaction type)×(distress type) level, where
            the geographic unit is a ZIP or county. For each level, we count the number of
            transactions.
            This initial dataset is divided into six distinct datasets used during different parts of
            the analysis:
                i.   all sales (transaction types R and S, distress types ∈ NULL, A, I, S and O),
               ii.   non-distress resales (transaction type R, null distress indicator)35
              iii.   new housing/subdivision sales (transaction type S),
               iv.   purchases at foreclosure auctions (distress type A),
                v.   DataQuick-inferred short sales (distress type I),
              vi.    REO liquidations (distress type S).
             A variation of the above aggregation splits counts to the (geographic unit)×(month)
             ×(transaction type)×(distress type)×(bedroom) level, where bedroom information
             comes from the assessor file. We mark each transaction as having missing bedroom
             information, 1 to 3 bedrooms, or 4 or more bedrooms. Geographies with more
             than 5% of months lacking transactions on properties with bedroom data, as well as
             geographies in states with consistently poor bedroom data collection, are dropped.
             A second variation requires processing individual records further before aggrega-
             tion:
                i. Transactions on recently built housing are marked by checking the SA_YR_BLT
                   column in the assessor file.
               ii. Transactions on properties owned by developers or owned by government-
                   sponsored enterprises are marked through running regular expression searches
                   on the SR_BUYER column in the recorder file. The regular expressions for
                   builders, developers, and GSEs are:
                   builder_re_list =
                     (’HOME|BUILDER| BUILD|BLDR| HM(\s|S\s)| CONST |REAL ESTATE|’,
                       ’PULTE|RYLAND|NVR|DR HORTON|CENTEX|LENNAR|MERITAGE|’,
  35
     Distress type O transactions appear to be classified as distress by DataQuick, but shows no other sign of being
a distress sale, such as an unusually low sale price or institutional seller. We exclude them by default, but have
confirmed the robustness of our results by including them as non-distress transactions. They make up at most 2%
of the sample in policy period months.


                                                        52
                 ’STANDARD PACIFIC’)
             developer_re_list =
                (’LLC|CORP|COMPANY| INC$|INTL| LAND |PROPERT(Y|IES)|TRUST|’,
                 ’INVEST(OR|MENT)|LP’)
             gse_re_list =
                (’FNMA|FHLM|HUD-HOUSING|FEDERAL (H|NATIONAL)|FANNIE|’,
                 ’SECRETARY OF (H|VET)|VETERANS AD’)
        iii. Transactions on properties considered recently in distress are marked through
             searching over a property’s transaction history and checking if the property was
             distressed less than two years prior to the current transaction.
        The exclusion of type L sales from the resales and the new housing datasets is due
        to DataQuick classifying properties with a later delinquent mortgage as type L, even
        if the sale associated with that mortgage was a non-distress sale. The label there-
        fore cannot be used to infer whether the original transaction was distressed, not
        distressed, or otherwise unusual. However, these type L sales account for many
        transactions in the pre-crisis period, up to a majority in some places in California.
        For these reasons, they are included when constructing the price and loans data.
   (b) DataQuick price data: For every geographic unit-by-month unit, we compute the
       group’s median price based on the SR_VAL_TRANSFER column [for non-distressed
       properties]. We exclude transactions for which price data are missing, about 10%
       of all transactions, from the computation. We code as missing any units where
       fewer than five transactions are available. These price data serve to complement
       the CoreLogic price indices in places when the CoreLogic data are not available.
    (c) DataQuick loans data: DataQuick counts mortgages attached to the paperwork
        on a closed sale as loans related to that transaction, and allow up to three liens
        connected to one transfer. However, these rows miss loans taken out by the buyer
        from different banks or subsequent to the purchase, which may include second liens
        and “piggyback loans” used to cover the cost of the down payment.
        We connect second liens, which are categorized as refinances in DataQuick, to trans-
        actions by sorting data on SR_PROPERTY_ID and SR_DATE_TRANSFER, and then
        linking all refinances between property transactions with the date of the preceding
        transaction. Loan values on refinances taking place less than 100 days after the
        preceding transaction are added to the loan value on that transaction.

3. CoreLogic Prices: CoreLogic Home Price Index (HPI) data from the national to the ZIP
   level were made available through the Initiative on Global Markets at Chicago Booth.
   Unlike the DataQuick price data, which records nominal values, the HPI is a variant
   of the Case-Shiller index measuring price changes in repeatedly transacted properties.
   The structure of the data is a balanced panel, available for 7,169 ZIP codes and 1,267
   counties.

4. FHFA Prices: FHFA Home Price Index (HPI) data from the national to the ZIP level.
   These data are public use. FHFA’s price indices are available at the yearly level for the
   largest set of ZIPs in our sample and are based on repeat sales. Bogin, Doerner and
   Larson (2016) describe the construction and source data for these price indices.

                                           53
  5. Covariate data: We construct a covariate dataset from the 2010 American Community
     Survey, the 2000 Census, IRS public use files at the ZIP level, and Equifax ZIP-level aggre-
     gates. The ACS data contains five-year averages (2006-2010) of demographic indicators
     estimated over the ZIP, county, and CBSA levels.


A.2    Sample Selection
We define the main analysis sample beginning with the non-distress resales dataset described
above. To ensure estimates are not biased by changes in geographical coverage, only ZIPs or
counties with more than 90% of their transaction time series complete from 2006 onwards are
included. This will tend to exclude very small ZIPs which have many months during which
there are no transactions. All other datasets are filtered through an inner join that restricts the
analysis sample to the same set of ZIPs.
    Appendix Table A.2 details the creation of the non-distress resales dataset.




                                                54
                                               Figure A.1: Geographical Coverage of the Analysis Dataset
55




     Notes: The figure displays the proportion of the population in each county that resided in ZIPs covered in the analysis dataset, using 2007 ACS population
     data.
                                                Figure A.2: Placebo Coefficients
                            .06
               Sales impact coefficient
                0       .02 -.02   .04




                                          -10      0             10                20           30
                                                                Month

                                                        2008-2011         2005-2008
                                                        2006-2009         2007-2010
                                                        2009-2012         2010-2013


Notes: This figure presents a placebo test for whether seasonality accounts for the spikes in the home sales distri-
bution. The test estimates month-by-month regressions and plots coefficients from the non-control specification
in Figure 5, panel (b), emphasized with a bold line, along with equivalent regressions shifted backward in time
to start in 2005, 2006, and 2007, and shifted forward to start in 2009 and 2010.




                                                              56
               Table A.1: The Effect of the FTHC on Starter Homes vs. Large Homes

                 (a) 1-3 Bedrooms, ZIP                                      (b) 4+ Bedrooms, ZIP
                               (1)           (2)                                          (1)            (2)
                           No Controls     CBSA FE                                    No Controls      CBSA FE
  Pre-policy                  0.008          0.012*           Pre-policy                  -0.008        -0.006
    2007m9-2009m1            (0.008)        (0.006)            2007m9-2009m1             (0.006)       (0.006)
  Observations                2971           2911             Observations                2120          2066
  R2                          0.003          0.446            R2                          0.004         0.389
  Policy                      0.013         0.023**           Policy                      -0.002        0.002
    2009m2-2010m6            (0.011)        (0.006)            2009m2-2010m6             (0.008)       (0.007)
  Observations                2971           2911             Observations                2120          2066
  R2                          0.004          0.504            R2                           0.0          0.366
  Post-policy                 0.005          0.009            Post-policy                 -0.007        -0.006
    2010m7-2011m11           (0.012)        (0.006)            2010m7-2011m11            (0.008)       (0.007)
  Observations                 2971          2911             Observations                2120          2066
  R2                            0.0          0.576            R2                          0.002         0.406
  Early policy                0.004         0.018**           Early policy                -0.004        0.001
    2009m2-2009m9            (0.009)        (0.005)            2009m2-2009m9             (0.007)       (0.007)
  Observations                2971           2911             Observations                2120          2066
  R2                          0.001          0.462            R2                          0.001         0.354
  Spike 1                    0.029*         0.037**           Spike 1                     0.003         0.006
    2009m10-2009m12          (0.014)        (0.01)             2009m10-2009m12           (0.008)       (0.008)
  Observations                2970           2910             Observations                2120          2066
  R2                          0.011          0.464            R2                           0.0          0.351
  Spike 2                     0.018         0.025**           Spike 2                     -0.001        0.001
    2010m4-2010m6            (0.012)        (0.007)            2010m4-2010m6             (0.008)       (0.008)
  Observations                2968           2908             Observations                2119          2065
  R2                          0.005          0.418            R2                           0.0          0.316
  Controls                      No             Yes            Controls                     No             Yes
  CBSA FE                       No             Yes            CBSA FE                      No             Yes

Notes: These tables present regressions of the same form as those in Table 3. We divide the home sales series into
“starter” homes—defined as those with 1, 2, or 3 bedrooms—and large homes—defined as those with 4 or more
bedrooms. We run the ZIP level specifications separately for each series. The analysis sample here is the subset of
the main analysis sample where fewer than 5% of transactions between 2004 and 2013 have missing bedrooms
data.




                                                       57
              Table A.2: Total number of observations in dataset through each filter

                                                   ZIPs                        Counties         CBSAs
 Geo-month observations (transaction counts in parentheses)
 Matched between assessor and transaction data  2,716,338                       150,859         55,348
                                                (124.4 M)                      (124.4 M)      (117.5 M)
 + Arm’s length transactions w/valid geo, month 2,540,700                       145,776         53,575
                                                (70.51 M)                      (70.51 M)      (67.26 M)
 + Cleaned resales & new sales over 2004-2013   1,423,144                        85,724         29,509
                                                (37.28 M)                      (37.28 M)      (35.37 M)
 + Non-distress resales                         1,371,576                        85,560         29,481
                                                (21.68 M)                      (21.68 M)      (20.37 M)
 + Time series 90%+ complete over 2006-2013     1,042,080                        75,687         27,107
                                                (20.41 M)                      (21.08 M)      (20.05 M)
 + Matched to exposure variables and covariates 1,018,976                        75,570         26,756
                                                (19.95 M)                      (21.07 M)      (19.81 M)

 Unique geographic units in dataset
 Matched between assessor and transaction data                    19240           973             295
 + Arm’s length transactions w/valid geo, month                   18351           970             295
 + Cleaned resales & new sales over 2004-2013                     17671           941             295
 + Non-distress resales                                           17453           941             295
 + Time series 90%+ complete over 2006-2013                        9082           664             235
 + Matched to exposure variables and covariates                    8882           663             232
Notes: The number of unique geographic units in the dataset (ZIPs, counties or CBSAs) are in parentheses.




                                                     58
