NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE GREAT RECESSION AND CHARITABLE GIVING
Jonathan Meer
David H. Miller
Elisa Wulfsberg
Working Paper 22902
http://www.nber.org/papers/w22902

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2016

We received valuable comments from Jeffrey Clemens, Daniel Hungerman, John List, Benjamin
Marx, and Harvey Rosen. We are especially grateful to Dr. Mark Wilhelm and Xiao Han for
providing the data used for this paper. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do
not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2016 by Jonathan Meer, David H. Miller, and Elisa Wulfsberg. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

The Great Recession and Charitable Giving
Jonathan Meer, David H. Miller, and Elisa Wulfsberg
NBER Working Paper No. 22902
December 2016
JEL No. D64,E02,H41
ABSTRACT
We examine the impact of the Great Recession on charitable giving. We find sharp declines in
overall donative behavior that is not accounted for by shocks to income or wealth. These results
suggest that overall attitudes towards giving changed over this time period.

Jonathan Meer
Department of Economics
TAMU 4228
College Station, TX 77843
and NBER
jmeer@econmail.tamu.edu
David H. Miller
Department of Economics
TAMU 4228
College Station, TX 77843
dhmiller29@gmail.com

Elisa Wulfsberg
Department of Economics
TAMU 4228
College Station, TX 77843
wulf193@tamu.edu

1. Introduction
The impact of the Great Recession on every aspect of economic behavior is palpable. The
effects on charitable giving are of particular interest because the need for private philanthropy is
generally greatest during times of economic distress, just when the ability of donors to contribute is
most limited. Indeed, total giving fell dramatically during that time period, as predicted by earlier
studies exploring the relationship between aggregate giving and economic conditions (List, 2011;
List and Peysakhovich, 2011).
While several studies have examined aggregate trends in giving around this time period
(LeClair, 2014; Melkote, 2015; Reich and Wimer, 2012), there are shortcomings to the approaches these analyses take. Those using IRS data are limited to donors who itemize deductions on their
tax returns, about 30 percent of households, most of them high income (Greenberg, 2016) –
though itemizers account for most of the dollar value of giving. While informative, these studies
can only describe broad patterns of giving during the Great Recession. They cannot, for example,
disentangle whether the reduction in giving is driven by shocks to household income and wealth,
or whether broader factors during that era explain the drop. For example, Fisman, Jakiela, and
Kariv (2015) show that individuals exposed to the recession behave more selfishly in dictator
games, even as they themselves may not have been directly affected.
In this paper, we examine patterns of giving before, during, and after the Great Recession
using household-level panel data from the Panel Study of Income Dynamics. We look at both the
likelihood of making donations and the amounts given, controlling for a variety of explanatory variables, including income and wealth and, in some specifications, household fixed effects. We find
that giving fell on both the extensive and intensive margins during the Great Recession, that it had
not recovered by 2012, that it is not explained by a fall in income or wealth, and that the reduction
is evident even when controlling for time-invariant unobserved attributes, like tastes for altruism
that do not shift over time. These findings provide evidence that other factors, like changing attitudes towards giving or increased uncertainty, explain much of the fall in giving during the Great
Recession.
2. Data Summary and Econometric Specifications
We use seven biennial waves of the Panel Study of Income Dynamics (PSID), spanning
2001 through 2013. The data include demographic, income, and wealth information, as well as
questions about charitable giving in the previous calendar year. After removing observations with
missing values, the data comprise 54,115 observations on 13,109 individuals. We construct indicators for whether a household reported giving in the previous year and the total amount given (adjusted for inflation using the CPI). 1 In the 2001 wave of the PSID, reporting giving in the previous
year, 61.2 percent of households reported making a donation. The mean gift conditional on making one is $2,597 (s.d. = $11,247) and the median is $924 (in 2013 dollars). The median percent of
income given is 3.7%.

1

See Wilhelm (2006) for details on the construction of the data set.

4
Our empirical strategy is straightforward. We estimate a series of regressions with a measure of giving as the dependent variable, and vary the set of explanatory variables. 2 Our variables of
interest are the year effects, with 2001 as the comparison year. These coefficients show the impact
of all factors affecting households’ giving each year, particularly the macroeconomic environment.
We begin by using ordinary least squares to look at the simple means of the likelihood of
giving and the (log) amount given, conditional on making a gift. It is then straightforward to combine the estimates from these two regressions to find the impact on the average amount given,
while allowing the effects on the extensive and intensive margins to differ. The next set of specifications adds a series of demographic controls, 3 state of residence, and a state-level housing price index (the All-Transactions Index) and its quadratic to account for the extraordinary fluctuations in
the housing market that were present during this period. If the year effects are substantially different in this specification, it suggests that the basic descriptive statistics generated in the first approach
actually reflect patterns correlated with those controls, such as those driven by changes in state-level
macroeconomic conditions. The third set of specifications adds controls for household income,
while the fourth adds controls for wealth (including home equity). 4 If the changes in giving reflect
broader trends in giving rather than the impact of shocks to household income and wealth, the
year effects from these regressions will be similar to those with fewer controls.
Finally, we take advantage of the panel nature of the PSID and include head-of-household
fixed effects in the four specifications listed above. 5 These account for all time-invariant attributes
of the head including, most importantly, unobserved tastes for altruism. A decline in giving during
and after the Great Recession, even accounting for income, wealth, and individual fixed effects,
strongly suggests that broader changes in attitudes towards giving are at play.
3. Results
Figure 1 plots the year effects from OLS regressions of the probability of giving; the excluded category is giving in 2000 (recorded in the 2001 wave of the PSID). Across all four specifications, giving increases by one to two percentage points after the downturn of 2000-2001. Giving
begins to decline by 2008, though the inclusion of income and wealth controls in panels C and D
account for much of this impact. By 2010, though, the likelihood of giving has fallen sharply, by
8.8 percentage points in panel A to 4.5 percentage points in panel D. Despite a partial recovery of
the economy by 2012, the probability of giving falls even further relative to 2000 levels. Without
any controls, the reduction is 10.5 percentage points. When including income in Panel C, the effect is -7.3 percentage points, and adding wealth reduces the effect to -6.2 percentage points. As a
first pass, this is strong evidence that forces broader than individual circumstances drove the decline in giving.

We cluster standard errors at the household level in all models.
These include age and its quadratic, race, gender, retirement and disability status, number of children, self-reported
health, marital status, education, and religious affiliation. These variables are reported for the head of household.
For flexibility, we use a series of indicators for various levels of income and wealth. The results are not appreciably
affected by using, for example, a linear and quadratic parameterization, nor by interacting income and wealth.
The set of demographic controls is adjusted to include only time-varying variables; age is collinear with the head and
year effects and is excluded. Including broader bins for age does not impact the results.
2
3

4

5

5
Turning to the intensive margin in Figure 2, we see similar results – the amount given, conditional on donating, falls dramatically during and after the Great Recession. Somewhat surprisingly, the time pattern of giving when there are no controls is very similar to that when including the
full slate of controls. Note that this result represents both a treatment effect of the business cycle
and a change in the composition of givers; while interesting, one must be cautious in interpretation.
In Figure 3, we combine our results from the extensive and intensive margins to compute
the unconditional impact on giving. Given the steep decline on both margins, it is unsurprising that
overall average giving falls dramatically. 6
We next turn to estimates that include individual fixed effects in Figure 4. As noted above,
fixed effects allow us to account for unobserved time-invariant attitudes towards altruism. Moreover, to some extent, the OLS estimates reflect the changing composition of the panel. Unsurprisingly, therefore, the change in giving is less dramatic than in specifications that did not include these controls. The likelihood of giving increases significantly relative to the 2000 comparison year
until 2010, and falls lower still in 2012. The results in Panel D are particularly striking: even controlling for individual fixed effects, income, wealth, and other factors, the likelihood of giving was
roughly four percentage points lower in 2012 than it was during the boom in the mid-2000s.
Turning to Figure 5 and the effects on the intensive margin, the results are quite different
from those in Figure 2, without fixed effects. Rather than falling, the amount given conditional on
making a gift remains stable over the business cycle. That is, those who remain as donors do not
reduce their giving. This change likely reflects shifts in the composition of the conditional sample,
and highlights the importance of care in interpreting results on the intensive margin. In Figure 6,
we combine the estimates. The small decline in the probability of giving coupled with the increase
by those who still give yields a significant drop in overall donations from the peak of the business
cycle, but in most specifications, it does not drop significantly below the levels seen in the 2000
wave.
4. Conclusions
Our examination of patterns of charitable giving around the time of the Great Recession
indicates that the propensity to give fell sharply and stayed well below previous levels, even when
accounting for individual fixed effects. The amount given, conditional on giving, is sensitive to the
inclusion of fixed effects; the estimates change sign when fixed effects are included, likely reflecting
the change in the composition of the sample as the propensity to give fell. Overall giving falls relative to the levels seen in the mid-2000s, during the peak of the business cycle. Shocks to income
and wealth do not account for this drop, suggesting that broader shifts in attitudes towards giving or
increased uncertainty are at work. Given previous results on habit formation in charitable giving
(Meer, 2013) and later-life impacts of macroeconomic shocks on behavior (Malmendier and
Nagel, 2009), this finding suggests that the Great Recession might have serious long-term negative
consequences for philanthropic behavior.

Recall that the usual approximation in a log-linear regression does not hold for such large coefficients in absolute value; for example, an effect of -0.50 log points is a 39.3% reduction.

6

6
References
Fisman, Raymond, Jakiela, Pamela, Kariv, Shachar, 2015. How did distributional Preferences
Change during the Great Recession? Journal of Public Economics 128 (C), 84-95.
Greenberg, Scott, 2016. Who Itemizes Deductions? Tax Foundation.
LeClair, Mark, 2014. “Philanthropy in Transition.” Palgrave Macmillan.
List, John A., 2011. The Market for Charitable Giving. Journal of Economic Perspectives 25 (2),
157-180.
List, John A., Peysakhovich, Yana, 2011. Charitable Donations are More Responsive to Stock
Market Booms than Busts. Economics Letters 110, 166-169.
Malmendier, Ulrike, Nagel, Stefan, 2011. Depression Babies: Do Macroeconomic Experiences
Affect Risk-Taking? Quarterly Journal of Economics, 126 (1), 373-416.
Melkote, Avinash, 2015. The Impact of the Great Recession on Charitable Giving. Working paper, The College of New Jersey.
Meer, Jonathan, 2013. The Habit of Giving. Economic Inquiry 51 (4), 2002-2017.
Reich, Rob, Wimer, Christopher, 2012. Charitable Giving and the Great Recession. The Russell
Sage Foundation and The Stanford Center on Poverty and Inequality.
Wilhelm, Mark, 2006. New Data on Charitable Giving in the PSID. Economics Letters 92 (1), 2631.

7
Figure 1: Effects on Probability of Giving
OLS Estimates

8
Figure 2: Effects on Log Amount Given Conditional on Making a Gift
OLS Estimates

9
Figure 3: Effects on Total Log Amount Given
OLS Estimates

10
Figure 4: Effects on Probability of Giving
Individual Fixed Effects Estimates

11
Figure 5: Effects on Log Amount Given Conditional on Making a Gift
Individual Fixed Effects Estimates

12
Figure 6: Effects on Total Log Amount Given
Individual Fixed Effects Estimates

