NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

LEVERAGE
Tano Santos
Pietro Veronesi
Working Paper 22905
http://www.nber.org/papers/w22905

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2016, Revised December 2018

Previously circulated as “Habits and Leverage.” For their comments, we thank Patrick Bolton,
John Y. Campbell, Georgy Chabakauri, Anisha Ghosh, Luigi Guiso, Lars Hansen, Christian
Julliard, Arvind Krishnamurthy, Kai Li, and Norman Schrhoff, as well as seminar participants at
EIEF (Rome), the 2016 European Summer Symposium in Financial Markets (Switzerland), the
2017 Adam Smith Conference (Paris), the 2017 NBER AP meetings (Chicago), the CEPR Credit
Cycle conference (London), the 2017 ABFER meetings (Singapore), Harvard Business School,
University of Chicago, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, EDHEC, Stockholm School
of Economics, University of Amsterdam, BI Norwegian Business School, NYU Stern, Bocconi
University, and University of Turin. We thank Alejandro Hoyos Suarez for excellent research
assistance. This research has been supported by the Fama-Miller Center for Research in Finance
and the Center for Research in Security Prices, both located at Chicago Booth. A previous version
of the paper circulated under the longer title “Habits and Leverage.” The views expressed herein
are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2016 by Tano Santos and Pietro Veronesi. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Leverage
Tano Santos and Pietro Veronesi
NBER Working Paper No. 22905
December 2016, Revised December 2018
JEL No. E21,E44,G12
ABSTRACT
Many stylized facts of leverage, trading, and asset prices obtain in a frictionless general
equilibrium model that features agents’ heterogeneity in endowments and time- varying risk
preferences. Our model predicts that aggregate debt increases in expansions when asset prices are
high, volatility is low, and levered households enjoy a “consumption boom.” Our model is
consistent with poorer households borrowing more and with intermediaries’ leverage being a
priced factor. In crises, levered households strongly delever by “fire selling” their risky assets as
asset prices drop. Yet, as empirically observed, their debt-to-wealth ratios increase as higher
discount rates make their wealth decline faster.

Tano Santos
Graduate School of Business
Columbia University
3022 Broadway, Uris Hall 414
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
js1786@columbia.edu
Pietro Veronesi
University of Chicago
Booth School of Business
5807 South Woodlawn Avenue
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
pietro.veronesi@chicagobooth.edu

1.

Introduction

This paper is concerned with the determinants of leverage, both for households and financial
intermediaries. This topic has been the focus of much attention in the wake of the financial
crisis of 2008. Indeed, a popular narrative on the crisis is that it was the excessive growth
in both household and financial intermediary leverage that led to the crisis once it proved
unsustainable, as exemplified, for instance, in the fact that household debt grew well above
disposable income. There are though few models that, first, offer sharp predictions about the
level and dynamics of both aggregate household debt as well as its cross sectional distribution
and, second, can be calibrated to the data to obtain quantitative predictions. The purpose
of this paper is to fill this void.
We construct an exchange economy populated by households that differ in both their
attitudes towards risk and in their initial wealth. We posit that households’ attitudes towards
risk fluctuate with aggregate economic conditions and that they fluctuate more for some
households than for others. These differences induce motives for risk sharing and we offer a
full characterization of the efficient distribution of risk across households. Our model features
the strong discount effects that the asset pricing literature has found are needed to match
key aspects of the data. The model then generates at the aggregate level quantitatively
plausible amounts of risk.
We decentralize the efficient allocation as follows. Because individual household endowment features idiosyncratic risk a competitive financial intermediary arises to pool and eliminate this risk from households’ consumption. The alternative is to have a very large number
of Arrow-Debreu markets in which each of the individual idiosyncratic risks is traded, which
is potentially very costly. The existence of a financial intermediary saves on these costs.
The intermediary can both grant loans and issue deposits. Households thus can replicate
the efficient allocation through a dynamic strategy in which they trade the aggregate stock
market and borrow and lend from and to the financial intermediary, respectively.1 We solve
for asset prices, portfolio allocations and leverage measures in closed form and investigate
both the qualitative and quantitative properties of our model.
Our results connect to some stylized facts that have been the focus of the recent literature
but also to some new ones. They are discussed in Section 2. Start with household leverage.
The definition of leverage matters for its cyclical properties and the interpretation that we
1

Our model is thus quite different than Bewley (1977) and the literature that follows from it, which
typically features ex-ante identical households that face uninsurable idiosyncratic shocks. These households
are ex-post different depending on the realization of theses shocks and self-insure to smooth out consumption.

1

give to those dynamics. Data shows that household leverage is pro-cyclical when debt is
normalized by income and counter-cyclical when normalized by net worth, a fact we are able
to reproduce. In our model income is exogenously determined but both household debt and
net worth are endogenous. Other things equal, we show that households that borrow do so
proportionally to income. But there is an additional determinant of household leverage and
it is the variation in the attitudes towards risk. As households’ income grows they become
more tolerant of risk and some of them become more tolerant than others. The more risk
tolerant households are willing to take on additional risk through leverage and increase their
exposure to aggregate market conditions. This second effect gives an additional “kick” to
the amount of debt borrowing households take and thus debt grows faster than income.
The same mechanism, an increase in risk tolerance, lowers the discount rate households
require to hold risky assets, pushing up prices and increasing net worth, which more than
compensates for the growth in debt, leading to a drop in the ratio of debt to net worth.
The dynamics of household leverage then are the portfolio policy dual of the traditional
argument as to why habit persistence models can generate asset price volatility beyond the
volatility of the underlying cash-flows: It is a product of the effect of shocks to income
on the households’ attitudes towards risk. Importantly, when aggregate income drops the
dynamics of household leverage reverse. Borrowing households sell assets to repay their debt
and delever. Debt to income drops but asset prices drop even faster as households discount
risk more aggressively due to falling risk tolerance. As a result debt to net worth increases
in bad times, as aggregate income falls. Ours is to our knowledge, the first model to be able
to reconcile these diverging dynamics of household leverage.
A second fact is concerned with the cross sectional distribution of leverage across households. Using data from the Survey of Consumer Finances, we show that when sorting
households into net worth quintiles, poorer households lever more. Our model features two
sources of household heterogeneity, initial wealth and preferences. We calibrate the cross
sectional distribution of these parameters to match some stylized properties of household
consumption and are able to reproduce the inverse pattern linking debt to assets and net
worth. The intuition is that in our model household preferences are non-homothetic so that
poorer households are less risk tolerant than wealthier ones. Thus poor households that lever
up must be very risk tolerant to undo the effect of wealth on risk taking, which results in
high leverage. But we miss on the magnitudes: Our households are not as levered as they are
in the data in periods of good economic conditions and are half as much in recessions. Thus
something else needs to be brought to bear to explain the observed magnitudes.2 Instead our
2

In this our model provides a benchmark that can be used to assess how much “work” other potential
ingredients, such as the savings gluts hypothesis of Bernanke (2005) or the surge in credit supply associated

2

model does much better in what concerns the level of aggregate household debt to income:
It is about 135% of disposable income at the peak of the real estate cycle in 2007, which is
just slightly less than what the model generates.
In our framework financial intermediaries provide the assets and liabilities needed to
implement the efficient allocation: They grant loans to risk tolerant households that are
willing to lever up to increase their exposure to aggregate risk and issue short term liabilities
(deposits) that the more risk averse households use to smooth out consumption. Critically
the amount of deposits they can issue is limited by the loans they can grant which is determined by the amount of leverage taken by risk tolerant households. The balance sheet
of the financial intermediary thus inherits the properties of the household balance sheet. In
this our model formalizes the idea that financial intermediaries’ liabilities are constrained
by their ability to originate assets (loans), which in turn is determined by the risk tolerant
households willingness to borrow. Two important implications follow from this observation.
First, some, such as Adrian and Shin (2014) for instance, have argued that the financial
intermediary leverage is driven by value-at-risk (VaR) like constraints: There is a negative
relation between changes in VaR and changes in leverage. These constraints are in turn
linked to the volatility of asset prices. Effectively thus, as volatility increases financial
intermediaries lower their leverage. We show that this is exactly what one should expect to
observe in a simple frictionless economy such as the one in this paper. In our model return
volatility is countercyclical. Thus there is a negative correlation between the volatility and
measures of leverage that normalize financial intermediary debt by slow moving measures
such as book equity or aggregate income, but a positive one when we normalize debt by
some measure of the intermediaries’ net worth.
Second, a recent a literature has shown that measures of financial intermediary leverage
show up as priced factors in tests of the cross section of returns (see Adrian, Etula and
Muir (2014) and He, Kelly and Manela (2016)). This evidence has been put forth as proof
that financial intermediaries matter for asset pricing. They might but we argue that these
tests are mispecified and cannot claim to establish the impact of intermediaries on asset
prices. The point is straightforward: Financial intermediaries’ balance sheets reflect more
fundamental forces at work, namely the gyrations of the marginal rate of substitution (MRS)
of the representative consumer. It may well be the case that shocks to the capital structure of
banks and other intermediaries offer a clean proxy for shocks to the MRS of the representative
consumer, which is unobserved, but in isolation this evidence cannot be offered as proof that
with looser lending constraints as in Justiniano, Primiceri and Tambalotti (forthcoming), will have to do to
explain the levels of household leverage that were observed in the years prior to the financial crisis of 2008.

3

the marginal investor is a financial institution.
In addition we clarify a debate regarding the market price of risk associated with the
factor linked to the intermediaries’ leverage. This price can be positive or negative depending on whether debt is normalized by some measure of income, which is slow moving, or the
intermediaries equity, which incorporates the discount shocks that are key in our analysis.
Our framework can reproduce the sign of the factors suggested by Adrian, Etula and Muir
(2014) and He, Kelly and Manela (2016), which are different in what concerns this normalization. The intuition for this result is exactly the one advanced to understand the different
dynamics of household debt depending on whether one normalizes by income or net worth.
Finally, our model features an important property of the data. In our framework households trade the stock and borrow and lend to smooth consumption and share risks. Our
model can match for example the high equity premium and high volatility of returns and
features frequent drops in price dividend ratios. Interestingly though, and as observed in
the historical series, substantial household deleveraging only occurs in extreme realizations
of the aggregate shocks, such as in the aftermath of the financial crisis of 2008. Indeed,
household leverage has dropped from about 135% of disposable income in 2007Q4 to about
a 100% in 2018Q2. These are magnitudes that correspond roughly to an extreme realization
of the aggregate shock in our model.
Our point thus is that many stylized facts of household and financial intermediary leverage
can be explained without appealing to financial frictions. But of course these frictions do
matter; the question is how much. Our model can be seen as providing a benchmark to
which frictions can be added to offer a quantitative assessment of their importance.
Related literature. This paper is obviously connected to the literature on optimal risk
sharing, starting with Borch (1962). Much of this literature is concerned with assessing to
what extent consumers are effectively insured against idiosyncratic shocks to income and
wealth.3 Our paper is closely related to Dumas (1989), Wang (1996), Bolton and Harris
(2013), Longstaff and Wang (2012), and Bhamra and Uppal (2014). These papers consider
two groups of agents with constant risk aversion, and trading and asset prices are generated
by aggregate shocks through the variation in the wealth distribution. While similar in spirit,
our model generates several novel results that do not follow from this previous work, such
as procyclical debt to income ratios, countercyclical debt to wealth ratios, higher leverage
amongst poorer households, consistency with asset pricing facts, and so on. Our model is
more closely related to Chan and Kogan (2002), who also consider a continuum of households
3

See for instance Dynarski and Sheffrin (1987), Cochrane (1991), Mace (1991) and Townsend (1994).

4

with habit preferences and heterogeneous risk aversion. In their setting, however, households’
risk aversions are constant, while in our setting they are time varying in response to business
cycle variation, a crucial ingredient in our model. Moreover, Chan and Kogan (2002) do not
investigate the leverage dynamics implied by their model, which is our focus.
Our framework differs from these models in another important respect. In models such
as Longstaff and Wang (2012) for example, asset pricing dynamics are tightly linked to
the dynamics of the cross sectional distribution of wealth. Given that these dynamics are
dominated by low frequency components it is challenging to explain asset pricing empirical
regularities appealing to them. Instead the asset pricing implications of our model are orthogonal to the wealth distribution: when we aggregate we obtain a representative consumer
whose preferences are independent of whether wealth is held by risk tolerant or risk averse
agents. Thus asset pricing dynamics can be fit independently of the wealth distribution.
Our model is related to Campbell, Grossman and Wang (1993), which explores the implications for trading volume and asset prices in a model where the motivation for trade is
driven by shocks to agents’ risk tolerance. More recently Alvarez and Atkenson (2017) consider a model where agents’ risk tolerance is subject to uninsurable idiosyncratic shocks. In
our paper instead variation in risk tolerance is driven by exposure to a business cycle factor,
and the source of heterogeneity, in addition to initial endowment, is the degree of exposure
to that factor. Neither Campbell, Grossman and Wang (1993) or Alvarez and Atkenson
(2017) analyzes the dynamics of leverage and the distribution of leverage in the population.
Our paper is also related to the literature that links causally household debt to aggregate
economic activity. For instance Eggertson and Krugman (2012) argue that a tightening of the
household borrowing constraints leads to sustained depressed economic activity. Justiniano,
Primiceri and Tambalotti (2015) construct a general equilibrium model that, as we do, tries
to obtain reasonable levels for household leverage and find instead that the macroeconomic
consequences of household leveraging and deleveraging are minor. In our model household
leverage has no impact on economic activity. In fact the causality runs the other way: Bad
realizations of economic activity decrease risk tolerance and lead to deleveraging cycles.
Finally, a recent literature (Barro and Mollerus (2014) and Caballero and Fahri (2014))
studies the determinants of the supply of safe assets and its connection to aggregate activity.
In our model all debt is indeed risk free and the supply of safe securities is determined by the
risk bearing capacity of the risk tolerant households. Our model thus also has implications
for the dynamics of the supply of safe assets and their relation to aggregate variables.

5

2.

Facts

Our model speaks to a set of empirical regularities which have been the focus of renewed
interest in the aftermath of the financial crisis of 2008.
Household Leverage. Household leverage has featured prominently in policy discussions
in the wake of the 2008 financial crisis. Two measures of leverage are of interest here. In
the first, US households debt is normalized by their net worth, whereas is it normalized by
disposable income in the second. We refer to the first measure as market leverage and the
second, with some abuse of terminology, as book leverage:
Market leverage =

Household debt
Net worth

and

Book leverage =

Household debt
Disposable income

(1)

Figure 1 Panel B reproduces Figure 1 in Adrian and Shin (2010). It plots the quarterly growth
in percent of total assets held by households against the quarterly growth rate in percent
in market leverage. Asset growth is strongly associated with drops in market leverage:
As asset values grow, mostly real estate and financial assets, net worth grows even faster
than household debt and thus market leverage drops. Instead, as shown in Panel A, book
leverage correlates positively, though weakly, with asset growth: As real estate and financial
assets grow in value, household debt grows faster than disposable income and thus leverage
increases. Given that asset growth is strongly pro-cyclical, it follows that market leverage is
countercyclical and book leverage is pro-cyclical.
Figure 2, which plots market and book leverage for the last twenty years, provides a
striking example of this pattern. During the years of appreciating real estate values household
debt grew much faster than disposable income whereas market leverage was stable as growth
in net worth compensated for the growth in household debt. When the crisis struck prices
collapsed and as a result market leverage increased dramatically as households, which were
deleveraging, couldn’t do it fast enough to compensate for the drop in asset values, which
compressed household net worth. Instead book leverage dropped as households delevered at
a rate that was faster than the rate at which their disposable income fell.
There are also patterns in what concerns the cross section of household leverage. Figure
3 shows the amount of debt to total assets for households sorted on net worth quartiles in
2009 (we further split the last quartile to show the behavior of the top 10%). Data is from
the Survey of Consumer Finances. The 2009 survey was an ad-hoc date in which the same
households as in 2007 survey were surveyed again. The figure shows two regularities. First,
the lower the net worth quartile to which the household belongs, the higher the ratio of
debt to net worth. Second, leverage increased across all quartiles in 2009, the trough of the
6

Figure 1: Total assets and the two definitions of leverage for the US household
Panel A plots the quarterly growth (in percent) in total assets held by US households against the quarterly
growth (in percent) in household “market” leverage. Market leverage is defined as household debt divided
by their net worth. Panel B plots the quarterly growth (in percent) in total assets held by US households
against the quarterly growth (in percent) in household “book” leverage. Book leverage is defined as total
household debt divided by disposable personal income. 1951Q1 to 2018Q2. Household debt is obtained by
subtracting net worth from household total assets. Data source: Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis.

financial crisis, but the increase was particularly pronounced in the lowest quartile.4
We show that all these patterns can be explained in a simple frictionless framework
that features household heterogeneity in wealth and attitudes towards risk. The model is
calibrated to match standard asset pricing regularities and thus we are able to assess leverage
magnitudes in a setting with realistic risk properties, which is a novel contribution to the
literature.
Leverage and the risk of financial intermediaries. Household leverage has a clear
counterpart in the leverage of financial institutions. The top two panels of Figure 4 reproduce Figure 3 in Adrian and Shin (2014). These authors plot the change in assets against
changes in book (left panel) and enterprise leverage (right panel). Given that asset growth
is procyclical, the plots show that market leverage is strongly countercyclical whereas book
leverage is procyclical, as it was the case with households.
4

Some care needs to be exerted when interpreting Figure 3. Poor households’ main assets are housing
while rich households’ main assets are investment in public or private equity, which are levered securities.
In the internet appendix we adjust the data to take into account the implicit leverage in equity and private
businesses and obtain similar results.

7

Figure 2: US Household leverage during the real estate bubble and burst
The figure shows the time series of market (dashed line; right axis) and debt-to-income (solid line; left axis)
for US households between 1998Q1 to 2018Q2. Market leverage is defined as total assets of US households
divided by their net worth. Book leverage is defined as total assets divided by disposable personal income.
Data source: Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis.

Figure 3: The cross section of household leverage
This figure plots the distribution of debt-to-asset ratios from the Survey of Consumer Finances in 2007 and
in 2009, which was conducted on the same sample of households. The sample is restricted to households
with debt.

8

Adrian and Shin (2010,2014) argue that in good times intermediaries increase the size of
their balance sheet by issuing debt, which grows relative to book equity. Instead during bad
times, risk measures such as VaR increase, which constrains financial intermediaries’ capital,
forcing them to liquidate assets and reduce debt. The bottom panel of Figure 4 shows that
indeed an increase in Value-of-Risk of financial institutions – that is, the volatility of their
risky assets – generates a decline in their (book) leverage because of active develeraging
by part of financial intermediaries. Others have suggested a slightly different story for the
procyclicality of book leverage. For instance, Geanakoplos (2009) and Gorton and Metrick
(2012) argue that procyclical leverage is the mirror image of increased collateral requirement
during downturns (increased “haircuts”). Geanakoplos terms such dynamics “the leverage
cycle,” arguing that leverage is high when volatility is low and prices are high. Finally, He
and Krishnamurthy (2013) provide a theoretical model of procyclical market leverage also
based on the constraints of financial institutions.
All these authors emphasize some form of friction to explain these regularities and none
of them can simultaneously reconcile the pro- and countercylicality of book and market
leverage, respectively. We argue instead that these regularities result from the fact that
households intermediate through financial institutions and thus household portfolio choices
determine to a large extent intermediaries’ leverage. In our framework households deposit
with financial intermediaries as well as borrow from them. The reason financial intermediaries exist is because households are exposed to idiosyncratic risk. Financial intermediaries
are able to diversify this risk and save on markets as a result. The balance sheet of the financial intermediaries, which are assumed to be competitive, is thus a reflection of the household
balance sheet and follows to a large extent their active leveraging and deleveraging.
Financial intermediary leverage as a risk factor. A recent literature studies the impact
of financial intermediaries’ leverage on asset prices. For instance, Adrian, Etula, and Muir
(AEM, 2014) show that a book leverage factor prices the cross-section of equity returns.
He, Kelly, and Manela (HKM, 2017) show that a market leverage factor prices also prices
equity returns as well as other asset classes. All this is taken as evidence of the role of
financial institution in pricing risky assets. This is motivated by models such as He and
Krishnamurthy (2013) in which households are barred from investing directly in risky assets
and financial institutions become the “marginal pricer”. Instead in our model the pricing
ability of factors linked to financial intermediaries’ balance sheets is simply a reflection of
the risk factors affecting households.

9

0.4

0.3

0.3
∆log(Enterprise Value)

0.4

∆log(Assets)

0.2
0.1
0
-0.1
-0.2
-0.3
-0.3

0.2
0.1
0
-0.1
-0.2
-0.3

-0.2

-0.1

0

0.1

0.2

-0.4
-0.6

0.3

∆ log(Book Leverage)

-0.4

-0.2

0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

1

∆ log(Enterprise Value Leverage)

Figure 4: Leverage and Risk (Adrian and Shin, 2014)
The top two panels reproduce Figure 3 in Adrian Shin (2014). The left panel shows the scatter chart of the
asset-weighted growth in book leverage and total assets for the eight largest U.S. broker dealers and banks.
The right panel is the scatter for the asset-weighted growth in enterprise value leverage and enterprise value.
The dark dots correspond to the period 2007-2009. The bottom panel reproduces Figure 6 in Adrian and
Shin (2014) and it plots the annual growth rate in unit VaR against the annual growth rate in leverage.

In addition, the market price of risk of this leverage factor depends on whether book or
market leverage is used. AEM’s book leverage factor has a negative market price of risk,
while HKM’s market leverage factor has positive market price of risk. The two different
signs in the market price of risk have generated some controversy in the literature about the
proper definition of intermediary leverage (see Section 4 in HKM). The different signs of the
market price of risk have a natural explanation in our framework. It is simply the result of
the different cyclical behavior of household leverage depending on whether one normalizes
by net worth, which depends on prices, or income.
Panel A of Table 1 reports results using the same data in AEM and HKM to price the

10

Table 1: The Market Price of Leverage Risk. Panel A reports Fama-MacBeth regressions where the
set of test portfolios are the standard 25 Fama-French portfolios sorted on size and book to market. Column
I reports the standard CAPM regression. Column II adds to the market, the market leverage, defined as
Debt/Equity = 1/(capital ratio) − 1, which is a transformation of the capital ratio= Equity/(Debt + Equity)
introduced in He, Kelly and Manela (2017). Column III reports the same regression where instead of using
market leverage we use book leverage, defined as in Adrien, Etula, and Muir (2014). Panel B reports timeseries predictability regressions of future excess returns on book leverage, while Panel C reports time-series
predictability regression on market leverage. The sample period is 1970-2012. t-statistics are in parenthesis.

Panel A. Cross-sectional Regressions
I
II
III
α
3.19
0.76
1.07
(3.05) (0.62) (0.97)
Market Return
-0.89
0.97
0.82
(-0.72) (0.69) (0.61)
Market Leverage
-0.22
(-2.13)
Book Leverage
0.63
(3.07)
2
R (%)
6.54
50.77
53.35
Panel B. Time-Series Predictability with Book Leverage
1 year 2 year 3 year 4 year 5 year
Coef (×100)
-1.78
-1.79
-2.17
-3.13
-9.89
(-0.83) (-0.72) (-0.89) (-1.03) (-3.29)
R2
0.01
0.01
0.01
0.01
0.07
Panel C. Time-Series Predictability with Market Leverage
1 year 2 year 3 year 4 year 5 year
Coef (×100)
3.66
6.21
8.56
10.03
13.06
(1.57) (1.50) (2.18) (2.51) (3.84)
R2
0.04
0.07
0.10
0.12
0.19

Fama French 25 value and size sorted portfolios.5
The first column reports the CAPM regression, in which the aggregate market portfolio
is the main risk factor. As is well known, the CAPM fails to price these portfolios. The R2 is
a puny 6.5%, the alpha is strongly positive, and the average market return is negative. The
second column shows that market leverage is able to explain a large fraction of the variation
of the portfolios. The market return becomes positive (but not statistically significant), the
5

Data on the AER and HKM factors are available on the HKM web site. We transform HKM capital
ratio = Equity/(Debt + Equity) into a debt-to-equity ratio Debt/Equity = 1/(capital ratio) − 1. We then
normalize both factors to have zero mean and variance one. The sample is 1970 through 2012.

11

alpha is zero, and the market price of risk is negative, and significant. Finally, column III
shows the same results for book leverage, and obtains similar results, but now with a positive
market price of risk.
Panels B and C of Table 1 provide additional support. They report the results of predictive regression of future excess returns using book and market leverage, respectively. Book
leverage has only mild predictive power of future returns, and with a negative sign. In contrast, market leverage displays stronger predictability of future returns, with a positive sign:
High aggregate market leverage predicts higher future returns.
In contrast to the recent literature, our model offers a different explanation for the role
of factors linked to intermediaries’ leverage in asset pricing tests and rationalizes the sign of
the market price of risk associated with that factor depending on the specific definition of
leverage adopted. Our explanation does not rely on financial frictions but our point is not
that frictions are not important. Rather, it is that financial intermediaries’ leverage is driven,
at least to some extent, by the marginal rate of substitution of the representative consumer
and that in fact may provide a cleaner proxy to other ones suggested in the literature. Thus
its apparent pricing ability.

3.

The model

Preferences and endowments. We posit a continuous time single good exchange economy
populated by a continuum of households indexed by i. These households have preferences
for period t ∈ [0, ∞) over consumption Cit given by
u (Cit ; ψit , Yt , t) = e−ρt log (Cit − ψit Yt ) .

(2)

Utility is then derived from the distance between individual consumption and aggregate
output Yt , scaled by the process ψ it . Yt follows
dYt
= µY dt + σY (It) dZt .
Yt

(3)

where Zt is a Brownian motion, µY is a constant,6 but the volatility σY (It), which we refer
to as economic uncertainty, depends on a state variable It that summarizes the state of the
economy. It follows
dIt = k (I − It ) dt − v It
6



dYt
− µY dt
Yt



The main results of the paper carry through with a richer specification of the drift µY .

12

(4)

That is, It increases after bad aggregate shocks,

dYt
Yt

< µY dt, and it hovers around its central

tendency I. It is useful to interpret It as a recession indicator : During good times It is low
and during bad times It is high.
Finally, ψit in (2) is a function on It, ψit ≡ ψ i (It ). To obtain closed form solutions for
prices and quantities we assume a specific functional form for ψi (·):

ψ i (It) = γ i 1 − It−1 ,
(5)
R
where γ i are positive constants normalized so that γ i di = 1 and we assume throughout
that It > 1 so that ψi (It ) > 0. This restriction is achieved by assuming that σ Y (It ) → 0 as
It → 1.7

Intuitively, ψit regulates the local curvature of the utility function, with higher ψit implying a higher curvature. Indeed, for given consumption Cit and output Yt , the local risk
aversion (LRA) is
uCC Cit
ψit
LRAit ≡ −
= 1+
(6)
uC
Cit /Yt − ψ it
As we will show below (see equation (10)), Cit/Yt > ψit and thus households have a LRA
strictly greater than that of log utility. Attitudes towards risk are thus determined by both
ψit and the consumption share Cit /Yt . For a given consumption share, a higher ψ it implies
a higher LRA. From (5), ψit is monotonically increasing in γ i and the recession indicator It.
Therefore, our preference specification implies that households with higher γ i have higher
LRA and, in addition, all households’ LRAs increase in recessions, when It is higher, albeit
heterogeneously depending on γ i . Our model thus allows us to introduce heterogeneous
variation in households’ risk preferences during the business cycle in a simple way.
To conclude the model, each agent is born at time 0 endowed with a tree that produces
R
Yit . We do not need to make assumptions on Yit except that its aggregate Yt = Yit di

follows the dynamics in (3). The time-0 values of households’ stochastic endowments are
R
heterogeneous and denoted by ω i . We normalize prices so that ω i di = 1.
Financial intermediary and financial markets. Households are born at time 0 endowed
with individual trees whose output bear idiosyncratic risk. As we show below, holding
idiosyncratic risk is suboptimal for households and therefore they want to share risks with
other households. It is costly to share risks by trading with each other and thus they form
an intermediary to pool their idiosyncratic risks.
Specifically, at time 0 households form a financial intermediary by pledging their endowment in exchange for a portfolio that consists of shares of the intermediary and either
7

We use the simple notation

R

di to indicate the integration over agents’ density f(γ i , ωi ).

13

Figure 5: Balance sheets of households and the financial intermediary

loans or deposits. The intermediary issues a unit amount of shares to households, who then
trade them competitively. Because the intermediary pools the idiosyncratic risks of the trees
of individual households, the intermediary’s stock price only depends on aggregate shocks,
which is the desired exposure of all households. Moreover, depending on risk aversion, each
household may decide to invest some funds in overnight safe demand deposits, or borrow to
lever up their investment in the intermediary risky stock. We assume a single intermediary
for simplicity, but we could have any number of them.
Figure 5 shows the balance sheets of the intermediary as well as of the two types of
households that, as we will show, arise in equilibrium, risk-tolerant (RT) households and
risk-averse (RA) households. The assets of the intermediary are comprised of the set of
individual trees pledged by households, whose values are Pit , and the loans it issues to the
RT households, denoted by Lit . The liabilities of the intermediary are comprised of demand
deposits, denoted by Djt , and by the equity shares issued to the households, whose value is
Pt . Let rt denote the equilibrium risk-free rate at which both borrowing and lending occurs.
The balance sheet of each household i has its own tree Pit both as an asset, as that’s its
endowment, and as a liability, as it pledges its cash flows to the intermediary. In addition,
14

a RA household j holds Njt shares of the intermediary’s stock and Djt in demand deposits,
while a RT household i borrow Lit from the intermediary and purchases Nit shares of the
intermediary’s. The net worth Wi,t of each household i at time t ≥ 0 is then

Ni,t Pt − Li,t for the Risk Tolerant (RT) household
Wi,t =
(7)
Ni,t Pt + Di,t for the Risk Averse (RA) household
Given ω i is the value of household’s initial endowment, it has to be that ω i = Wi,0 .
Discussion. Our preference specification (2) possesses numerous appealing properties,
which we now discuss. As shown in (6), our model implies heterogeneity across agents
and across time in the local curvature of the utility function, determined by the interaction
of the parameter γ i and the recession indicator It. First, there is substantial evidence of cross
sectional dispersion in attitudes towards risk in the population (see, for instance, Barsky,
Juster, Kimball and Shapiro (1997), Guiso and Paiella (2008) and Chiappori and Paillea
(2011)). Second, as for the time series variation, Guiso, Sapienza and Zingales (2018), using
a large sample of clients of an Italian bank, find that measures of risk aversion increased after
the 2008 financial crisis. They find that the increase in risk aversion is more pronounced for
those experiencing large losses in wealth, though the increase in risk aversion occurs even
for those agents who did not experience any loss. In our model all variables are perfectly
correlated and thus we cannot produce this “pure” discount effect.
In addition, for a given ψ it, households who are richer consume more of aggregate output
and thus from (6) result in a lower curvature. That is, our preference specification imply nonhomotheticity at the individual level. There is strong evidence in favor of this property in
the data; roughly, richer households are less risk averse. Households with higher endowment
thus increase the share of wealth invested in the risky asset, an empirical regularity found
in surveys of household finances even when restricted to those who participate in the stock
market (Wachter and Yogo, 2010). More generally, the portfolio allocation predictions of
our model are consistent with the empirical evidence of Calvet and Sodini (2014).
Households trade with an intermediary for risk sharing: First, the intermediary allows
households to shed the idiosyncratic risk implied by their initial endowment, as they sell
it in exchange of claims to the pooled aggregate endowment. Second, the intermediary
allows households to reach their desired dynamic investment mix by borrowing or lending.
This second risk-sharing channel arises out of households’ differences in attitudes towards
risk (differences in γ i ) and thus also play a role in the equilibrium distribution of risk in the
population. To illustrate the role of each source of cross sectional variation we also investigate
the two polar cases of homogeneous preferences (γ i = 1 for all i) and/or homogeneous
15

endowments (ω i = 1 for all i).8
In our model, the role of the intermediary is to complete financial markets even in the
absence of Arrow-Debreu securities. By pooling idiosyncratic risks and selling shares that
are effectively claims on the the aggregate endowment, the intermediary can offer a security
that only depends on aggregate shocks without assuming any additional risks because its
balance sheet is perfectly hedged from the law of large numbers. In this respect, however,
we make the additional assumption that households do not default on their promises. That
is, the sale of their tree to the intermediary at time 0 in exchange of shares of the latter is
final. We emphasize that the intermediary is passive: it only allows households to costlessly
trade with each other. The no-profit condition may be the result of perfect competition in
the market for intermediation services.
Finally we need assumptions on the relevant household parameters to guarantee that
their marginal utility remains positive in all possible states. The following is a sufficient
condition and is assumed throughout


−1
ωi > γ i 1 − I
for all i.
(A1)
In sum, risk sharing in our model operates through the balance sheet of the financial
intermediary: households dynamically trade the intermediary’s stock and borrow from and
lend to it to obtain the desired consumption path. The amount of demand deposits that
the financial intermediary can issue is limited by the amount of loans that is able to grant.
The balance sheet of the intermediary thus endogenously expands and contracts over the
business cycle with the variation in the households’ attitudes towards risk.

4.

Equilibrium

The portfolio problem. Given prices {Pt , rt } households choose consumption Cit , the
amount of shares of the intermediary stock Nit , and the amount of deposits Dit or loans Lit
to maximize their expected utilities
Z ∞

−ρt
max
E0
e log (Cit − ψit Yt ) dt
{Cit ,Nit ,Dit ,Lit ,}

0

subject to the dynamic budget constraint
dWit = Nit (dPt + Yt dt) + (Dit − Lit )rtdt − Cit dt
8

with

Wi,0 = ω i .

We are obviously not the first two focus on these two sources of cross sectional differentiation; see for
instance Longstaff and Wang (2012) and Bolton and Harris (2013). Empirically these sources of variation
have been investigated by, for example, Chiappori and Paeilla (2011) and Calvet and Sodini (2014).

16

The optimal allocation only depends on the net position (Dit − Lit ). We break the
indeterminacy by assuming that only either Dit or Lit can be positive at any given time t.
Definition of a competitive equilibrium. A competitive equilibrium is a series of
stochastic processes for prices {Pt , rt } and allocations {Cit , Nit , Dit , Lit }i∈I such that houseR
R
holds maximize their intertemporal utility and markets clear Cit di = Yt , Nit di = 1, and
R
R
the intermediary balance sheet clears Dit di = Lit di. The economy starts at time 0 in its
stochastic steady state I0 = I. Without loss of generality, we normalize the initial output
Y0 = ρ for notational convenience.
For later reference, it is useful to illustrate some steps of the derivation of the competitive equilibrium. Details are contained in the Internet Appendix. Because markets are
dynamically complete, each agent solves the static problem
Z ∞

Z ∞

−ρt
max E0
e log (Cit − ψit Yt ) dt subject to E0
Mt Cit dt ≤ wi M0
(8)
{Cit }

0

0

where Mt is the state price density. The first order condition of the corresponding Lagrangean
implies that
uC (Cit ; ψit , Yt , t) =

e−ρt
1
= Mt
Cit − ψit Yt
φi

for all i,

(9)

where φi is the inverse of the Lagrange multiplier of the static budget constraint in (8),
R
normalized such that φi di = 1. It is easy to show that9


Mt = e−ρt Yt−1 It
and
Cit = ψit + φi It−1 Yt .
(10)
Consumption for all households is increasing in aggregate output but it increases more
for those households for whom ψ it is larger as their marginal utility increases more with
increases in aggregate output.10
Proposition 1 (Efficient allocation). Let the economy be at its stochastic steady state at
time 0, I0 = I, and normalize Y0 = ρ. Then (a) the (inverse of ) Lagrange multipliers are
φi = γ i + (ω i − γ i )I

(11)

(b) The optimal consumption path for household i is given by
Cit = si (It) Yt

with

si (It) = γ i + (wi − γ i )

I
∈ (0, 1)
It

(12)

R
It is enough to solve for Cit in (9), integrate across households, and use the resource constraint Cit di =
Yt to yield Mt . Plugging this expression in (9) yields Cit .
−1
10
Marginal utilities remain positive, (Cit − ψit Yt ) = φIYt t > 0, and thus households’ utilities are well
i
defined. The marginal utility is lower the higher the aggregate output and the lower the recession indicator.
9

17

The inverse of the Lagrange multipliers φi in (11) are increasing in the initial aggregate
endowment ω i and decreasing in γ i (as I > 1). Higher initial endowment loosens the financial constraint and thus reduces the Lagrange multiplier. Similarly, higher γ i increases the
marginal utility of consumption and thus the desire to increase consumption, making the financial constraint tighter. The inverse of the Lagrange multipliers φi can also be interpreted
as Pareto weights in a planner problem, and we refer to them as such at times.
Equation (12) shows the equilibrium sharing rule. Households with high endowment wi
or low γ i enjoy a high consumption share si (It ) = Cit /Yt during good times, that is, when
the recession indicator It is low, and vice versa. This is intuitive given the discussion of local
risk aversion in (6). Indeed, substituting now in LRA the equilibrium consumption we find
LRAit = −

Cit ucc (Cit , ψit , Yt , t)
It + (ω i /γ i − 1)I
=
uc (Cit , ψit , Yt , t)
1 + (ω i /γ i − 1)I

(13)

Given that It > 1, in equilibrium, each agent i’s LRAit is decreasing in ω i /γ i : Households
with low initial endowment ω i relative to γ i are more risk averse in equilibrium than those
with high endowment relative to γ i . Efficiency calls for households with ω i > γ i to consume a
bigger share of aggregate output in good times in exchange for a lower share in bad times thus
insuring households with ω i < γ i . This effect is standard in the risk sharing literature that
features households with CRRA preferences (see Longstaff and Wang (2014) and Veronesi
(2018)). In our model though there are two additional effects relative to that literature.
First, in our framework the amount of risk sharing also depends on the recession index
because it generates systematic heterogeneous variation in household’ risk aversion over the
business cycle. For instance, households with ω i > γ i are relatively more risk tolerant in the
peak of the cycle than in the trough which expands risk sharing possibilities. Second, and
unlike in the CRRA case, our preferences are non-homothetic and thus initial endowment
affects households’ risk aversion: Even if all agents had identical preferences, γ i = 1 for all
i, agents with higher ω i still consume more in good times and less in bad times.

4.1.

Asset Prices

Proposition 2 (Competitive equilibrium). The equilibrium stock price and interest rate are


ρ + kIIt−1
Pt =
Yt
(14)
ρ (ρ + k)

rt = ρ + µY − (1 + v)σ2Y (It) + k 1 − IIt−1
(15)
18

The stock price in Proposition 2 is identical to the one found in Menzly, Santos and
Veronesi (MSV, 2004) once we define St = It−1 . This should not be surprising as the state
price density in (10) is similar to the one obtained in that paper. An important benefit
of this result is that we are able to calibrate the economy to yield reasonable asset pricing
quantities. Indeed, given the state price density in (10) we obtain the following proposition:
Proposition 3 (Stochastic discount factor). Given the risk-free rate rt in (15), the stochastic discount factor follows
dMt
= −rt dt − σM,tdZt
Mt

with

σM,t = (1 + v)σY (It),

(16)

Intuitions for the asset pricing implications are then well understood. Start with the
risk free rate rt . The terms ρ + µY − σ2Y (It) in (15) are the standard log-utility terms:
time discount, expected aggregate consumption growth, and precautionary savings. The
two additional terms k(1 − IIt−1 ) and v σ Y (It), are additional intertemporal substitution
and precautionary savings terms, respectively, associated with the external habit features of
the equivalent representative agent model (see MSV for details).
As for (14), a negative aggregate shock dZt < 0 decreases the price directly through its
impact on Yt , but it also increases households risk aversion through It . As a result of this,
households require a higher discount to hold risky securities which produces an additional
drop in prices. Thus, our model with time-varying risk preferences yields higher volatility of
returns when compared with a model with log preferences, for example:


vkI
σP (It ) = σ Y (It) 1 +
.
ρIt + kI

(17)

In addition, returns are predictable both because the market price of risk is time varying
(see (16)) and there is variation in aggregate consumption volatility (σY (It)). This generates
the predictability of stock returns. Indeed,
Et [dRP − rtdt] = σ M (It )σP (It)dt

where

dRP = (dPt + Yt dt)/dt

(18)

All these effects combine to generate a higher equity premium.
Formulas (14) and (15) of Pt and rt in Proposition 2 also imply the following result:
Corollary 4 Asset prices are independent of the endowment distribution across households
as well as the distribution of preferences. In particular the model has identical asset pricing
implications even if all households are identical, i.e. γ i = 1 and ω i = 1 for all i.
19

In our framework standard Gorman aggregation results hold and thus there is a representative household that one can use for pricing purposes. Corollary 4 simply emphasizes
that the preferences of this representative household are independent of the distribution of
endowments and preferences of the underlying households. Thus Pt in equation (14) and
rt in (15) are independent of the distribution of either current consumption or wealth in
the population. This property distinguishes our model from the existing literature, such as
Longstaff and Wang (2012) or Chan and Kogan (2002). In these papers, the variation in
risk premia is driven by endogenous changes in the cross-sectional distribution of wealth.
Roughly more risk-tolerant households hold a higher proportion of their wealth in stocks. A
drop in stock prices reduces the fraction of aggregate wealth controlled by such households
and hence their contribution to the aggregate risk aversion. The conditional properties of
returns thus rely on strong fluctuations in the cross sectional distribution of wealth. Instead,
in our model households’ risk aversions change, which in turn induces additional variation
in premia and puts less pressure on the changes in the distribution of wealth to produce
quantitatively plausible conditional properties for returns. Indeed, Corollary 4 shows that
the asset pricing implications are identical even when households are homogeneous and thus
there is no variation in cross-sectional distribution of wealth. Our model then features a clean
separation between its asset pricing implications and its implications for trading, leverage
and risk sharing. In particular, the corollary clarifies that equilibrium prices and quantities
do not need to be causally related to each other, but rather comove with each other because
of fundamental state variables, such as It in our model.

5.

Leverage

We characterize now both household and financial intermediary leverage. The main results
are presented in the same order we discussed the main empirical regularities in Section 2.

5.1.
5.1.1.

Household leverage
Households’ Investments and Saving Decisions

Proposition 5 (Optimal Allocations). In equilibrium:
a) Households with γ i > ω i are risk averse (RA) and save in risk-free deposits:
Dit = v (γ i − ω i ) H (It ) Yt > 0
20

(19)

b) Household with ω i > γ i are risk tolerant (RT) and borrow from the intermediary:
Lit = v (ω i − γ i ) H (It) Yt > 0

(20)

c) All households buy Nit shares in the intermediary stock:
Nit = γ i + (ρ + k)(1 + v) (ω i − γ i ) H (It )

(21)

where
H (It) =

I
>0
ρIt + k(1 + v)I

(22)

Implementation of the efficient allocation described in Proposition 1 requires that households with ω i < γ i save and households with ω i > γ i borrow. Thus, the terminology
introduced in (7): Households for whom ω i < γ i are the RA households and households
with ω i > γ i are the RT households. We use these expressions throughout. Notice as well
the dependence of Dit and Lit on the recession indicator It, which reflects the dependence
of household portfolios on the fluctuations of their attitudes towards risk. We explore this
dependence in the next section.
The next corollary shows that RT households borrow to achieve a position in stocks that
is higher than 100% of their wealth.
Corollary 6 (Household positions in stocks). The investment in stock of household i in
proportion to wealth is


ρIt
1
+
v
1
−
Nit Pt
ρIt +I [k+(ρ+k)(ω i /γi −1)]


=
> 1 if and only if ω i > γ i .
(23)
Wit
1 + v 1 − ρIt
ρIt +Ik

Expression (23) shows that RT households invest comparatively more in stocks. In particular, because households’ preferences are non-homothetic in wealth, for given preference
parameter γ i there is a positive relation between wealth and the share of the portfolio held in
risky assets, a result with strong empirical support (see, for instance, by Wachter and Yogo,
2010, section 2.2). Obviously, nonhomotheticity can obtain in a variety of settings.11 But
expression (23) has some specific implications that have been taken to the data by Calvet
and Sodini (2014). Indeed we show in the Internet Appendix that (23) can be written as


Nit Pt
SR (It)
θi Yt
=
1−
,
(24)
Wit
σ P (It )
Wit
11

Wachter and Yogo (2010) for instance write a model in which nonhomotheticity obtains because the
households have non-separable preferences over two kinds of goods, a basic good and a luxury one.

21

where SR (It ) = (1 + v) σ P (It ) is the Sharpe ratio of the risky asset and θi is a household
specific constant. Equation (24) is a version of equation (2) in Calvet and Sodini (2014, page
876).12 These authors test a variety of implications of (24) in a large panel of Swedish twins
(which serves to control for differences in risk preferences) and find strong support for them.

5.1.2.

Households’ debt-to-income and debt-to-wealth ratios

We now show that our model is consistent with the business cycle dynamics of household
leverage highlighted in Section 2. The RT households who lever up at time t borrow Lit from
the intermediary (see Figure 5). We characterize the two definitions of leverage introduced
there, namely, debt-to-income and debt-to-wealth ratios (see equation (1)).
To characterize debt-to-income ratios we need a specification of household income, Yit .
For simplicity, we assume that Yit = ω i Yt εit , where εit is a stationary idiosyncratic risk with
εit > 0 and Et [εit ] = 1.
Proposition 7 (Household leverage) Let ω i > γ i . Then
a) Debt-to-income and debt-to-wealth ratios are given by:
Lit
= v (1 − γ i /ω i ) H (It) ε−1
it
Yit

and

Lit
vρ(ρ + k) (ω i − γ i ) H (It)
=
,
Wit
γ i ρ + ((ρ + k) ω i − γ i ρ) IIt−1

(25)

respectively, where H (It) is given by (22).
b) The higher the ratio γ i /ω i and the lower the leverage whether measured relative to
income or wealth.
c) Debt-to-income ratios, Lit /Yit , are procyclical on average. Debt-to-wealth ratios, Lit /Wit ,
are countercyclical if It < I ∗∗ where I ∗∗ is the threshold given by (IA.17) in the Internet
Appendix.
As seen in (a) and (b), leverage is fully characterized by the time series behavior It and
the cross section of γ i /ω i .
SR
Equation (2) in Calvet and Sodini (2014) is φit = γσ
(1 − θ i Xit /Wit ), where Xit is a subsistence or
P
habit level in consumption. This equation obtains in a variety of habit setups (see Section II of the Internet
Appendix of Calvet and Sodini (2014)). In expression (2) of our model, aggregate output, Yt , takes the place
of “habit” in traditional models.
12

22

Point(c) is the critical point of proposition, as it shows that whether one normalizes
by the “income” of the household, Yit , or her wealth Wit matters for the business cycle
properties of the particular measure of leverage. As the economy improves and It decreases
risk-tolerant households borrow more relative to their income. The reason is that as the
economy improves the local curvature of the utility function decreases (see expression (13)).
Wealthy households (high ω i ) or households with low exposure to aggregate shocks (low
γ i ) are willing to take on more risk by borrowing more and investing more in the financial
intermediary’s stock.
The implications for leverage when normalizing by wealth, Wit , are instead different. As
the economy improves the stock price increases and it does so more than the amount of debt
issued by the borrowing households. In effect, the difference in the time series behavior of
both measures of leverage is driven by the fact that in debt-to-wealth ratios, Lit /Wit , discount
effects are present in the denominator whereas they are not in debt-to-income ratios, Lit /Yit ;
whether one normalizes by income or wealth matters for the cyclical properties of leverage.13
Put it in another way, the variation on leverage depends on the business cycle variable It,
which affects also the stock return volatility and risk premium. As It increases, all agents’
risk aversions increase, which induce them to decreases their debt-to-income Lit /Yit , but at
the same time the risk premium increases, which induces them to increase the amount of
debt in percentage of wealth to take advantage of the improved investment opportunities.
The results in Proposition 7 hold also in aggregate once we integrate across all risktolerant households. Therefore, the dynamics of aggregate debt-to-income and debt-towealth ratios are thus in line with the evidence in Figure 2, which shows the increase in
debt-to-income ratio of households before the 2008 crisis but the increase in debt-to-wealth
ratio after the crisis kicked in, in 2009.
In addition, the results of Proposition 7 are also consistent with Figure 3, which shows
that households with lower wealth are those with higher debt-to-wealth ratios. Our model
can easily match this pattern by assuming that γ i /ω i is positively correlated with ω i , a
relation that is also automatically imposed by the wealth constraint (A1). Moreover, under
such assumptions, point (c) of the proposition implies indeed that debt-to-wealth ratio of
poorer agents increases the most during bad times, as shown in Figure 3. These results
thus show that our model is able to match qualitatively important patterns in the data. In
Section 6. we investigate the model’s quantitative performance and show in simulation that
the same pattern occurs even when γ i and ω i are independent of each other provided that
the distribution of γ i is sufficiently wide.
13

The threshold I ∗∗ in point (c) of Proposition 7 is very high and rarely reached in simulations.

23

5.1.3.

Leverage and consumption

Our framework has tight implications for the relation between leverage and current and
future consumption at the individual household level.
Corollary 8 Household i’s consumption growth satisfies
dCit
= µC,it dt + σC,it dZt
Cit

(26)

where
(ω i − γ i )I
F (It)
γ i It + (ω i − γ i )I


v(ω i − γ i )I
=
1+
σY (It)
γ i It + (ω i − γ i )I

µC,it = µY +

(27)

σ C,it

(28)

with
F (It) = k(1 − IIt−1 ) + (1 + v)v σ 2Y (It )

(29)

If σ Y (It) is increasing in It with σY (1) = 0, then there exists a unique solution I ∗ to F (I ∗) = 0
such that for all i and j with γ i /ω i < 1 < γ j /ω j we have




dCit
dCjt
E
< µY < E
for
Cit
Cjt




dCjt
dCit
> µY > E
for
E
Cit
Cjt

It > I ∗

(30)

It < I ∗

(31)

This corollary shows that cross-sectionally, RT households, those with γ i < ω i , have lower
expected growth rate of consumption than RA households when It is low, and viceversa. We
know that these are also times when such households are heavily in debt. It follows then
that households who are heavily leveraged enjoy both a high consumption boom in good
times, but a lower future expected consumption growth.14
Corollary 9 Highly leveraged households enjoy high consumption shares in good times but
have lower expected consumption going forward.
To reiterate, leverage and consumption patterns are not casually related. They are
both driven by changes in the attitudes towards risk: After a sequence of good economic
14

Parker and Vissing-Jørgensen (2009) use the Consumer Expenditure (CEX) Survey to show that the
consumption growth of high-consumption households is significantly more exposed to aggregate fluctuations
than that of the typical household.

24

shocks aggregate risk aversion declines. Thus, RT households borrow more and experience a
consumption “boom”. The increase in consumption is due to the higher investment in stocks
that have higher payoffs in good times. Good times mean lower individual (and aggregate)
risk aversion and thus these same households take on more leverage. Hence, our model
predicts a positive comovement of leverage and consumption at the household level. Finally,
mean reversion in It also implies that RT households are also those that suffer a bigger drop
in consumption growth once It increases.
This implication of our model speaks to some of the recent debates regarding the low
consumption growth experienced by levered households following the Great Recession. Some
have argued that the observed drop in consumption growth was purely due to a wealth effect,
as levered households tend to live in counties that experienced big drops in housing values,
whereas others have emphasized the critical role of debt in explaining this drop.15 Clearly
these effects are important but our contribution is to show that because leverage is an
endogenous variable, high leverage followed by low consumption is precisely the prediction
of our model even without causal effect of leverage on consumption.

5.2.

Financial intermediary leverage

The definition of leverage for the financial intermediary is similar to that of the households.
The total amount of debt of the intermediary is
Z
Dt =
Dit di.

(32)

i:γ i <ω i

Again, we define two measures of intermediary leverage: The first measure, Dt /Yt normalizes
the amount of debt on the liability side of the intermediary’s balance sheet by the aggregate
output at time t, the income flowing from the assets held. The second, Dt /Pt , instead
normalizes by the market value of intermediary equity, Pt . We are interested in the cyclical
properties of these measures and whether they can serve as factors priced in the cross section.
5.2.1.

Time series properties of financial intermediary leverage

Proposition 10 (Financial intermediary leverage)
a) The amount of debt issued by the financial intermediary, Dt , is given by
Z
Dt = vK1 H (It ) Yt
where
K1 ≡
(ω i − γ i ) di > 0

(33)

i:ω i >γ i

15

See for instance Mian and Sufi (2014, in particular pages 39-45) for a summary of these differing views.

25

and H (It) is given in expression (22).
b) Debt-to-output ratio and debt-to-equity ratio are given by, respectively:
Dt /Yt = vK1 H (It )

and

Dt /Pt =

vρ (ρ + k) K1 H (It)
.
ρ + kIIt−1

(34)

c) Intermediary’s debt-to-output ratio, Dt /Yt , is procyclical. The intermediary debt-toequity ratio, Dt /Pt , it is countercyclical provided It < I ∗∗, where I ∗∗ is given in equation
(IA.17) in the Internet Appendix.
The implications for the leverage of the financial intermediary follow immediately from
the results on household leverage. After all the financial intermediary’s leverage is directly
linked to the short debt issued to saving households who use it to hedge their exposure against
aggregate shocks. In turn the amount of short debt issued by the financial intermediary is
backed by the loans granted to borrowing households.
Financial intermediary debt, Dt , increases as the economy improves (as It decreases)
on account in turn of the increase of the risk bearing capacity of RT households who take
on leverage. This allows the financial intermediary to grant more loans to those household
which in turn allows it to issue more short term debt to the RA households. Conversely,
the risk bearing capacity of borrowing households diminishes as the economy deteriorates
and with it the supply of safe assets, precisely when it is most needed. Our model thus
provides a theory of the supply of safe assets that is determined by the risk bearing capacity
of borrowing households.16
Whether we normalize financial intermediary debt, Dt , by aggregate output or by equity
matters for whether aggregate leverage is pro- or countercyclical. Proposition 10 establishes
that as the economy improves debt grows more than aggregate output, Yt , and thus the
procyclicality of Dt /Yt . The countercyclicality of intermediary’s debt-to-equity ratio Dt /Pt
instead has to do with the discount effects that characterize our model. A large realization
of Yt increases aggregate wealth on account of both the direct effect but also the additional
increase in valuations as the households’ risk aversion drops (see (14)). This results in a
countercyclical leverage measure.
16

This is an issue studied by other papers. See for instance Barro and Mollerus (2014), who propose a
model based on Epstein-Zin preferences to offer predictions about the ratio of safe assets to output in the
economy. Gorton, Lewellen and Metrick (2012) and Krishnamurthy and Vissing-Jorgensen (2012) provide
empirical evidence regarding the demand for safe assets. In all these papers the presence of “outside debt”
in the form of government debt plays a critical role in driving the variation of the supply of safe assets by
the private sector, a mechanism that is absent in this paper.

26

The time-series properties of intermediary leverage described in Proposition 10 are consistent with the empirical regularities discussed in Section 2. As displayed in the top panels
of Figure 4 book leverage decreases when firms’ asset value decrease, while market leverage
increases when the intermediaries’ valuations decrease. While in this literature this dynamics is interpreted as the active deleveraging of intermediaries, our results show that similar
results obtain in general equilibrium due to the demand and supply of credit from households.
Because the dynamics of leverage depends on It which also affects the volatility of the
risky asset (see (17)), we obtain the following:
Corollary 11 On average, the intermediary debt-to-output ratio, Dt /Yt , is high when aggregate volatility σ P (It) is low and the price of risky assets Pt is high.
In our model, both return volatility and debt-to-output ratio of the intermediary depend
on the single state variable It which is then the source of the comovement. This result is
consistent with the evidence in the bottom panel of Figure 4, which shows that VaR measures
correlate negatively with leverage, as VaR is in turn positively related to measures of asset
return volatility.
5.2.2.

Intermediary asset pricing and leverage risk price

Our model also sheds light on recent empirical findings in the “intermediary asset pricing”
literature as discussed in Section 2. In our one-factor model the conditional CAPM holds. If
we could easily measure It in the data, we could compute expected returns off the conditional
CAPM. However, suppose that economy’s aggregate risk aversion, which is proportional to
It, is not observable. The leverage ratio of intermediaries is instead observable and it can be
used as a proxy, thus explaining the empirical evidence.
Formally, let Lt denote either of the two measures of financial intermediary leverage that
we have considered. Then if Lt is monotonic in It there exists a function q (·) such that17
It = q (Lt ) . The state price density is then
Mt = e−ρt Yt−1 It = e−ρtYt−1 q (Lt ) .
0

(Lt )
The volatility of the SDF is thus σ M,t = σY,t − qq(L
σ L,t where σL,t is the volatility of leverage.
t)

The risk premium for any asset with return dRit can then be written as


dYt
Et [dRit − rtdt] = Covt
, dRit + λLt Covt (dLt , dRit )
Yt
17

For this heuristic argument, we restrict It < I ∗∗ so that Dt /Pt is monotonic. See Proposition 10.

27

(35)

where
λLt = −

q 0 (Lt )
q (Lt )

(36)

The first term of (35) corresponds to the usual log-utility, consumption-CAPM term, while
the second term corresponds to the additional risk premium due to shocks to Lt . λLt is the
market price of leverage risk.18 We then obtain
Corollary 12 (Price of leverage risk)
D/Y

> 0, when leverage is defined as Lt = Dt /Yt .

D/P

< 0, when leverage is defined as Lt = Dt /Pt .

a) The price of leverage risk is positive, λt

b) The price of leverage risk is negative, λt

As shown in Proposition 10, Dt /Yt is procyclical. That is, leverage is high when on
average, marginal utilities are low. Thus the market price of risk associated with this measure
of leverage is positive. Instead Dt /Pt is countercyclical and thus it is high when on average
marginal utilities are high and thus the market price of risk is in this case negative.
To link these results to the empirical evidence in AEM and HKM (see Table 1 in Section
2.) we can equate Dt /Yt to the “book leverage” of financial intermediaries and Dt /Pt to their
“market leverage”. Indeed, like our measure of debt-to-output Dt /Yt , book leverage does
not depend on market prices and thus it is procyclical. In contrast, market leverage depends
on asset prices, and thus the discount effect that renders it countercyclical.
Finally, notice that good time, when It is low, are also periods when expected excess returns are low and so is typically aggregate uncertainty σY (It ).19 Because Dt /Yt is procyclical
and Dt /Pt is countercyclical the following corollary obtains immediately,
Corollary 13 (Predictability of Future Excess Returns) Let the risk risk premium E[dRit −
rt dt] = σM (It)σ P (It) be countercyclical. Then a high intermediary debt-to-output ratio Dt /Yt
predicts lower future excess returns, while a high intermediary debt-to-equity ratio Dt /Pt
predicts high future excess returns. The regression coefficient is negative for intermediary
debt-to-output ratio and positive for intermediary debt-to-equity ratio.
These theoretical results are consistent with Panel B and C of Table 1 that show that
high book leverage weakly predicts future lower excess returns, while high market leverage
18

This decomposition is for illustrative purposes only. All shocks are perfectly correlated in our model and
so there is only one priced of risk factor.
19
Note that we have not made any assumptions yet on σ Y (It ), except that it vanishes for It → 1.

28

predicts higher future returns. Our simulations below also show that interestingly our model
is also consistent with market leverage being better in predicting returns than book leverage,
as the price at denominator induces far more variation of market leverage than book leverage.

5.3.

Discussion

Risk sharing and leverage are in our model two related but distinct concepts. Efficient risk
sharing requires marginal utilities (scaled by the Pareto weights, φi ; see equation (11)) to be
equated across households (see equation (9)). How the competitive equilibrium implements
the efficient allocation described in Proposition 1 depends on the specific financial market
structure assumed and thus so do the leverage implications of our model. With this in mind,
it is useful to consider how the portfolio allocations in Proposition 2 implement the efficient
allocation described in Proposition 1 through a standard replication argument. Let Wit be
the value of the contingent claim that at each point in time and state delivers as a dividend
the consumption of agent i, Cit , associated with the efficient allocation (see equation (12)).
We show in the Internet Appendix that the value of this contingent claim would be:
Z ∞

Mτ
ργ + (ρ(ω i − γ i ) + kω i )IIt
Wit = Et
Ciτ dτ = i
Yt .
(37)
Mt
ρ(ρ + k)
t
Clearly a financial structure that features these contingent claims can equally implement
the efficient allocation: Each agent would buy his corresponding contingent claim at date
0 and consume the dividends Cit throughout. Following Cox and Huang (1989) the stock
investment and borrowing/lending decision in Proposition 5 simply replicates the cash-flows
of this contingent claim
Nit Pt + Bit = Wit .

(38)

where Bit is a position in risk-free bonds. In our model, we have that demand for deposits
is Dit = Bit if Bit > 0 and demand for loans from the intermediary is Lit = −Bit if Bit < 0.
For this to be satisfied for every t (and pay Cit as dividend), it must be the case that the
portfolio and the security have the same sensitivity to shocks dZt . Denoting by σW i (It) the
volatility of log(Wit ), the portfolio allocation Nit and Bit must then satisfy


Wit σ W i (It)
σW i (It)
Nit =
and
Bit = Wit − Nit Pt = Wit 1 −
.
Pt σ P (It)
σ P (It )
The bond position, Bit , depends on the ratio of volatilities

σ W i (It )
:
σP (It )

(39)

If this ratio is greater

than one, the agent is leveraging his investment in the stock market. The volatility of the
contingent claim is



v (k + (ρ + k)(ω i /γ i − 1)) I
σWi (It) = σY (It) 1 +
ρIt + (k + (ρ + k)(ω i /γ i − 1)) I
29



.

(40)

Comparing this expression with σ P (It) in (17), we see that σ W i (It) > σP (It) if and only
if ω i > γ i . That is, RT households (ω i > γ i ) borrow to leverage their portfolio. Intuitively,
from the optimal risk sharing rule (12), RT households have a high consumption share in
good times, when It is low, and a low consumption share in bad times, when It is high.
This particular consumption profile implies that the value of the contingent claim Wit is
more sensitive to discount rate shocks than the stock price Pt . As a result the “replicating”
portfolio requires some leverage to match such sensitivity.
Equation (39) also highlights the reason why the aggregate debt-to-output ratio, which
is equal to Dt /Yt , increases in good times. This is due to a “level effect”: from (40) and (17)
the ratio of volatilities actually declines as It decreases. This is intuitive as the hypothetical
contingent claim pays out more in good times and hence becomes less sensitive to discount
rate shocks then. However, from (37) the value of the hypothetical contingent claim Wit
increases in good times because the discount rate declines and more than overcomes the
decline in the ratio of volatilities. As a result, aggregate debt increases in good times.
While a procyclical aggregate debt-to-output ratio may seem intuitive, it is not normally
implied by, for instance, standard CRRA models with differences in risk aversion. In such
models, less risk averse households borrow from more risk averse agents, who want to hold
riskless bonds rather than risky assets. As aggregate wealth becomes more concentrated
in the hands of less risk-averse agents, the need of borrowing and lending declines, which
in turn decreases aggregate debt.20 Moreover, a decline in aggregate uncertainty – which
normally occur in good times – actually decreases leverage in such models, as it reduces the
risk-sharing motives of trade (see Veronesi (2018)). In our model, in contrast, the decrease
in aggregate risk aversion in good times make households with high-risk bearing capacity
even more willing to take on risk and hence increase their supply of risk-free assets to those
who have a lower risk bearing capacity.
20

Longstaff and Wang (2012), Figure 5, shows the standard inverse-U shape relation between market
leverage and the share of consumption of the least risk-averse agent s. Market leverage is minimized at the
extremes for s = 0 and s = 1. While Longstaff and Wang do not report a similar plot for the debt-to-output
ratio, it is straightforward verify that the same inverse-U shape holds also for the debt-to-output ratio.

30

6.

Quantitative implications

6.1.

Parameters and simulations

We now provide a quantitative assessment of the effects discussed in previous sections. There
are two sets of parameters to consider, those that pertain to the aggregate time series properties of the model and those that relate to the cross sectional dispersion in households’
attitudes towards risk and wealth.
In what concerns the time series parameters we follow MSV closely as our model aggregates to a representative consumer household which is identical to the one in that paper.
The only exception is that in the present model the aggregate endowment process is heteroskedastic. Our theoretical results do not depend on the functional form of σ Y (It) but
obviously to simulate the model we need to specify one. We assume that
σY (It ) = σ max 1 − It−1



(41)

Assumption (41) implies that output volatility increases when the recession index increases,
but it is also bounded between [0, σmax ].21 This is consistent with existing evidence that
aggregate uncertainty increases in bad times (see e.g. Jurado, Ludvigson, and Ng (2015)),
it satisfies the technical condition σ Y (It) → 0 as It → 1, and it also allows us to compare
our results with previous literature, as we obtain
dIt = k(I − It )dt − (It − 1)vdZt
with v = vσmax which is similar to the one in MSV.
σ max is chosen to match the average consumption volatility E[σY (St)] = std[∆ log(Ctdata)],
where the expectation can be computed from the stationary density of It.22 The rest of the
parameters are similar but not identical to MSV and are reported in Panel A of Table A.1
in Appendix A1.1. Panels B and C of that table shows that, similarly to MSV, the model is
able to match the main properties of stock returns, both conditionally and unconditionally.
Figure A.1, which reproduces Figure 1 in MSV.23
21

The alternative of assuming e.g. σ Y (It ) as linear in It would result in σ Y (It ) potentially diverging to
infinity as It increases. We also assume that σ Y (I) is multiplied by a “killing function” k(I −1 ) such that
k(x) → 0 when x → 0 to ensure that integrability conditions are satisfied (see Ceriditto and Gabaix (2008)).
We do not make such function explicit for notational convenience.
22
See the Appendix in MSV. In addition, note that in MSV, α = v/σ and therefore we compute v = ασ.
Finally, MSV has It bounded below by a parameter λ > 1 while in our model It is bounded below by 1.
23
Like Campbell and Cochrane (1999) and Menzly, Santos, and Veronesi (2004), our model also implies
a positive relation between stock return volatility and equity risk premium, for which though there is little
evidence in the data.

31

6.2.

The cross-section of household leverage

We now proceed to specify the distribution of initial endowments wi and of preferences γ i .
A full micro-founded “calibration” is clearly problematic in our setting, given the types of
preference specification. We resort to illustrate the model’s predictions through a reasonable
numerical illustration which yields sensible quantities for some observables, such as households consumption volatility and debt levels. We assume that the risk aversion parameters
R
γ i are uniformly distributed γ i ∼ U[1 − γ, 1 + γ], so as γ i di = 1. The uniform distribution
is a reasonable starting point, as it bounds above the parameter γ i .


−1
Endowments ω i must meet Assumption A1, that is, ω i > γ i 1 − I
. To obtain draws

of ω i that are independent of γ i we thus have to restrict the distribution of ω i so that the
−1
−1
support is bounded from below by ω = max(γ i )(1 − I ) = (1 + γ)(1 − I ). To ensure a
positively skewed distribution of wealth, we thus assume that
ω i = ω + eµw +σ w εi

with εi ∼ N(0, 1) and µw = log [1 − ω] − σ 2w /2 to ensure E[ω i ] = 1.24 The only free
parameters of the cross-sectional distribution of agents are thus γ and σ w .
We choose γ and σ w with an eye on relevant moments of individual households’ consumption growth, such as average household consumption growth (arithmetic or log), its
mean and median total and systematic volatility, and the cross-sectional dispersion of both.
One important stumbling block to estimate the total and systematic volatility of household
consumption growth is the lack of reliable panel data on households consumption, which
has limited the empirical work on the time-series properties of individual households’ consumption. However, the Internet Appendix IA2. describes a novel methodology to estimate
households’ total and systematic consumption volatility from cross-sectional consumption
data, and its application to the Survey of Consumer Expenditure (CEX). For our estimation, we use the dataset compiled by Kocherlakota and Pistaferri (2009) which spans the
period 1980–2005.
Panel A of Table 2 reports the results. The average quarterly (arithmetic) growth rate
is about 6%, which is large but mostly driven by the large cross-sectional heterogeneity in
quarterly growth rates. Indeed, the median is slightly negative and the cross-sectional standard deviation is 40%, in line with estimates by e.g. Constantinides and Ghosh (2017). The
log-growth indeed shows a slightly negative mean, which is close to the median, highlighting
the positive skewness of the consumption data.
24

2

Indeed E[ωi ] = ω + E[eµw +σ w ε ] = ω + eµw +σ w /2 = 1.

32

The total quarterly volatility is also large, at 36.5%, and it displays a strong positive
skewness, as its median is much lower at 27.1%, and its dispersion (standard deviation) is at
42.4%. Clearly, much of this quarterly consumption volatility is due to idiosyncratic shocks
and residual seasonalities.25 As one would expect, quarterly systematic volatility is lower
than the total volatility: the average is almost 8.9%, and the median is just 6.6%. The
dispersion is still large, but reasonable, at 10.4%.
Panel B of Table 2 contains the same moments as Panel A but from the simulated model.
We consider various combinations γ for the uniform U[1 − γ, 1 + γ] and the dispersion σ w
of the lognormal distribution of endowments. We focus on the case U [0, 2] and σ w = 0.75
and discuss the other parameter configurations in the Internet Appendix. The simulated
moments for consumption growth and systematic volatility are reasonable and close to the
data, with the important exception that our model is not able to generate the large crosssectional dispersion in quarterly consumption growth. This is to be expected, as the crosssectional dispersion in the data quarter by quarter is likely due to idiosyncratic shocks, which
are absent in our model.26 More specifically, with those parameters, the model generates a
mean growth rate of 0.9%, with the median at 0.5% and a cross-sectional dispersion of 6.3%.
There is positive skewness, but not at the levels observed in the data, as this is “systematic
skewness”. Indeed, the mean consumption volatility is at 8.7%, with the median at 5.9%
and dispersion at 11.3%. These values are similar to the corresponding values in Panel A for
systematic volatility. This calibration also generate positive skewness in systematic volatility,
as observed in the data.
Panel A of Figure 6 shows the distribution of endowment in a simulation of 200,000 agents
when σw = 0.75. The distribution is strongly positively skewed. Because of the restriction
R
ω i di = 1, the distribution shows a large mass of households with ω i < 1 to allow for some
households with a very large endowment. Panel B shows the relation between endowment
ω i and leverage, namely, ω i − γ i . Indeed, recall that only households with ω i − γ i > 0 lever
up (see Proposition 5). The model is such that agents with a wide range of endowments
both borrow and lend, depending on their risk aversion. However, agents with very large
endowment are borrowers only, as their risk aversion is low.
Our assumption on the joint distribution of preferences γ i and endowments ω i in the
25

As explained in the Internet Appendix IA2., for each household i we mitigate the influence of seasonality
by computing the average σ
b2it over the three quarters of available variance observations.
26
More precisely, household’s endowments feature idiosyncratic shocks in our model but diversification
through the intermediary’s balance sheet eliminates them from the households’ equilibrium consumption
processes. Likewise, our model is not rich enough to be able to generate a wealth distribution that is close
to the one in the data.

33

Table 2: Cross-Sectional Parameters and Household Consumption Moments.

Panel A. Households Quarterly Consumption Moments. Data

Mean
6.04
-0.59

Arithmetic
Logarithmic

Growth Rate (%)
Median Std. Dev.
-0.63
40.13
-0.66
35.78

Total
Systematic

Mean
36.53
8.94

Volatility (%)
Median Std. Dev.
27.10
42.35
6.61
10.42

Panel B. Households Quarterly Consumption Moments. Model
U [γ, γ]
U [0, 2]
U [0, 2]
U [0, 2]
U [0, 2]
U [0, 2]
U [1, 1]
U [1, 1]
U [1, 1]
U [1, 1]
U [1, 1]

σw
1.00
0.75
0.50
0.25
0.00
1.00
0.75
0.50
0.25
0.00

Arithmetic Growth Rate (%)
Mean Median Std. Dev.
0.99
0.53
7.09
0.91
0.53
6.35
0.84
0.53
5.60
0.80
0.53
5.14
0.82
0.51
5.33
0.57
0.53
2.12
0.55
0.51
1.74
0.54
0.53
1.24
0.52
0.52
0.65
0.53
0.53
0.00

Mean
9.63
8.77
7.91
7.47
7.87
3.17
2.66
2.05
1.51
1.15

Volatility (%)
Median Std. Dev.
6.21
12.64
5.86
11.30
5.54
9.69
5.41
8.52
5.77
8.81
2.26
3.79
1.72
3.50
1.35
2.43
1.21
1.59
1.15
0.00

previous section also yields a cross section of debt-to-wealth ratio, Lit /Wit , that matches
well its empirical counterpart around the financial crisis in 2007 - 2009. Recall that Figure 3
shows two patterns of leverage across households. First, households with lower net worth have
higher debt-to-wealth ratios. Second, the debt-to-wealth ratio of poorer households increased
dramatically between 2007 and 2009, while the same is not true for richer households.
Figure 7 plots Lit /Wit of the borrowing RT households by wealth percentile in simulations,
which aims to replicate Figure 3.27 It does for booms (St high), recessions (St low), and crisis
(St very low). First, in general, households with lower net worth (Wit) take on more debt as
a fraction of assets. To understand this result first recall that Figure 7 shows the leverage
of borrowing households, what we have termed throughout the RT households, and that
our preferences are non-homothetic: given γ, low net worth households are more risk averse
than richer households. The intuition is clear: conditional on borrowing a poor household
must have a much higher risk tolerance than an average rich household and for this reason
they take on more leverage. Notice that this result obtains even when the distribution of ω i
27

As discussed in footnote 4, in the data there are also cross-sectional differences in terms of the assets
held by different households, such as housing or equity. Ours is clearly a simplification but an extension to
multiple assets with housing would likely produce similar results.

34

Figure 6: Preference and Endowment Distribution. Panel A plots the distribution of endowments
−1
wi = w + eµw +σ w εi where w = 2(1 − I ), µw = log[1 − w] − 12 σ 2w , σ w = 0.75 and ε ∼ N (0, 1). Panel B shows
the relation between endowments ωi and ω i − γ i ; recall that households with wi − γ i > 0 take on debt.

and γ i are independent from each other. This revealed preference argument has important
implications regarding the inferences on risk preferences one should draw from household
portfolio decisions. On observing the patterns observed in the data two hypothesis are
equally consistent: that the initial wealth and risk tolerance correlate negatively in the
population or that, as in our case, preferences are non-homothetic and selection is inducing
the particular pattern in Figure 3.
The second important pattern in Figure 3 is that debt-to-wealth ratios Lit /Wit increase
markedly during crises, that is, those rare times in which St is on the left-hand-side of its
distribution (see Panel A of Figure A.1). This is an important channel in our model: While
households who borrow deleverage when It increases, and hence reduce their amount of debt,
the debt-to-asset ratio actually increases. The reason is that the value of assets declines by
even more (see Proposition 7). That is, households engage in active debt repayment but
household leverage when debt is normalized by wealth, Lit /Wit , increases nonetheless. This
pattern is particularly evident during the financial crisis of 2008 (see Figure 2).28
28

The Internet Appendix documents that a similar plot obtains in the case of Spain which also has a
comprehensive household survey (the “Encuesta Financiera de las Familias” or EFF). We thank Olympia
Bover of the Bank of Spain for pointing out this to us.

35

Figure 7: Debt-to-assets ratios across the wealth distribution in the model . This figure plots
the distribution of debt-to-asset ratios of households who take on debt in simulations during three types of
periods: Booms (It low), recessions (It high) and crisis (It very high).

Notice though that we miss on the magnitudes. For instance, as shown in Figure 3 the
leverage of low net worth households at the trough of the crisis, in 2009, is above 130%,
whereas it is about half of that in our simulations. The disparity in magnitudes is even
more pronounced in good times. Thus additional ingredients need to be brought to bear in
order to explain why low net worth households levered as much as they did during the years
leading up to the financial crisis of 2008.
In sum, our model is able to capture an important fact in the cross section, that the
less wealthy lever more. This stands in contrast with most models with heterogeneous
agents, such as, for example, Dumas (1982) and Longstaff and Wang (2012). There, less
risk averse households lever up, invest in risky stocks, and become richer as a result. These
models thus imply counterfactually that leverage is more pronounced amongst richer agents
and are unable to explain the patterns in Figure 3. In contrast, in our model the two
different sources of heterogeneity, combined with the implicit assumption that households
with low endowment have lower habit loading γ i , imply that poor households lever up more,
consistently with the data. Of course, there is an important difference between our model
and the data: in our model agents poorer households lever to purchase equity issued by the
financial intermediary, while in the data they lever to purchase durable goods and housing.

36

Figure 8: Aggregate leverage and Stock Holdings of Levered households Panel A plots Dt /Yt , the
aggregate debt to output ratio in the economy (see expression (34)) as a function of the surplus consumption
ratio St . Panel B reports the aggregate holdings of stocks for the RT households.

6.3.

Aggregate leverage, panic deleveraging and stock prices

Our model has implications for the dynamics of the aggregate household leverage, which is
also the leverage of the financial intermediary in our model. Panel A of Figure 8 shows the
aggregate debt-to-output ratio as a function of St for our choice of parameter values. Panel
B shows the aggregate stock holdings of RT households. As can be seen in expression (34)
the behavior of Dt /Yt with respect to St depends on the shape of the function H (It ). Recall
that this function is decreasing and convex in It, and thus increasing and concave in St.
In particular, our parametric choices imply that aggregate deleveraging accelerates as bad
times morph into severe distress as househoulds’ risk aversions skyrocket.29 Instead for high
values of St the function is relatively flat and variation of the surplus ratio in that domain do
not result in big swings in either aggregate stock holdings or the aggregate debt-to-output
ratio. Because the state variable does not visit that range of values very often (see the
stationary density of St in Panel A of Figure A.1) it follows then that the extreme periods
of deleveraging do not happen often.
Figure 9 further emphasizes the point. It shows the time series behavior of several quantities of interest over a 100 years of artificial quarterly data. Panel A shows the realization of
the surplus consumption ratio St = It−1, while panel B reports the corresponding economic
29

It is important to emphasize that these results do not depend on the specific assumptions made on the
functional form for σ Y (It ) as the function H(It ) does not depend on it.

37

Figure 9: “Fire Sales” in a Simulation Run . This figure plots the time series of several quantities
in 100 years of quarterly artificial data. Panel A reports the “surplus consumption ratio” St = It−1 . Panel
B reports the consumption volatility σ Y (It ). Panel C and D report the price-dividend ratio and the stock
return volatility, respectively. Panel E reports the aggregate position in risky stock of levered households
(grey dashed line, right axis). Panel F reports the aggregate debt-to-wealth ratio of levered agents (dashed
red line; right axis) and the aggregate debt-to-output ratio (solid blue line, left axis).

38

uncertainty σY (It). Economic uncertainty increases in bad times but not unreasonably so
as the conditional volatility is only slightly above 6% when the economy is in deep distress.
Panel C shows the variation in the price-dividend ratio due to variation in the surplus consumption ratio, with a visible drop from the mid 30s to about 15 early on in the sample and
again dips to almost 10 between quarters 100 and 140, when the recession is more sustained.
This is the standard behavior of asset prices in external habit economies in the presence of
negative shocks in consumption growth. Finally Panel D shows the stock return volatility,
which increases dramatically during bad times, to almost 60% during periods of deep distress. Panel E shows the behavior of the aggregate stock holdings of the RT households.
Finally Panel F reports the intermediary’s leverage, both when we normalize by output,
Dt /Yt , as well as with equity, Dt /Pt .
Panels E and F illustrates the impact of the variation of the surplus consumption ratio
on the stock position of leveraged households and the leverage ratios. The variation in
both quantities is rather limited most of the time, except during extreme bad events. It is
thus in these occasions, as the surplus consumption ratio drops and economic uncertainty
increases, that levered households decrease their indebtness and liquidate their positions in
risky assets. Comparing Panels E and F with Panel C, we see that during such times prices
drop substantially and leveraged households delever as well by selling stocks. A possible
interpretation of the comovemet of these time series is that the “price pressure” generated by
the stock selling shown in Panel E is causing the price decline in Panel C. This interpretation
is incorrect. As shown in Corollary 4 the asset pricing implication of our model are identical
to those that obtain in a representative household framework and the same sequence of
aggregate shocks would have led to the same path for asset prices.
Our model does not produce large swings in household leverage, except in situations
of deep distress but the speed of adjustment is much faster, as should be expected from a
frictionless model. For example, as shown in Figure 2, aggregate household debt-to-income
peaked at about 135% in early 2007 and dropped to about 100% in the years following the
crisis. Our model delivers slightly higher magnitudes. In simulations, debt-to-income is close
to 160% and drops to about 145% when the surplus consumption ratio suffers a strong drop
(between quarter 100 and 140), but it does it so much faster than in the data.
In our framework the balance sheet of the financial intermediary responds passively to
the households’ portfolio decisions. As shown in Panel F Dt /Yt drops when stock prices
drop but this deleveraging is simply a reflection of the fact that as the economy deteriorates
RT households become more risk averse and decrease the amount they borrow. Because the
asset side of the intermediary’s balance sheet contracts so does the liability side and thus
39

R
Figure
10: Simulations: Panel A and B plot log changes in total assets, defined as At ≡ Pit di +
R
i:ω i >γ i Lit di, against two measures of financial intermediary leverage, our proxy for book leverage Dt /Yt ,
and market leverage, Dt /Pt . Panels C and D show the V aRt , defined as V aRt = 2.325 × σ A,t against the
corresponding measures of leverage.

the reduction in the amount of deposits that the intermediary can issue to RA households.
Notice then that the dynamics of the balance sheet of the financial intermediary are delinked,
for example, from any form VaR constraints such as in Adrian and Shin (2014), as illustrated
in Figure 4 in Section 2. Our point is not that frictions do not matter but rather that there
are more fundamental forces at work driving the low frequency dynamics of balance sheets
and that frictions are likely to be an amplification factor rather than the primal cause of
fluctuations.
Figure 10 reproduces Figure 4 in Section 2. Panels A and B shows the relation between
asset growth (on the y-axis) and leverage growth (on x-axis), where leverage is “book leverage” (Panel A) and market leverage (Panel B) in simulations. The intermediary’s assets, At,
are equal to the sum of the values of the individual trees plus the total value of the loans
R
R
Lit granted, that is At ≡ Pit di + i:ωi >γ Lit di. There is negative relation in Panel A and
i

positive relation in Panel B, exactly as in Panels A and B of Figure 4, respectively. Panels
C and D plot the relation between the change in the intermediary value-at-risk and leverage growth in the two cases, respectively. We approximate the intermediary value-at-risk
as V aRt = 2.325 × σ A,t , that is, assuming assets are (approximately) normally distributed.
The volatility of assets is given by σA,t =

Pt
At

× σP,t as the volatility of loans Lit is zero.
40

As can be seen from Panel C, book leverage growth is negatively related on average
with change in value at risk, consistently with the evidence put forth by Adrian and Shin
(2014) (see Panel C of Figure 4). But the relation is not causal: Both leverage ratios and
asset volatility are driven by It. As It increases, intermediaries delever and asset volatility
increases. Panel D reports the same simulation results but with market leverage on the
x-axis, in which case a clear positive relation appears. Unfortunately, we do not have an
empirical counterpart to compare this plot to. Still, the message of Panels C and D is that
passive deleveraging and market price variation can as well generate the type of empirical
predictions that are usually argued as evidence of active balance sheet management by
financial intermediaries.30

6.4.

Intermediary Asset Pricing

We showed in subsection 5.2.2. that financial intermediary leverage should be expected to
be a predictor of the cross section of stock returns and that the sign of the market price of
risk depends on the specific definition of leverage used. To check that this result obtains
in simulations we perform standard Fama-MacBeth cross-sectional regressions and use both
measures of leverage as risk factors, with the different signs depending on definitions (see
Table 1 in Section 2.)
For convenience, we consider as test assets the contingent claim securities Wit in expression (37) that pay the dividend Cit over time. Recall we use the standard Fama-French 25
portfolios sorted by size and book-to-market as test assets in the empirical data in Table 1.
We normalize, both in simulations and in the empirical data, the leverage factors to have
mean zero and variance one to facilitate the comparison between the coefficients obtained in
the regressions run with simulated and empirical.
Panel A of Table 3 shows the results of Fama-MacBeth cross-sectional regressions with
simulated data and should be compared with Panel A of Table 1. In our model the conditional
CAPM holds: the first column of Panel shows a strong quarterly coefficient of 1.5 and the
R2 (not reported) is 100%, which is unsurprising as our model has only one shock and thus
all returns are perfectly correlated. Similarly, we do not report t-statistics, as they are all
very large given the large number of artificial data (except for the alpha’s, which are close
to zero). Column II shows that the estimated market price of risk of market leverage is
30

In this conclusion, our paper echoes Welch (2004), who argues that the determinants of corporate leverage
are not active decisions by management related to market timing, taxes or other considerations put forth
by the capital structure literature, but rather stock return dynamics, which account for about 40% of debt
ratios fluctuations.

41

Table 3: The Market Price of Leverage Risk in Simulations. Panel A reports Fama-MacBeth
regressions in a sample of simulated data from our model. The set of test portfolios are the contingent
claims that pay the efficient allocation Cit for each household i (see (12)) and returns are calculated using
prices Pit (see expression (37)). Panels B and C report time series regressions of market returns on book
and market leverage, respectively lagged one to five years. t−statistics are in parenthesis.

Panel A. Cross-Sectional
I
α
0.01
Market Return
1.51
Market Leverage
Book Leverage

Regressions
II
III
-0.02
0.04
1.54
1.48
-0.05
0.02

Panel B. Predictability with Book Leverage
1 year 2 year 3 year 4 year
β
-0.79
-1.49
-2.04
-2.44
t(β)
-4.11
-3.34
-3.09
-3.04
2
R
2.66% 5.45%
7.80% 9.51%

5 year
-2.76
-3.06
10.99%

Panel C. Predictability with Market Leverage
1 year 2 year 3 year 4 year 5 year
β
4.24
7.27
9.38
10.83
11.88
t(β)
25.80
26.72
27.02
27.67
28.57
2
R
14.39% 24.58% 31.18% 35.36% 38.31%

negative, while column III shows that the estimated market price of risk of book leverage
is positive, consistently with Panel A and with the results in Corollary 12. The magnitudes
though are smaller which is unsurprising as the conditional CAPM holds in our framework.
Moreover, the model doesn’t offer a counterpart to value- and size-sorted portfolios and
hence the test asset average returns don’t display as large a spread as in the data.31 Still,
the simulation results highlight that endogenous leverage ratios – which only proxy for shocks
to risk aversion – show up in cross-sectional regressions as risk factors and with different signs
depending on their definitions as found in empirical work.
An additional prediction of our model is at the time-series level (see Corollary 13), which
is consistent with Panels B and C of Table 1 in Section 2. Panels B and C of Table 3 provides
evidence from artificial data. In this case, book leverage (Panel B) is always significant, but
31

The spread in annual average returns across portfolios is 12% in the data while only 4.7% in the model.

42

we note both a lower R2 and t−statistics compared to market leverage (Panel C). That
is, our model is consistent with the empirical finding that market leverage should be a
better predictor of future stock returns. Indeed, while book leverage and market leverage
are clearly related to each other, they are not perfectly correlated. In our simulated data,
market leverage and book leverage have a correlation of -83% in levels, and -75% in first
differences. In the data, they have a correlation of -39% in levels and -31% in first difference.
The imperfect correlation in simulation is due to the non-linearities implicit in the model.
In sum, measures of financial intermediary leverage show up as risk factors in tests of the
cross section of stock returns. This evidence has been interpreted as evidence that financial
intermediaries act as marginal investors in many markets. Our contribution is to show that
this is not necessarily the case. In our model fluctuations in the intermediary’s balance sheet
are driven in turn by fluctuations in the households’ attitudes towards risk. Thus it might
be the case that the predictive success of measures of financial intermediaries’ leverage is
simply due to the fact that it proxies for these changes in the attitudes towards risk and is
unrelated to leverage ratio constraints.

7.

Conclusions

We propose a general equilibrium exchange economy populated with heterogenous households. Households differ in their attitudes towards risk and also in their initial endowment.
In addition attitudes towards risk fluctuate with aggregate economic conditions, but by more
for some households than for others. In particular, during bad times some agents become
more risk averse than others which induces motives for risk sharing and trading. We posit
the existence of a financial intermediary that can issue deposits and grant loans and show
how households can achieve their optimal allocation through a dynamic trading strategy
that combines aggregate stock market positions and either borrowing from or lending to the
intermediary. The model aggregates to a representative household that features also time
changing attitudes towards risk. Our framework is thus able to generate the strong discount
effects that have been shown to be key in addressing well known asset pricing regularities
in the data. Because it generates endogenously a reasonable amount of risk it serves as a
useful framework to evaluate household portfolio decisions.
Our model is consistent with many stylized facts in the data, such as the procyclicality
of households’ debt-to-income ratios and countercyclicality of debt-to-net worth ratios. In
addition, we are able to match stylized patterns of the cross sectional distribution of leverage as a function of net worth. In particular poorer households lever more than wealthier
43

households and debt-to-net worth increases in bad times for all households, independently
of their net worth. The intermediaries’ balance sheets reflect the economy’s aggregate risk
aversion and they expand and contract as households’ demand for loans and deposits change
over the business cycle. Because the intermediaries’ balance sheet reflects the state of the
economy and are easier to measure than households risk preferences, intermediaries’ leverage
ratios can serve as proxies for the potentially poorly measured marginal rates of substitution
of the representative household. We are able to qualitatively replicate standard tests in the
financial intermediation and asset pricing literature which have been put forth as evidence of
the existence of the asset pricing role of frictions and capital constraints. We argue that these
tests offer no such proof as our results obtain in a frictionless complete markets framework.
Our model is simple, however, in that it only has one state variable, all quantities move
in lock-step and thus there is an unrealistic perfect (positive or negative) correlation between
leverage, prices, volatility, expected return, consumption, and so on. It is this assumption
which allows for closed form solutions in quantities and prices and thus obtain a better
understanding of the various economic forces at work. Future research should focus on
generalizing our simple setting to obtain more realistic dynamics. Two avenues of future
research seem particularly fruitful given the simplicity of our setting: First, it would be
useful to explicitly model housing as a second risky asset that also provides housing services
to households. In our calibration, poor agents borrow more to buy the risky asset, which
would match well the data if the class of risky assets were to also comprise housing. We
conjecture that our main results would remain unscathed by this generalization but it would
be an interesting extension nonetheless. A second extension is to consider idiosyncratic
preference shocks, as in Alvarez and Atkenson (2017), and solve for the incomplete market
version of the model. Indeed, Alvarez and Atkenson (2017) show in a three-period model but
with more general recursive utilities that preference shocks impact asset prices and trading,
and that it is possible to solve for the equilibrium even when market are incomplete. The
extension to a dynamic economy such our ours may bring about additional dynamics and
possibly allow the model to better match the distribution of consumption growth and its
total volatility. Such model should also perform better in matching basic properties of the
wealth distribution, which our current one-factor model is unable to fully explain.

44

REFERENCES
Adrian, Tobias, Erkko Etula and Tyler Muir (2014) “Financial Intermediaries and the
Cross-Section of Asset Returns,” Journal of Finance, Volume 69, Issue 6 December:
2557-2596.
Alvarez, Fernando and Andy Atkenson (2017) “Random Risk Aversion: A Model of Asset
Pricing and Trade Volumes,” manuscript, The University of Chicago.
Barro, Robert and Andrew Mollerus (2014) “Safe Assets,” NBER Working Paper, 20652,
October.
Bernanke, Ben (2005) “The Global Saving Glut and the U.S. Current Account Deficit,”
Remarks by Governor Ben S. Bernanke at the Sandridge Lecture, Virginia Association
of Economists, Richmond, Virginia.
Bhamra, Horjat and Raman Uppal, (2014), “Asset Prices with Heterogeneity in Preferences
and Beliefs,” The Review of Financial Studies.
Brav, Alon, George M. Constantinides, and Christopher C. Geczy (2002) “Asset Pricing
with Heterogeneous Consumers and Limited Participation: Empirical Evidence,” Journal of Political Economy, 110, 4, 793 – 824.
Bolton, Patrick and Christopher Harris (2013) “The Dynamics of Optimal Risk Sharing,”
working paper, Columbia Univeristy.
Borch, K. H. (1962).“Equilibrium in a Reinsurance Market,” Econometrica, 30, 424? 44.
Caballero, R.J. and E. Farhi (2016) “The Safety Trap,” unpublished, MIT, May.
Calvet, L.E. and P. Sodini (2014). “Twin Picks: Disentangling the Determinants of RiskTaking in Household Portfolios.” Journal of Finance, 69, 2, pp:867 – 906.
Campbell, John Y., Sanford J. Grossman and Jiang Wang (1993) “Trading volume and
Serial Correlation of Stock Returns,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 905-939.
Campbell, John Y. and John Cochrane (1999) “By Force of Habit: A Consumption-Based
Explanation of Aggregate Stock Market Behavior,” Journal of Political Economy, 107
(April): 205?51.
Ceriditto, Patrick, and Xavier Gabaix (2008) “Regularity Conditions to Ensure the Existence of Linearity-Generating Processes,” working paper.
Chan, Yeung Lewis and Leonid Kogan (2002) “Catching up with the Jonese: Heterogeneous
Preferences and the Dynamics of Asset Prices,” Journal of Political Economy, 110, no.
6: 1255-1285.
Chiappori, P. A. and Paiella, M. (2011) “Relative Risk Aversion Is Constant: Evidence
from Panel Data,” Journal of the European Economic Association, vol. 9 (6), pp.
1021-1052.
45

Cochrane, John (1991) “A Simple Test of Consumption Insurance,” Journal of Political
Economy, vol. 99 no. 5. 957-976.
Cox, John, and Chi-fu Huang (1989) “Optimal Consumption and Portfolio Policies when
Asset Prices Follow a Diffusion Process.” Journal of Economic Theory Vol. 49, No. 1:
33–893.
Constantindes G. and A. Ghosh (2017). “Asset Pricing with Countercyclical Household
Consumption Risk,” Journal of Finance, 73, February, 415–459.
Dumas, B. (1989)“Two-person dynamic equilibrium in the capital market,” Review of Financial Studies, Vol. 2, pp. 157?188.
Dynarski, Mark and Steven M. Shreffin (1987) “Consumption and Unemployment,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, May, 411-428.
Eggertson, Gauti B. and Paul Krugman (2012) “Debt, deleveraging, and the liquidity trap:
A Fisher-Minsky-Koo approach,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics 127 (3), 14691513.
Geanakoplos, John (2010) “The Leverage Cycle” NBER Macro Annual, v29, University of
Chicago Press.
Gorton, Gary and Andrew Metrick (2010)“Securitized Banking and the Run on Repo,”
Journal of Financial Economics.
Gorton, G., S. Lewellen, and A. Metrick (2012) “The Safe-Asset Share,” American Economic Review, May, 101-106.
Guiso, Luigi and Monica Paiella (2008) “Risk Aversion, Wealth, and Background Risk”
Journal of the European Economic Association, vol. 6 (6), pp. 1109-1150.
Guiso, Luigi, Paola Sapienza and Luigi Zingales (2018) “Time Varying Risk Aversion,”
Journal of Financial Economics, 128, pp. 403-421.
Hansen, Lars P. and Ravi Jagannathan (1991) “Implications of Security Market Data for
Models of Dynamic Economies,” Journal of Political Economy, 99 (2): 225-262.
He, Zhiguo and Arvind Krishnamurthy (2013) “Intermediary Asset Pricing,” American
Economic Review, 103 (2): 723-770.
He, Zhiguo, Bryan Kelly and Asaf Manela (2016) “Intermediary Asset Pricing: New Evidence from Many Asset Classes,” Journal of Financial Economics (forthcoming).
Hoopes, J., P. Langetieg, S. Nagel, D. Reck, J. Slemrod, B. Stuart, “Who Sold During the
Crash of 2008-9?Evidence from Tax-Return Data on Daily Sales of Stock,” Working
paper.
Jurado, Kule, Sydney Ludvigson, and Serena Ng (2015) “Measuring Uncertainty”, American Economic Review, 105 (3): 1177-1215.
46

Justiniano, Alejandro, Giorgio E. Primiceri and Andrea Tambalotti (2013) “Household
Leveraging and Deleveraging,” Review of Economic Dynamics, 18, 3-20.
Justiniano, Alejandro, Giorgio E. Primiceri and Andrea Tambalotti (forthcoming), “Credit
Supply and the Housing Boom,” Journal of Political Economy.
Kocherlakota, N. and L. Pistaferri, (2009). “Asset pricing implications of Pareto optimality
with private information”, Journal of Political Economy, 117, 3: 555 – 590.
Krishnamurthy, A. and A. Vissing-Jorgensen (2013).“Short-term Debt and Financial Crises:
What we can learn from U.S. Treasury Supply,” unpublished, Northwestern University,
May.
Longstaff, Francis A. and Jiang Wang (2012) “Asset Pricing and the Credit Market,” Review of Financial Studies, vol. 25 (11): 3169-3215.
Mace, Barbara (1991) “Full Insurance in the Presence of Aggregate Uncertainty,” Journal
of Political Economy, vol. 99 no. 5. 926-956.
Menzly, Lior, Tano Santos and Pietro Veronesi (2004) “Understanding Predictability,” Journal of Political Economy, 112 (1): 1-47.
Mian, Atif and Amir Sufi (2015) “House of Debt,” The University of Chicago Press.
Parker, Jonathan and Annette Vissing-Jørgensen (2009) “Who Bears Aggregate Fluctuations and How?” American Economic Review: Papers & Proceedings, 99:2, 399-405.
Townsend, Robert M. (1994) “Risk and Insurance in Village india,” Econometrica, May,
62(3), 539–591.
Veronesi, Pietro (2018) “Heterogeneous Households under Uncertainty,” Working Paper,
University of Chicago.
Wachter, J. A. and M. Yogo (2010). “Why Do Household Portfolio Shares Rise in Wealth?”
The Review of Financial Studies, 23, 11, pp: 3929 – 3965.
Wang, Jiang (1996) “The Term Structure of Interest Rates in a Pure Exchange Economy
with Heterogeneous Investors,” Journal Financial Economics 41 (May): 75–110.
Welch, Ivo (2004) “Capital Structure and Returns,” Journal of Political Economy, vol. 112
no. 1, February, pp: 106-131.

47

Table A.1: Parameters and Moments.
Panel A reports the parameters for our calibration of the
time series properties of the model. σ max which is chosen to match the average volatility of consumption,
which is the new parameter relative to MSV. Panel B reports a set of moments for the aggregate stock
market and interest rates, as well as consumption growth, and compares with the same moments in artificial
data obtained from a 10,000-year Monte Carlo simulation of the model. Panel C similarly reports the R2 of
predictability regressions in the model and in the data, using the price-dividend ratio as predictor.

Panel A. Parameter Estimates
ρ

k

I

v

µ

σ max

0.0416

0.1567

1.5

1.1353

0.0218

0.0819

Panel B. Moments (1952 – 2014)

Data
Model

E[R]

Std(R)

E[rf ]

Std(rf )

E[P/D]

Std[P/D]

SR

E[σt ]

Std(σ t )

7.13%
6.06%

16.55%
21.83%

1.00%
2.09%

1.00%
2.87 %

38
28.45

15
4.92

43%
27.78%

1.41%
1.46%

0.52%
1.41%

Panel C. P/D Predictability R2

Data
Model

A1.
A1.1.

1 year

2 year

3 year

4 year

5 year

5.12%
14.29%

8.25%
24.03%

9.22%
30.84%

9.59%
35.30%

12.45%
38.61%

Appendix
Quantitative implications of the model: Asset pricing

Figure A.1 reports the conditional moments implied by the model as a function of the surplusconsumption ratio St. As in MSV Figure 1, Panel A reports the stationary distribution of
the surplus-consumption ratio St and shows that most of the probability mass is around
S = 0.667, although St drops considerably below occasionally. The price-dividend ratio is
increasing in St (panel B), while volatility, risk premium and interest rates decline with St
(panel C) for the area with positive mass. Note that our choice of parameters is such to give
near zero mass to the area in which σ P (It) and expected return Et [dRt − rtdt] are increasing
in St = It−1 .32 Finally, the Sharpe ratio is also strongly time varying, and it is higher in bad
times (low St ) and lower in good times (high St ). This figure is very similar to Figure 1 in
MSV.
Given the parameters in Panel A of Table A.1, we simulate 10,000 years of quarterly
32

Figures 4 and 5 of Campbell and Cochrane (1999) also display expected excess return and return volatility
that are monotonically decreasing in the surplus consumption ratio St .

48

Figure A.1: Conditional Moments. Panel A shows the stationary probability density function of the
surplus consumption ratio St . Panel B shows the P/D ratio as a function of St . Panel C plot the expected
excess return Et [dRP − rt dt], the return volatility σ P (St ) and the interest rate r(St ) as functions of St .
Finally, Panel D shows the Sharpe ratio Et [dRP − rt dt] /σ P (St ) against St .

data and report the aggregate moments in Panel B. As in MSV, Table 1, the model fits well
the asset pricing data, though both the volatilities of stock returns and of the risk free rate
are higher than their empirical counterparts.33 Still, the model yields a respectable Sharpe
ratio of 32.64%. Finally, the simulated model generates an average consumption volatility
of 1.43% with a standard deviation of 1.18%. This latter variation is a bit higher than
the variation of consumption volatility in the data (0.52%), where the latter is computed
fitting a GARCH(1,1) model to quarterly consumption data, and then taking the standard
deviation of the annualized GARCH volatility. Our calibrated number is however lower than
the standard deviation of dividend growth’ volatility, which is instead around 1.50%.
The calibrated model also generates a strong predictability of stock returns (Panel C),
with R2 ranging between 14.18% at one year to 35.92% at 5 year. This predictability is
stronger than the one generated in MSV and also the one in the data. This is due to the
combined effect of time varying economic uncertainty (i.e. the quantity of risk) and time
varying risk aversion (i.e. the market price of risk), which move in the same direction.

33

The volatility of the risk free rate can be substantially reduced by making the natural assumption that
expected dividend growth µY decreases in bad times, i.e. when the recession indicator It is high. Indeed, in
the extreme, by assuming µY (It ) = µY + (1 − v)σ Y (It )2 − k(1 − IIt−1 ), which is decreasing in It , we would
obtain a constant interest rates r = ρ + µY . No other result in the paper depend on µY (It ) and thus all the
other results would remain unaltered by the change.

49

