NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

BOMBS AND BABIES:
US NAVY BOMBING ACTIVITY AND INFANT HEALTH IN VIEQUES, PUERTO RICO
Gustavo J. Bobonis
Mark Stabile
Leonardo Tovar
Working Paper 22909
http://www.nber.org/papers/w22909

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2016

We thank Francesco Amodio, Michael Baker, Loren Brandt, Fred Finan, Jeanne Lafortune,
Elaine Liu, Aprajit Mahajan, Ted Miguel, José Tessada, Tom Vogl, and seminar and conference
participants at UC Berkeley, Toronto, Catholic University of Chile-Economic History and
Cliometrics Lab Second Annual Conference 2014, the 11th Annual Workshop of the Households
in Conflict Network, and the CIREQ Montreal Applied Economics Conference 2016 for helpful
comments and suggestions. We would also like to thank Jordan Scantlebury for excellent
research assistance, the Institute of Statistics of Puerto Rico, Dr. Heriberto Marín, and Dr. Arturo
Massol Deyá for sharing administrative data and for their general support throughout, as well as
the Canadian Institute for Advanced Research and the CONICYT/Programa de Investigación
Asociativa (Project SOC 1102) for financial support. The views expressed in this document are
those of the authors and do not necessarily represent those of the Center for a New Economy
(CNE) or its sponsors. We are responsible for any errors that may remain. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2016 by Gustavo J. Bobonis, Mark Stabile, and Leonardo Tovar. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Bombs and Babies: US Navy Bombing Activity and Infant Health in Vieques, Puerto Rico
Gustavo J. Bobonis, Mark Stabile, and Leonardo Tovar
NBER Working Paper No. 22909
December 2016
JEL No. I1,O0
ABSTRACT
We study the relationship between in utero exposure to military exercises and children’s early-life
health outcomes in a no-war zone. This allows us to document non-economic impacts of military
activity on neonatal health outcomes. We combine monthly data on tonnage of ordnance in the
context of naval exercises in Vieques, Puerto Rico, with the universe of births in Puerto Rico
between 1990 and 2000; studying this setting is useful because these exercises have no negative
consequences for local economic activity. We find that a one standard deviation increase in
exposure to bombing activity leads to a three per thousand point (70 percent) increase in
extremely premature births; a three to seven per thousand point – 34 to 77 percent – increase in
the incidence of congenital anomalies; and a five per thousand point increase in low APGAR
scores (38 percent). The evidence is generally consistent with the channel of environmental
pollution. Given the well-documented relationship between neonatal health and later life
outcomes, there is reason to believe that our substantial short-term effects may have longer-term
consequences for this population.
Gustavo J. Bobonis
Department of Economics
University of Toronto
150 St. George St., Room 304
Toronto, Ontario
M5S 3G7, Canada
and Centre for a New Economy
gustavo.bobonis@utoronto.ca
Mark Stabile
INSEAD
Europe Campus
Boulevard de Constance
77305 Fontainebleau
France
and NBER
mark.stabile@insead.edu

Leonardo Tovar
School of Public Policy and Governance
University of Toronto
Toronto, Ontario
leonardo.tovar@alum.utoronto.ca

I. Introduction
From death to severe disability to economic deprivation, wars have strong negative consequences for
civilians. They are frequently the victims of conflict, and the indirect consequences of war are often concentrated
among vulnerable groups – the poor, women, children, and the elderly. There is also a growing consensus that
conflict has strong long-term negative consequences for civilians’ human capital accumulation, socioeconomic
outcomes, and their livelihoods more generally. In particular, conflict can have negative consequences for children
while in utero, and that these in turn have consequences for individuals’ long-term health, educational, and economic
outcomes.5,6 While we know there are many harmful aspects to conflict, our understanding of which elements of
conflict have the strongest effects on children, and in particular their health and human capital accumulation is more
limited.
In what ways do wars harm human capital accumulation? To the extent that conflict disrupts economic
activity and leads to the destruction of physical capital (e.g., Abadie and Gardeazabal 2003), this can affect
households’ access to or capacity to invest in human capital accumulation. Violent conflict also generates a
disproportionate amount of stress, fear, and anxiety, which can have negative effects on physical and mental health
(Becker and Rubinstein 2011; Dustmann and Fasani 2014). This in turn may have indirect negative effects on birth
outcomes (e.g., Beydoun and Saftlas, 2008; Quintana-Domeque and Rodenas 2014). Finally, conflict can affect
human development via environmental channels – air and water pollution, for instance (e.g., Al-Hadithi et al 2012;
Brown 2012; Currie and Schwandt 2014). Understanding what drives these short-term and long-term outcomes can
have implications for war’s impacts on economic growth and inequality, as well as for conflict and post-conflict
assistance. However, the work that separately identifies the channels through which violent conflict can affect shortterm and long-term human development is scarce.
The central goal of this paper is to document the non-economic impacts of military activity on neonatal health
outcomes. We take advantage of a unique setting that provides us with the opportunity to examine such
relationships. Over the span of six decades (1941-2001), the U.S. Navy utilized two-thirds of the territory of Vieques,
Puerto Rico, to host a range of military exercises (including ship-to-shore gun fire, air-to-ground bombing by naval
aircraft, and Marine amphibious landing) 12.5 kilometres away from residential population. Studying this setting is
useful because these exercises have no negative consequences for economic activity, allowing us to identify noneconomic mechanisms through which this military activity impinges on early life outcomes (and hence potentially
future economic activity). To do so, we combine monthly data on tonnage of ordnance used in these naval exercises
with the universe of births in Puerto Rico between 1990 and 2000, to study the relationship between in utero

Prominent examples of the research on the effects of conflict for early-life and long-term outcomes are Alderman, Hoddinott and Kinsey (2006), Bundervoet,
Verwimp, and Akresh (2009), Camacho (2008), León (2012), Mansour and Rees (2012), Galdo (2013), and Quintana-Domeque and Rodenas (2014). A
complementary literature analyzes how environmental factors that occur during the prenatal period have significant early life and long-term consequences; see
Almond and Currie (2011) for a broad survey of the literature. Most epidemiological and medical research focuses on the role that nutrition plays for fetal
development and early-life health outcomes (Kramer, 1987).
6 This emerging body of research supports the “fetal origins” hypothesis first articulated by David Barker (1990): the idea that numerous external environmental
factors during the mother’s pregnancy can have important, long-lasting consequences on health outcomes. According to the fetal origins hypothesis, intrauterine
exposure to environmental agents may program the fetus to have particular metabolic characteristics (Barker, 1990). The specific biological mechanisms that
manifest in different health outcomes of fetuses depend on the level of exposure to environmental factors as well as nutritional and genetic factors.
5

2

exposure to these military exercises and children’s early-life health outcomes. Specifically, we compare newborns
having experienced distinct levels of exposure to these exercises within the municipality over time while controlling
for high frequency period-specific effects (using the health outcomes of newborns in other municipalities) to identify
these effects.
The military exercises have significant negative consequences for early life outcomes. We find that a one
standard deviation increase in exposure to bombing activity while in utero leads to a three per thousand point (70
percent) increase in extremely premature births; a three to seven per thousand point (34-77 percent) increase in the
incidence of congenital anomalies; and a five per thousand point (38 percent) increase in low APGAR scores. We
find direct support for the channel of environment pollution using data from U.S. Environmental Protection Agency
(EPA) Discharge Monitoring Reports by the Atlantic Fleet Weapons Training Facility (U.S. Navy) of inorganic
chemicals such as arsenic, cyanide, and lead, in waters surrounding the live impact area. In particular, we find strong
evidence that bombing activity leads to short-term increases in arsenic levels above EPA limits in waters surrounding
the live impact area: a one standard deviation increase in average ordnance levels leads to a 14 percentage point
increase in this incidence risk, an effect that is 51.2 percent above the mean incidence risk. Given that arsenic
exposure has been linked to increased frequency of spontaneous abortions and congenital malformations
(Nordstrom et al. 1979; Hopenhayn-Rich et al. 1999, this evidence is suggestive of a link between water pollution
resulting from the bombing activity and infant health outcomes. In contrast, we do not find evidence that possible
disruptions in economic activity are a mechanism mediating these effects.
Finally, we examine whether following the end of naval practices in July 2000 had short-term consequences
for infants’ health outcomes. Using data on infant health outcomes up to the year 2003, we examine infant health
outcomes for cohorts conceived following the end of naval practices to those conceived in the preceding period
within the municipality. The sudden end of bombing practices is associated with a 7.5 per thousand (72 percent)
decrease in the incidence of congenital anomalies. The evidence from this distinct episode confirms the hypothesis
that reductions in environmental pollution and other environmental factors lead to a substantial reduction in the risk
of congenital anomalies among the infant population (Currie, Greenstone, and Moretti 2011; Currie, Ray, and
Neidell 2011).
Our study makes several contributions to the conflict and human development literature. Prominent
research on the effects of conflict for early-life and long-term outcomes document a link that is most plausibly
explained by economic channels and changes in stress as well as mental and physical health of the adult population. 7
We demonstrate that an important plausible channel in the context of certain conflicts is one of an environmental
nature, consistent with a complementary literature that analyzes how environmental factors that occur during the
prenatal period have significant early life and long-term consequences (Almond and Currie 2011). The study also has
important implications for policy. Infant health outcomes such as congenital anomalies, low birth weight, and low
Apgar scores are important predictors of child health (McCormick 1985; Pollack and Divon 1992; Almond, Chay,
7

For instance, Camacho (2008), León (2012), and Quintana-Domeque and Rodenas (2014).

3

and Lee 2005) and long-term outcomes such as educational attainment, labor market outcomes, and adult health
(Currie and Hyson 1999; Behrman and Rosenzweig 2004; Black, Devereux, and Salvanes 2007). Given the welldocumented relationship between neonatal health and later life outcomes, there is reason to believe that our
substantial short-term effects may have longer-term consequences for this population. Moreover, previous research
has documented the effects of both maternal stress and environmental pollution on infant health (c.f. Currie et al
2009) and our evidence strongly suggests that at least one of these channels is responsible for the detrimental effects
on child health that we find here. Since the shutdown of the U.S. Navy in Vieques in 2001 formalized the start of a
negotiation between the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico and the U.S. for an ecological and economic restoration
strategy for the island, these findings have implications to expand the discussion to address child health and child
development dimensions.
The paper is organized as follows. Section II provides background on U.S. Navy Activities in Vieques and
the possible implications for health outcomes among the resident population. We follow with a description of the
data and the empirical methodology in Section III. We present the central empirical results of the paper and
robustness tests in Sections IV and V, respectively. In Section VI we explore potential mechanisms, followed by
documenting the effects of the end of naval practices on infant health outcomes in Section VII. The paper concludes
in Section VIII with a discussion of findings and their broad implications.

II. Background
II.A. U.S. Navy Activities in Vieques
Vieques is an islet off the eastern end of Puerto Rico with approximately 350 square kilometers (Figure 1).
In 2010, the island hosted 9,301 habitants. Close to two-thirds of the Vieques territory served as part of the U.S.
Navy Atlantic Fleet Weapons Training Area from 1941 to 2001. Military training and operations were conducted in
the eastern end of the island, while the western end was used to store munitions. The central part, the “civilian area”
(approximately 45 square kilometers), was designated to accommodate local civilian residents.
The eastern naval area hosted a range of military exercises including ship-to-shore gun fire, air-to-ground
bombing by naval aircraft, and Marine amphibious landing. Over the span of six decades, naval operations averaged
between 180 to 250 days each year (approximately 6,300 shelling days) with an annual estimate of 3-14 million
pounds of live ordnance detonated and dropped within the live impact area (189-662 million pounds in total)
(Porter, Barton, and Torres, 2011, p. 68). The live impact area encompasses an area of about 900 acres and is 12.5
kilometers away from residential population.
In addition to conventional weaponry, the composition of munitions used during bombardment exercises
posed risks to the health of the population and ecology of the island. The U.S. Agency for Toxic Substances and
Disease Registry (ATSDR) notes that naval training involved handling of Napalm and Agent Orange at various
stations within the eastern naval area (ATSDR 2001). Despite serious concerns of the radiological and toxicological
4

effects of depleted uranium once it vaporises in the air, over 250 rounds (88 lb) of ammunition tipped with depleted
uranium were fired in 1999 (Wargo 2009). According to a U.S. Congress report by the U.S. Department of Defense,
biological weapons were tested in Vieques but no further details of the operation are publicly disclosed (Porter,
Barton, & Torres, 2011).
The U.S. Navy reduced its operations in April 1999 following a widely publicized campaign when David
Sanes, a civilian employee, was killed during a bombing accident. No military training exercises took place on
Vieques for approximately thirteen months. In May 2000, the Navy resumed military training exercises but only with
“practice” bombs and other non-explosive ordnance for a brief period of less than fifty days (ATSDR 2003, p. 13).
All military training exercises at Vieques officially ceased on May 1, 2003, when the Navy turned its lands over to the
U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service.
Since various areas of the island remained contaminated by solid and hazardous waste resulting from
decades of military activity, in 2005 the U.S. Environment Protection Agency (EPA) declared these lands a
superfund site. This required the U.S. Navy to partner with the EPA, Fish and Wildlife Service and the Puerto Rico
Environmental Quality Board to determine and implement cleanup actions. The effects of decontamination practices
may pose further risks to Vieques residents and stress on pregnant women as these involve, among other things,
detonating defective ordnance in the air.8 Current projections indicate that work at the site will be completed in 2022
for the land areas and in 2029 for the underwater effort (EPA 2013).
II.B. Implications for Health Outcomes among the Resident Population
Most research efforts on the impacts of military activity on the health profile of the Vieques’ resident
population (“Viequenses”) have focused on documenting the unusually high cancer incidence rates in the
municipality. Reports produced by the Puerto Rico Department of Health have identified an upward trend since
1960 in cancer incidence rates in Vieques relative to the rest of Puerto Rico.9 The U.S. ATSDR has produced public
health assessment studies on drinking groundwater (released in 2001), ingesting or touching soil (2003), breathing air
(2003), and eating fish and shellfish (2003), and they all conclude that the resident population has not been exposed
to harmful levels of chemicals resulting from U.S. Navy training activities.10 A small number of independent research
studies have documented exposure of the population to higher levels of mercury, lead, copper, and nickel than those
clinically recommended by the World Health Organization (Ortiz-Roque & Lopez-Rivera, 2004; Massol-Deya, Perez,
Perez, Berrios, & Diaz, 2005). Although based on small samples, this literature is suggestive of an environmental link
that can help explain the Vieques population’s poor health profiles compared to those of residents of other
municipalities in Puerto Rico.

8 McCaffrey (2009) highlights this and several environmentally degrading practices by the U.S. Navy during the cleanup process, including burning excess
materials and waste and dumping toxic chemicals and substances in sensitive wetland areas.
9 See Zavala Zegarra (2000) for the period covering 1960-2004; and Figueroa, Suarez, De La Torre, Torres, and Perez (2009) for the period covering 1995-2004.
The latter documents that Vieques residents were 26 per cent more likely to develop cancer in 1995-1999, and 19 per cent in 2000-2004 compared to residents in
the rest of Puerto Rico.
10 The impartiality of ATSDR studies have been questioned by the academic community and journalists alike. For an analysis on the narrative and language used
by different U.S. departments and agencies on handling the Vieques file see Davis, Hayes-Conroy, and Jones (2007).

5

The effects of naval aircraft and bombing exercises on the psychological and psychosocial profile of Vieques
is an area that remains unexplored despite documented qualitative evidence that these activities disrupted regular life
activities. According to the 1999 Special Commission on Vieques, officials from the P.R. Department of Education
reported that “the vibrations caused by bombing practices shudder educational facilities, affecting the physical
structure of buildings and interrupting classes”. The Department concluded that it is evident that “this sort of
activity and the noise generated cause anxiety and concern among students and school staff in general” (Puerto Rico,
1999, p. 10). Even without definitive empirical evidence on the levels of physical and mental health among the
population of Vieques during the period of interest, the limited documentation available suggests that pregnant
women resident in the municipality may have been exposed to disruptive environmental factors that would have
affected fetal development.

III. Data and Methodology
III.A. Data Description and Sample Selection Criteria
Data on tonnage of ordnance used in these naval exercises is available from Discharge Monitoring Reports
submitted by the U.S. Department of the Navy’s Atlantic Fleet Weapons Training Facility (Roosevelt Roads Base,
Puerto Rico) to the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA). Information on ordnance used on a monthly
basis is available for the period May 1985 - July 1999.11
Additional data on ordnance used in the naval exercises is based on a study prepared for the Secretary of the
U.S. Navy in 1999, which was later reproduced in an ATSDR public health assessment of pollution via air pathways
(2003, pp. 96-97).12 The dataset contains two measures of live-fire range utilization: (1) total weight of ordnance that
the U.S. Navy and other parties used for all military training exercises, including air-to-ground, ship-to-ground, and
land-based activities; and (2) total weight of high explosives used at the live impact area. The measures are available
for the fiscal years 1983 to 1998 (October 1st - September 30th). From 1988 to 1999, between 1,359 and 2,667 tons of
ordnance were used in training exercises, of which between 124 and 469 tons were considered high explosives.
We combine these data with the universe of birth records in Puerto Rico between 1990 and 2000, available
from the Puerto Rico Statistics Institute. Specifically, we have data on approximately 695,722 births in the territory
of P.R. with information on birth outcomes such as sex, month of conception, exact date of birth, gestation period,
birth weight, APGAR scores (1-minute and 5-minute), and detection of congenital anomalies (by type), among other
characteristics. In addition, we have data on the mother’s municipality of residence at the time of birth, as well as a
number of characteristics of the mother (i.e., age and educational attainment).
We use the sample of births of mothers resident in P.R. at the time of birth (N = 656,374) for which the
date of birth and the period of gestation, as well as the municipality of residence, are known (N = 655,915, or 99.93
11 These reports were made available in August 2001 to Dr. Arturo Massol Deyá via a Freedom of Information Act (FOIA) request to the U.S. Environmental
Protection Agency. We thank Dr. Massol Deyá for sharing these reports with us.
12 The primary source of the data, U.S. Navy (1999), remains untraceable. We obtained the bombing data from charts reproduced in ATSDR (2003, pp. 96-97)
using Engauge Digitizer 4.1, a software designed for optical plot reading and digital conversion. For more information on Engauge Digitizer, visit
http://digitizer.sourceforge.net/

6

percent).13 After combining these data with the monthly tonnage of ordnance, we lose 37,008 observations (from
births in the year 2000) and an additional 39,317 observations with missing information on maternal age or
educational attainment. The remaining sample is composed of 579,590 births, with item non-response rates for our
various outcomes of interest in the 0.278-0.327 percent range. We first collapse the data to the municipality-bymonth level and weight the observations by the number of live births in the month, a process that yields identical
point estimates to the micro data. Our dataset is thus composed of 9,046 municipality-by-month cells, covering 117118 months per jurisdiction.
Summary statistics on the ordnance measures are reported in Table 1. Monthly ordnance used in the
exercises (in the complete 1985-1999 period) ranged from none (zero) to 658 tons; on average 129 tons of ordnance
were used. The average tonnage of ordnance during each child’s potential gestation period – our measure of interest
– is similar, as it is a 9-month moving average of the monthly measure. It ranges from 16.7 to 277 tons of ordnance,
and averages 130.6 tons per month. We also present density plots of the distributions for both measures (see Figure
2). The measure of monthly ordnance is quite skewed to the right, with most of the observations in the 0-2 tons per
month range (Panel A). In contrast, the measure of ordnance exposure during each child’s potential gestation period
is more symmetrically shaped and in the 0-3 tons per month range (Panel B).
Table 2 reports summary statistics form the birth records data. Regarding child health outcomes at birth,
one percent of live births are born with a congenital anomaly, and 1.3 percent of children have a low 5 minute Apgar
score (defined as less than 7 out of 10) (Table 2). Also, the percentage of infants born preterm is 12.6 percent, most
of them being moderately or late preterm (10.7 percent), but a substantial proportion (0.5 percent) are extremely
preterm. 10 percent of live births are considered low weight births. These health indicators are similar for infants in
Vieques than those in the rest of Puerto Rico: although the incidence of births with congenital anomalies is lower in
Vieques than in the rest of Puerto Rico (0.5 percent vs. 1.0 percent), the remaining health measures are similar across
these groups. These indicators are generally worse than those for the overall U.S. population during this time
period.14 The proportion of female live births is slightly higher in Vieques than in the rest of Puerto Rico (50.1
percent vs. 48.5 percent).
The average characteristics of mothers in Vieques are reasonably different from those in the rest of the
sample. 34.4 percent of mothers in Vieques have only a high school degree versus 29.1 percent in the rest of the
sample. Mother’s age is slightly younger (24.0 versus 24.7) and more of the mothers are giving birth as teenagers
(12.4 percent versus 9.5 percent).
Finally, we include municipality-level monthly employment and unemployment data estimates from the U.S.
Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS) Local Area Unemployment Statistics (LAUS) and annual crime statistics from the
Puerto Rico Police Department as further local controls.

Among the sample of births with known date of birth and gestation period (N = 655,916), there is only one (1) observation for which we do not have
information on the mother’s municipality of residence.
14 See National Center for Health Statistics, National Vital Statistics System. http://www.childstats.gov/americaschildren/health1.asp
13

7

III.B. Empirical Methodology
Our empirical strategy consists of comparing children having experienced distinct levels of exposure to
these exercises within the municipality of Vieques over time, using the health outcomes of newborns in other
municipalities to control for high frequency period-specific effects. This is essentially a differences-in-differences
design with a continuous treatment.
Specifically, we estimate linear models of the form:
yijmt = θ(Ordnancemt × Viequesj) + Xijmtβ + αj + γmt + εijmt,

(1)

where yijmt is the birth outcome for child i, born to mother residing in municipality j, conceived in the month m of
year t; Ordnancemt is the mean level of ordnance in the 9-month period between conception and birth (assuming a
40-week pregnancy); Viequesj is an indicator variable for mother’s residence in Vieques; αj are municipality fixed
effects; γmt are month-by-year fixed effects; and εijmt, is the error term. The measure of ordnance encompasses the
potential 9-month period instead of the actual gestation period, as ordnance levels can affect the duration of
gestation potentially causing selection bias in our estimates. Each specification includes controls for the maternal
characteristics shown above (in Section III.A). We also report the magnitude of the predicted relationship given a
one standard deviation increase in the explanatory variable of interest and each outcomes variable (in proportional
terms) by taking the product of the relevant coefficient estimate and the standard deviation of the ordnance volume
measure.
Computing standard errors and making inferences is complicated in cases where there is only one
treatment/intervention unit. The primary concern when using grouped data in differences in differences analysis is
accounting for possible serial correlation (Bertrand, Duflo, and Mullainathan 2004). Although we use data from 77
municipalities, we cannot use either (i) a standard cluster robust variance estimator (CRVE) or (ii) inference based on
the wild cluster bootstrap (Cameron, Gelbach, and Miller 2008) because the relevant degrees of freedom are the
number of treatment units – which in this case is a single municipality (Imbens and Kolesar 2012; MacKinnon and
Webb 2016). An additional concern is that ignoring spatial correlations that do not vanish between municipalities
may lead to bias in standard errors (Barrios et al 2012).
As an alternative, we employ a number of different approaches for inference. First, we rely on the long time
dimension of the data (118 months) to conduct inference based on asymptotics as the time dimension becomes
large. Specifically, we estimate standard errors using a nonparametric covariance matrix estimator that produces
standard errors that are robust to general forms of cross-sectional (spatial) and temporal dependence when the time
dimension becomes large (Driscoll and Kraay 1998) (henceforth DK). Second, following the literature on
randomization inference (Fisher 1925; Neyman 1990), we report the percentile rank of the coefficient from a
permutation exercise where we estimate a placebo effect of the relationship for every municipality. Finally, as a

8

robustness check we report heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors based on OLS estimates from models using
lagged dependent variables to account for autocorrelation.

IV. Results
The first column of Table 3 reports the effects of bombing during the pregnancy period on being born with
a congenital anomaly. We find a positive and significant effect of the average amount of ordnance in tons during the
pregnancy period on the probability of being born with a congenital anomaly. We report the coefficient as well as the
change in the probability of being born in low birth weight associated with a one standard deviation change in the
bombing ordnance measure. Expressed in this fashion, a one standard deviation change in bombing ordnance is
associated with a 3.4 per thousand point increase in the incidence of congenital anomalies, a 34 percent increase
relative to the baseline mean. The relationship is significant at 10 percent confidence, with a permutation percentile
rank of eight out of 77 (approximate p-value = 0.104). The magnitude of this impact is consistent with existing
evidence on the consequences of reductions in environmental pollution from Superfund site clean-ups on
neighbouring populations in the United States (Currie, Greenstone, and Moretti 2011).
Recent economic research has documented the relevance of Apgar scores in predicting short-term child
health (Almond, Chay and Lee, 2005). We find a positive and significant relationship between bombing ordnance
and the probability of having a low Apgar score. A one standard deviation change in ordnance increases the
probability of having a low Apgar score by 4.8 per thousand (37.9 percent). The relationship is significant at 10
percent confidence, with a permutation percentile rank of five out of 77 (approximate p-value = 0.065). Once again
there appears to be a strong and economically meaningful relationship between bombing levels and child health.
The third and fourth columns of Table 3 report results for premature birth measured as less than 37 weeks
and then specifically at extremely (less than 28 weeks) preterm births separately. Although there is no significant
relationship between bombing ordnance and premature birth in overall terms, we measure a relatively precise
relationship with extremely preterm births. Overall, a one standard deviation change in ordnance leads to 3.7 per
thousand point increase in extreme prematurity; the effect is over three quarters of the baseline rate (70.3 percent).
The relationship is significant at the 10 percent significance level, with a permutation percentile rank of one out of 77
(approximate p-value = 0.013). Finally, we examine the relationship between bombing ordnance and the probability
of being low birth weight (less than 2500g). We find no significant relationship in this case, consistent with recent
literature on the relationship between polluted sites clean-ups (Currie, Greenstone, and Moretti 2011).
We next explore whether the relationship between bombing ordnance and child health outcomes differs for
different trimesters of the pregnancy. Previous literature has documented that fetal exposures during different
trimesters can have differing effects on child health. For example, Almond and Mazumder (2011) find that fasting
during pregnancy for Muslims observing Ramadan, has negative effects on child health and that these effects are
larger in the first and second trimester than the third. In our context, however, the mothers are exposed to bombing
during the entire pregnancy, not just one trimester, but the amount of ordnance they are exposed to potentially
9

differs across trimesters. In order to explore the relationship by trimester we include three separate measures of
bombing ordnance in the regression models representing the exposure for the mother in each of the trimesters. The
results are reported in Table 4.
The relationship between bombing ordnance and congenital anomalies appears to be strongest and
statistically significant (at 95 percent confidence) in the second and third trimester, with robust permutation
percentile rank approximate p-values of 0.052 and 0.026, respectively. The combined effect is positive and the
proportional effects remain large: the marginal effect of a one standard deviation change in tons per month is a 7.6
per thousand point increase in the incidence of congenital anomalies, a 77.2 percent increase relative to the baseline
mean. For Apgar scores and premature births, the relationship is strongest for the first and second trimester. In both
cases the combined effect is positive and the proportional effects remain large. The marginal effects represent a 7.6
per thousand point increase in the incidence of low Apgar scores, a 59.6 percent increase relative to the baseline
mean, and a 1.4 percentage point – 11.2 percent – increase in the incidence of premature births.
Finally, for the incidence of extremely premature births we find a relationship of similar magnitude as the
overall effects reported above. A one standard deviation change in ordnance leads to 5.5 per thousand point increase
in extreme prematurity. Although the relationship is insignificant at conventional confidence levels based on the DK
standard errors, we have sufficient precision in the first and third trimesters (permutation percentile rank
approximate p-values are 0.013 and 0.052, respectively).
In summary, the measured impacts are consistent with existing evidence on the consequences of comparable
changes in environmental pollution on neighbouring populations in the United States ((Currie, Greenstone, and
Moretti 2011; Currie and Schwandt 2014) as well as with effects of terrorist attacks on infant health (QuintanaDomeque and Rodenas 2014; Camacho, 2008).

V. Robustness Tests
V.A. Robustness to Sample Selection Concerns
Since the characteristics of mothers in Vieques are reasonably different from those in the rest of the sample.
it is plausible that the estimated effects could be partially driven by sample selection. For instance, mothers with
children with a worse underlying health status may be more likely to reside in Vieques during periods of more
military activity, causing an upward bias in our estimates of interest. On the contrary, if bombing activity were to
cause miscarriages or stillbirths, and pregnancies that terminated in these were more likely to be of children with
worse underlying health conditions, this would cause our estimates to be biased downwards.
In order to evaluate these concerns, we take various steps to examine whether there is evidence of selection
on observable characteristics. First, we aggregate the data at the municipality-month-year level to estimate a model of
the relationship between the number of live births that were conceived in a given period in Vieques (relative to other
municipalities in Puerto Rico) as a function of the amount of ordnance:
10

ln(Njmt) = θB(Ordnancemt × Viequesj) + αj + γmt + εijmt,

(2)

where Njmt captures the count of births to mothers resident in municipality j conceiving children in the m,t monthyear period. Second, we estimate models analogous to equation (1) using the observable maternal characteristics as
dependent variables. Specifically, we estimate linear models of the form:
xijmt = θ(Ordnancemt × Viequesj) + αj + γmt + εijmt,

(3)

where xijmt is the maternal characteristic for mother i residing in municipality j, who conceived a child in month m of
year t; and the other variables are defined as above. We also report analogous estimates of a model using the child’s
sex as the dependent variable. Finally, we re-estimate the linear models on child health outcomes (equation 1)
excluding these maternal controls to assess their sensitivity to these control variables.
Appendix Table A1 reports estimates of equation (2). Again, we report the coefficient as well as the change
associated with a one standard deviation change in the bombing ordnance measure. We find a small, negative, and
statistically insignificant relationship between bombing during the pregnancy period and the number of births (in
levels). The estimate implies that a one standard deviation increase in the average amount of ordnance leads to 0.12
(0.2 percent) fewer births, a minuscule decrease in live births. Similar results hold when we estimate the relationship
in logs; the estimate implies that a one standard deviation increase in the average amount of ordnance leads to no
fewer births. Panel B shows estimates based on models that allow for trimester-specific effects. Estimates from these
lead to qualitatively similar results: a small and statistically insignificant relationship. The estimated relationship based
on the model of live birth counts in levels implies that a one standard deviation increase in ordnance leads to 0.70
(1.1 percent) fewer births relative to the sample mean, whereas the model in logs implies a 1 percent increase in live
births, both statistically insignificant at conventional confidence levels.
Panel A of Table 5 reports results for estimates of equation (3). Our results suggest that those children born
are more likely to be boys. Our estimates imply that a one standard deviation increase in bombing ordnance is
correlated with a 3.8 percentage point increase in the probability that the child is a boy.15 The second and third
columns report results for the educational attainment of mothers giving birth, broken down by high school
graduates, and some/complete higher education studies (less than high school is the reference group). There is a
positive and significant relationship between bombing ordnance and mothers’ educational attainment. A one standard
deviation increase in ordnance is correlated with a modest but significant 2.4 percentage point decrease in the
proportion of mothers who are high school graduates. In contrast we find a 3.8 percentage point increase in the
probability the mother has commenced or completed some higher education. Since the relationship between
maternal educational attainment and their children’s health status at birth is positive, this is indicative of positive
selection based on educational attainment.

15 This goes against our prior based on evidence that suggests that male foetuses are more vulnerable to detrimental influences in utero and therefore more likely
to terminate prior to term (Kraemer 2000; Eriksson et al. 2010; Almond and Mazumder 2011; Dinkelman 2013).

11

Columns 4 through 6 of Table 5 report results on the differential correlation of average ordnance in Vieques
with mothers’ age. There is, in general, no relationship between bombing ordnance and mothers’ age. However, this
relationship with maternal age is non-monotonic, as the proportion of births to teenage mothers or to mothers 40
years and older (in Vieques) is decreasing in the average ordnance level. The point estimates imply that a one
standard deviation increase in ordnance leads to a 2.3 percentage point decrease in the probability of a teenage birth,
and a 0.4 percentage point decrease in the probability of birth to a mother 40 years and older. Again, since the
relationship between teenage and older pregnancies and children’s health status at birth is negative, these correlations
are indicative of positive selection based on maternal age. We find very similar patterns for female births, maternal
educational attainment levels, and mothers’ age based on models that allow the relationship between bombing
ordnance and child health outcomes to differ for different trimesters of the pregnancy (reported in Panel B of Table
5). In any case, given the small degree of correlation between these observable characteristics and congenital
anomalies, the degree of selection on observables explains a very minor part of the relationship between the volume
of ordnance and the risk of congenital anomalies. Estimates of the potential bias vary between reductions in the
incidence of congenital anomalies by 0.2 per thousand to increases of 0.3 per thousand, an order of magnitude
smaller than our preferred estimates of the overall effect.
The estimates of the child health outcomes effects (equation 1) excluding maternal characteristics controls
are reported in Table 6. We report estimates of the effects when we (i) exclude maternal controls (columns 1,4,7), (ii)
exclude maternal schooling attainment controls (column 2,5,8), and (iii) exclude all maternal controls (column 3,6,9).
The estimates are remarkably stable. For instance, the model on congenital anomalies without controls implies that
the effect of a one standard deviation change in average ordnance leads to a 3.2 per thousand point increase in the
incidence risk, an estimated effect that is 0.2 per thousand points smaller in magnitude. None of these estimates are
statistically distinguishable from one another. Estimates for all other health outcomes at birth show a qualitatively
similar pattern of a statistically indistinguishable downward bias when excluding controls.16

V.B. Robustness to Inference Approach
Finally, as a robustness check we report heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors based on OLS estimates
from models using lagged dependent variables to account for autocorrelation; see Appendix Table A2. OLS
estimates of the effects on the incidence using lagged dependent variables to account for autocorrelation are of
similar magnitude, independently of the lag structure used (one to three lags of the dependent variables). For
estimates of congenital anomaly effects, the point estimates from the overall effects regressions imply estimates in
the 3.3 to 3.5 per thousand range but are insignificant at conventional confidence levels (Panel A, columns 1-3). The
estimates for low Apgar scores (columns 4-6) and extremely preterm births (columns 7-9) are quite stable and
statistically significant at 90 percent confidence. Estimates based on models allowing for trimester-specific effects are

16 As a further test of the effects of the bombing on the local environment (and potentially broader than health at birth) we investigate whether there is a
relationship between yearly average ordinance and yearly crime statistics by municipality. We find no significant relationship between ordinance levels and
reported crime.

12

also quantitatively similar, and have similar levels of precision as those discussed above; these are reported in Panel B
of the table. These various robustness checks imply that we find large and robust effects of bombing ordnance on a
variety of infant health outcomes.

VI. Discussion of Potential Mechanisms
There are a number of possible mechanisms by which these bombings could have affected mothers during
pregnancy: the bombings could disrupt economic activity affecting households’ access to or capacity to invest in
human capital. They could cause maternal stress, fear, and anxiety, which can have negative effects on physical and
mental health, and in turn have indirect negative effects on infant health outcomes at birth. The bombings could
have a negative effect on the environment (air, soil and water) thereby affecting maternal and child health. In this
section, we present and discuss the available evidence regarding these potential channels.
Environmental Pollution
Increases in solid and hazardous waste, resulting in potential contamination of soil, water, and/or air may
also have affected infant health. Again, previous literature has shown a direct link between air pollution and infant
health (Chay & Greenstone, 2003; Currie, Neidell, & Schmieder, 2009). To the extent that air or water pollution
directly increases and dissipates with the level of bombing, it would be consistent with the patterns between
bombing levels and low birth rates shown in Figure 3. To investigate the potential role of environmental
contamination, we examine water pollution levels. The Discharge Monitoring Reports contain information regarding
tests of water quality in the training area’s Inner Range, the waters surrounding the live impact area. These reports
contain information on tests to measure the levels of inorganic chemicals in the water (arsenic, cyanide, lead, among
others) in addition to other characteristics of the waters in the range. We use the information available on a quarterly
basis during the same period (May 1985 - July 1999). Appendix Table A3 reports the measures of water pollution
available, summary statistics on these measures, as well as the maximum containment level or limit approved by the
Environmental Protection Agency. For measures of dissolved oxygen, acidity, alkalinity and nitrogen, while average
levels are within the range deemed safe, the maximum level reported exceeds the range. For many of the inorganic
chemicals tested, average levels reported exceed the maximum level for safety.
Given that arsenic exposure has been linked to increased frequency of spontaneous abortions and congenital
malformations (Nordstrom et al. 1979; Hopenhayn-Rich et al. 1999), we document the extent to which there is a
relationship between the level of bombing activity and arsenic in the waters surrounding the live impact area.
Specifically, we estimate time series models to measure the relationship between naval bombing activity and the
incidence that maximum arsenic levels surrounding the live impact area are above permitted EPA limits, of the
following linear form:
1(yt > yEPA) = θB(Ordnancet) + εt,

(4)

13

where yt captures the maximum arsenic level measured in quarter t. We allow for leads and lags of the ordnance
volume measure to evaluate the degree of correlation of arsenic pollution based on bombing activity in previous time
periods. Standard errors are corrected for heteroskedasticity.
The estimates of the contemporaneous (same quarter) correlation are reported in Table 7. The estimates are
remarkably stable. For instance, the model with the simple correlation implies that the effect of a one standard
deviation change in average ordnance levels leads to a 14 percentage point increase in this incidence risk, an
estimated effect that is 51.2 percent above the mean incidence risk. Estimates that allow for lags and leads of
ordnance show a quantitatively similar pattern. This evidence is suggestive of a link between water pollution resulting
from the bombing activity and infant health outcomes. However, a number of other chemicals were also present
(although not correlated with bombing activity), and thus it is difficult to assess the role of arsenic in the etiology of
these effects.

Economic Downturns and Health/Other Infrastructure
Although given our research context, we can rule out the destruction of physical capital as a determinant of
these adverse infant health consequences (e.g., Abadie and Gardeazabal 2003), another plausible pathway is through
disruption of economic activity affecting households’ access to or capacity to invest in human capital (Leon 2012).
To evaluate this possibility, we examine the relationship between naval bombing exercises and the municipal
unemployment rate, using municipality-level monthly unemployment data estimates from the U.S. Bureau of Labor
Statistics (BLS) Local Area Unemployment Statistics (LAUS). We estimate models analogous to equation (3)
excluding maternal controls to predict unemployment rates as a function of the ordnance measure. Specifically, we
estimate models for the unemployment rate in each month starting 3 months preceding conception until 16 months
following conception.
The estimates are reported in Appendix Table A4. If anything, the evidence is consistent with the naval
activities leading to a short-term improvement in local economic conditions. A one standard deviation increase in
bombing activity predicts reductions in the unemployment rate in Vieques that range between 1.1 percentage points
during the month preceding conception up to 2.8 percentage points in the second month following conception.
Because these positive short-term fluctuations could lead to worse infant health outcomes attributable both
to selection (changes in the type of mothers who conceive based on local economic conditions) and to
improvements in health behaviors during recessions (Dehejia and Lleras-Muney 2004), we re-estimate the linear
models on child health outcomes (equation 1) including summary measures of average unemployment rates during
the 9-month potential pregnancy period as covariates (in levels or in logs) to assess their sensitivity to these control
variables. In some specifications, we also control for the average unemployment rate in the 9-month period
preceding conception, for purposes of robustness.

14

The estimates are reported in Appendix Table A5. In spite of there being a relationship between local
economic conditions and our measures of infant health – consistent with previous literature – our estimates are
robust to specifications that control for maternal characteristics and these local economic conditions. This evidence
is quite suggestive that in our context the link between bombing activity and infant health is not driven by a
pernicious effect in economic activity.

Maternal Stress
It is feasible that the bombings increased stress levels or sleep deprivation among pregnant women. The
medical literature indicates that prenatal stress increases levels of corticotrophin releasing hormone, which regulates
the duration of pregnancy and fetal maturation. Increases in prenatal stress levels have been associated with a
decrease in infant birth weight, an increased likelihood of LBW, and a decrease in gestational age at birth (Wadhwa,
Sandman, Porto, Dunkel-Schetter, & Garite, 1993). Studies have also suggested that stress induced during the first
trimester tend to have more significant effects on birth weight and preterm birth (Zhu, Tao, Hao, Sun, & Jiang,
2010). More recently, literature looking at terrorist bombings and mental health shows a strong relationship between
the two (Dustmann & Fasani, 2014). Therefore, it is certainly feasible that increased stress due to the bombings had
negative effects on infant health in Vieques.

VII. End of Naval Practices and Infant Health
As mentioned above, the U.S. Navy reduced its operations in April 1999 and stopped practices in July 2000
(ATSDR, 2003, p. 13). We exploit this episode to examine whether the sudden and stark reduction in bombing
activity had any short-term consequences for infants’ health outcomes. Using data on infant health outcomes for the
period 1990-2003, we examine infant health outcomes for cohorts conceived following the end of naval practices to
those conceived in the preceding period within the municipality.
Our empirical strategy to study this consists of a differences-in-differences design: comparing children who
were in utero not exposed to these exercises within the municipality of Vieques (conceived in August 2000 onwards)
to those in utero at some point during naval exercises, using the health outcomes of newborns in other municipalities
to control for period-specific effects. We estimate linear models of the form:
yijmt = θ(Postmt × Viequesj) + Xijmtβ + αj + γmt + εijmt,

(5)

where Postmt is the period following the end of naval practices in the municipality (July 2000 onwards).
The first column of Table 8 reports the effects of the end of bombing during the pregnancy period on the
risk of birth with congenital anomalies. We find a large and significant effect: the sudden change in bombing
practices is associated with a 7.5 per thousand decrease in the incidence of congenital anomalies, a 72 percent
reduction relative to the baseline mean. The magnitude of this impact is consistent with the evidence above, as the
15

end of practices led to a reduction in monthly ordnance of approximately 129 tons (the mean level of ordnance in
the preceding period). In contrast, we do not find significant evidence that this episode led to significant
improvements in Apgar scores or gestation periods (see columns 2-5). In sum, the evidence from this distinct
episode confirms the hypothesis that reductions in environmental pollution and other environmental factors lead to
a substantial reduction in the risk of congenital anomalies among the infant population and provides some additional
comfort that our estimates of the effects of the bombing are causal.

VIII. Conclusion
We identify the relationship between frequent explosions and high-ordnance military exercises and child
health at birth. Our results suggest that there is a negative effect of these exercises on live births, and their health
outcomes at birth. Because we can rule out that these military exercises have short-term perverse economic effects,
our analysis helps inform the literature regarding why stress and environmental factors may be important channels
via which conflict affects human development.
While it is challenging to make exact comparisons with other bombing sites (active war zones), it is perhaps
interesting to compare the magnitude of ordinance with those in war zones studied in the literature. Vieques
experienced between 100,000 and 300,000 tons of ordinance versus approximately 454,000 in the Korean war and
over 6 million in Vietnam (Miguel and Roland, 2011). There are, to our knowledge, few comparable estimates of the
effects of bombing on health outcomes at birth. However, our estimates on APGAR scores and pre-term birth are
consistent although larger than estimates of the effects of terrorism on health at birth (5/1000 increase in (extreme)
prematurity versus 1/1000 in Quintana-Domeque and Rodenas, 2014) and not inconsistent with estimates of conflict
on child height (Bundervoet, Verwierp and Akresh, 2009). While our estimates can been interpreted as the direct
health effects of the bombing, other estimates are presumably some combination of direct effects of conflict on
health and indirect effects through economic channels.
While previous literature looking at the longer-term effects of war on economic outcomes has found small
economic impacts (c.f. Miguel and Roland, 2011), there is reason to suspect that in this case there may be longer
lasting effects given the areas in which we find effects. Previous health economic research has documented a number
of long term consequences related to being born in poor health including long term effects on education, welfare
receipt, earnings and adult health (Black, Devereux, & Salvanes, 2007; Oreopoulos, Stabile, Roos, & Walld, 2008).
One study has even documented long-term consequences of fetal health on adults in Puerto Rico (Sotomayor, 2013).
Therefore there is reason to believe that our findings of short-term effects on infant health in this context may have
longer-term effects on educational attainment, labor force attachment, and adult health. Further study is required to
better understand the mechanisms through which the bombings affected infant health and to inform public policy.

16

References
Al-Hadithi, T., J. K. Al-Diwan, A. M. Saleh, and N. P. Shabila (2012). Birth defects in Iraq and the plausibility of
environmental exposure: A review. Conflict and Health, 6(3), 1-7.
Al-Sabbak, M., Sadik Ali, S., Savabi, O., Savabi, G., Dastgiri, S., & Savabieasfahani, M. (2012). Metal Contamination
and the Epidemic of Congenital Birth Defects in Iraqi Cities. Bulletin of Environmental Contamination and
Toxicology, 89(5), 937–944. http://doi.org/10.1007/s00128-012-0817-2
Alderman, H., Hoddinott, J., and Kinsey, B. (2006). Long Term Consequences of Early Childhood Malnutrition.
Oxford Economic Papers, 58(3), 450–74.
Almond, D., & Currie, J. (2011). Killing Me Softly: The Fetal Origins Hypothesis. The Journal of Economic Perspectives,
25(3), 153-172.
Almond, D., Chay, K. Y., & Lee, D. S. (2005). The Costs of Low Birth Weight. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 120(3),
1031-1083.
ATSDR. (2001). Public Health Assessment: Drinking Water Supplies and Groundwater Pathway Evaluation, Isla de Vieques
Bombing Range, Vieques, Puerto Rico. Atlanta: Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry. Retrieved
Aug. 2014, from http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/HAC/PHA/reports/isladevieques_10162001pr/printview.html
ATSDR. (2003). Public Health Assessment: Air Pathway Evaluation, Isla de Vieques Bombing Range, Vieques, Puerto Rico.
Atlanta: Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry.
Barker, D. J. (1990). The Fetal and Infant Origins of Adult Disease. BMJ, 301(6761), 1111.
Barrios, T. Diamond, R., Imbens, G. W., & Kolesár, M. (2012). Clustering, Spatial Correlations, and Randomization
Inference. Journal of the American Statistical Association, 107(498), 578-91.
Behrman, J., & Rosenzweig, M. (2004). Returns to Birthweight. Review of Economics and Statistics, 86(2), 586-601.
Bertrand, M., Duflo, E., & Mullainathan, S. (2004). How Much Should We Trust Differences-in-Differences
Estimates? Quarterly Journal of Economics, 119(1), 249-75.
Beydoun, H., and Saftlas, A. (2008). Physical and Mental Health Outcomes of Prenatal Maternal Stress in Human
and Animal Studies: A Review of Recent Evidence. Paediatric and Perinatal Epidemiology 22(5), 438–466.
Black, S., Devereux, P., & Salvanes, K. (2007). From the Cradle to the Labor Market? The Effect of Birth Weight on
Adult Outcomes. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 122(1), 409-439.
Bundervoet, T., Verwimp, P., & Akresh, R.(2009). Health and Civil War in Rural Burundi. Journal of Human Resources,
44(2), 536-63.
Camacho, A. (2008, May). Stress and Birth Weight: Evidence from Terrorist Attacks. The American Economic Review,
98(2), 511-515.
Cameron, C. Gelbach, J., & Miller, D. (2008). Bootstrap-Based Improvements for Inference with Clustered Errors.
Review of Economics and Statistics, 90(3), 414-27.
Carmichael, S. L., Shaw, G. M., Yang, W., Abrams, B., & Lammer, E. J. (2007). Maternal Stressful Life Events and
Risks of Birth Defects. Epidemiology (Cambridge, Mass.), 18(3), 356–361.
http://doi.org/10.1097/01.ede.0000259986.85239.87
Carmichael, S. L., Ma, C., Tinker, S., Rasmussen, S. A., Shaw, G. M., & the National Birth Defects Prevention Study.
(2014). Maternal stressors and social support as risks for delivering babies with structural birth defects.
Paediatric and Perinatal Epidemiology, 28(4), 338–344. http://doi.org/10.1111/ppe.12123
17

Chay, K., & Greenstone, M. (2003). The Impact of Air Pollution on Infant Mortality: Evidence from Geographic
Variation in Pollution Shocks Induced by a Recession. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 118(3), 1121-1167.
Currie, J., Greenstone, M., & Moretti, E. (2011). Superfund Cleanups and Infant Health. American Economic Review
Papers and Proceedings, 101(3), 435-41.
Currie, J., & Hyson, R. (1999). Is the Impact of Health Shocks Cushioned by Socioeconomic Status? The Case of
Low Birth Weight. American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings, 89(2), 245-250.
Currie, J., Neidell, M., & Schmieder, J. F. (2009). Air Pollution and Infant Health: Lessons from New Jersey. Journal
of Health Economics, 28, 688-703.
Currie, J., Ray, S. H., & Neidell, M. (2011). Quasi-Experimental Studies Suggest That Lowering Air Pollution Levels
Benefit Infants' And Children's Health. Health Affairs,30(12), 2391-99.
Currie, J., & Schwandt, H. (2014). The 9/11 Dust Cloud and Pregnancy Outcomes: A Reconsideration. NBER
Working Paper #20368.
Davis, J. S., Hayes-Conroy, J.S., & Jones, V.M. (2007). Military Pollution and Natural Purity: Seeing Nature and
Knowing Contamination in Vieques, Puerto Rico. GeoJournal, 69(3).
de Weerrth, C., & Buitelaar, J. (2005). Physiological Stress Recreatiity in Human Pregnancy. A Review." Neuroscience
and Behavioral Review, 29:295-312.
Dehejia, R., & Lleras-Muney, A. (2004). Booms, Busts, and Babies' Health. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 119, 10911130.
Driscoll, J. C., & Kraay, A. C. (1998). Consistent Covariance Matrix Estimation with Spatially Dependent Panel Data.
Review of Economics and Statistics, 80(4), 549-60.
Dustmann, C., and F. Fasani (2014). The Effect of Local Area Crime on Mental Health. Economic Journal,
forthcoming.
EPA. (2013). May 2013 Vieques Activities Update. Environmental Protection Agency. Retrieved Aug. 2014, from
http://www.epa.gov/region2/vieques/may2013viequesupdate_.pdf
Figueroa, N., Suarez, E., De La Torre, T., Torres, M., & Perez, J. (2009). Incidencia y Mortalidad de Cancer en Vieques,
1990-2004. San Juan: Registro Central de Cancer de Puerto Rico.
Fisher, R. A. (1925). The Design of Experiments (1st ed.) London: Oliver & Boyd.
Galdo, J. (2013). Long-Run Labor-Market Impacts of Early-Life Exposure to Civil War: Evidence from the Shining
Path in Perú. Economic Development and Cultural Change, 61(4), 789-823.
Hadi, A. S. (1992). Identifying Multiple Outliers in Multivariate Data. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society, Series B 54,
761-771.
Hadi, A. S. (1994). A Modification of a Method for the Detection of Outliers in Multivariate Samples. Journal of the
Royal Statistical Society, Series B 56, 393–396.
Hansen, D., Lou, H.C., and Olsen, J. (2000). Serious life events and congenital malformations: a national study with
complete follow-up. The Lancet, 356(9233), 875-880.
Hopenhayn-Rich, C., Hertz-Picciotto, I., Browning, S., Ferreccio, C., Peralta, C. (1999). Reproductive and
developmental effects associated with chronic arsenic exposure. In Chappel, W.R., Abernathy, C. O., &
Calderon, R. L. (eds.), Arsenic Exposure and Health Effects: Proceedings of the Third International Conference on Arsenic
Exposure and Health Effects, San Diego, California, 12-15 July, 1998, 115-64.
18

Imbens, G., & Kolesár, M. (2012). Robust Standard Errors in Small Samples: Some Practical Advice. NBER
Working Paper No. 18478.
Kramer, M. S. (1987). Determinants of Low Birth Weight: Methodological Assessment and Meta-Analysis. Bulletin of
the World Health Organization, 65(5), 663-737.
León, G. (2012). Civil conflict and Human Capital Accumulation: Long Term Consequences of Political Violence in
Perú. Journal of Human Resources, 47(4), 991-1023.
Mansour, H., & Rees, D. I. (2012, Sept.). Armed Conflict and Birth Weight: Evidence from the al-Aqsa Infitada.
Journal of Development Economics, 99(1), 190-199.
Massol-Deya, A., Perez, D., Perez, E., Berrios, M., & Diaz, E. (2005). Trace Elements Analysis in Forage Samples
from a U.S. Navy Bombing Range (Vieques, Puerto Rico). International Journal of Environmental Research and
Public Health, 2(2), 263-266.
MacKinnon, J. G., & Webb, M. D. (2016). Wild Bootstrap Inference for Wildly Different Cluster Sizes. Journal of
Applied Econometrics, forthcoming.
McCaffrey, K. (2009, Sept-Oct). Fish, Wildlife, and Bombs: The Struggle to Clean Up Vieques. NACLA Report, 3541.
McCormick, M. C. (1985). The Contribution of Low Birth Weight to Infant Mortality and Childhood Morbidity. New
England Journal of Medicine, 2(2), 263-266.
Miguel, E., Roland, G. (2011). The Long-Run Impact of Bombing Vietnam. Journal of Development Economics 96, 1-15.
Neyman, J. (1990). On the Application of Probability Theory to Agricultural Experiments: Essay on Principles-Section 9. Statistical Science, 5(4), 465-80.
Nordstrom, S., Beckman, L., & Nordenson, I. (1979). Occupational and environmental risks in and around a
smelter in northern Sweden. Hereditas, 90, 291-6.
Oreopoulos, P., Stabile, M., Roos, L., & Walld, R. (2008). The Short, Medium, and Long Term Effects of Poor
Infant Health. Journal of Human Resources, 43(1), 88-138.
Ortiz-Roque, C., & Lopez-Rivera, Y. (2004). Mercury Contamination in Reproductive Age Women in a Caribbean
Island: Vieques. Journal of Epidemiology and Community Health (1979-), 58(9), 756-757.
Pollack, R., & Divon, M. (1992). Intrauterine Growth Retardation: Definition, Classification, and Etiology. Clinical
Obstetrics and Gynecology, 35(1), 99-107.
Porter, J. W., Barton, J. V., & Torres, C. (2011). Ecological, Radiological, and Toxicological Effects of Naval
Bombardment on the Coral Reefs of Isla de Vieques, Puerto Rico. In G. E. Machlis, T. Hanson, Z. Špirić, &
J. E. McKendry, Warfare Ecology: A New Synthesis for Peace and Security: Proceedings of the NATO Advanced Study
Institute / Advanced Research Workshop (pp. 65-122). Dordretch: Springer Netherlands.
Puerto Rico. (1999). Informe de la Comisión Especial de Vieques al Gobernador de Puerto Rico, Hon. Pedro Rosselló. San Juan.
Quintana-Domeque, C., & Rodenas, P. (2014). “Fear in the Womb": The Effects of Terrorism on Birth Outcomes
in Spain. Working Paper.
Sotomayor, O. (2013). Fetal and Infant Origins of Diabetes and Ill Health: Evidence from Puerto Rico’s 1928 and
1932 Hurricanes. Economics and Human Biology, 11(3), 281-293.
U.S. Navy. (1999). The National Security Need for Vieques: A study prepared for The Secretary of the Navy.

19

Wadhwa, P. D., Sandman, C. A., Porto, M., Dunkel-Schetter, C., & Garite, T. (1993, October). The Association
between Prenatal Stress and Infant Birth Weight and Gestational Age at Birth: A Prospective Investigation.
American Journal of Obstetrics & Gynecology, 169(4), 858-65.
Wargo, J. (2009). Green Intelligence: Creating Environments that Protect Human Health. New Haven: Yale University Press.
Zavala Zegarra, D. (2000). Incidencia de Cancer en Vieques. San Juan: Registro Central de Cancer de Puerto Rico.
Zhu, P., Tao, F., Hao, J., Sun, Y., & Jiang, X. (2010, July). Prenatal Life Events Stress: Implications for Preterm Birth
and Infant Birthweight. American Journal of Obstetrics & Gynecology, 203(1), 1-8.

20

Figure 1: Map of Puerto Rico and Vieques with Former Division of Residential and Military Zones

Notes: Map is for illustrative purposes only. Map may not be drawn to scale.

21

Figure 2: Ordnance Used During Naval Exercises, 1985-1999
Panel A: Volume of Ordnance (Monthly)

0

.1

Density
.2

.3

.4

Ordnance (monthly)

0

2

4
Tons per Month

6

8

kernel = epanechnikov, bandwidth = 0.4335

Panel B: Volume of Ordnance (9-Month Period)

0

Density
.5

1

Ordnance (9-month potential gestation)

0

1

2

3

Tons per Month
kernel = epanechnikov, bandwidth = 0.1146

22

Table 1: Volume of Ordnance – Summary Statistics, 1985-1999

Notes: Reported are the sample mean, standard deviation, minimum and maximum of each variable; based on aggregated data at the
month level for the period 1985-1999.

23

Table 2: Descriptive Statistics, Puerto Rico Natality Files, 1990-2000

Notes: Reported are the sample mean and standard deviation of each variable; based on aggregated data at the municipality-by-month
level and weighted by the number of live births in the month. The dataset is composed of 9,046 municipality-by-month cells.

24

Table 3: Bombing Activity and Health Outcomes at Birth, 1990-1999

Notes: Coefficient estimates from municipality fixed effects regressions; each reported coefficient is from a different regression. Robust
standard errors to general forms of cross-sectional (across municipalities) and temporal (within municipality) dependence (Driscoll and
Kraay 1998) in parentheses; significant at (*) 90 percent, (**) 95 percent, (***) 99 percent confidence levels. Also, we report the
percentile rank of the coefficient from a permutation exercise and its approximate p-value. Mother characteristics’ controls include
indicators for high school graduate, higher education (some or completed), teenage pregnancy, mother’s age at childbirth of 40 years or
greater, and a linear control for the mother’s age. The change in each of the outcome variables from a one (1) standard deviation increase
in the tons of ordnance per month is calculated as the product of the relevant coefficient estimate and the standard deviation of the
ordnance volume measure (= coefficient estimate × 0.469).

25

Table 4: Trimester-Specific Bombing Activity and Health Outcomes at Birth, 1990-2000

Notes: Coefficient estimates from municipality fixed effects regressions; each set of estimates (by column) is from a different regression.
Robust standard errors to general forms of cross-sectional (across municipalities) and temporal (within municipality) dependence (Driscoll and
Kraay 1998) in parentheses; significant at (*) 90 percent, (**) 95 percent, (***) 99 percent confidence levels. Also, we report the percentile
rank of the coefficient from a permutation exercise and its approximate p-value. Mother characteristics’ controls include indicators for high
school graduate, higher education (some or completed), teenage pregnancy, mother’s age at childbirth of 40 years or greater, and a linear
control for the mother's age. The change in each of the outcome variables from a one (1) standard deviation increase in the tons of ordnance
per month is calculated as the product of the relevant coefficient estimate and the standard deviation of the ordnance volume.

26

Table 5: Correlates of Bombing Activity (Selection on Observables), 1990-2000

Notes: Coefficient estimates from municipality fixed effects regressions; each set of estimates (by panel and column) is from a different regression. Robust standard errors to general forms
of cross-sectional (across municipalities) and temporal (within municipality) dependence (Driscoll and Kraay 1998) in parentheses; significant at (*) 90 percent, (**) 95 percent, (***) 99
percent confidence levels. The change in each of the variables from a one (1) standard deviation increase in the tons of ordnance per month is calculated as the product of the relevant
coefficient estimate and the standard deviation of the ordnance volume measure.

27

Table 6: Sensitivity of Bombing Activity Effects Estimates to Controls

Notes: Coefficient estimates from municipality fixed effects regressions; each set of estimates (by panel and column) is from a different regression. Robust standard errors to general forms
of cross-sectional (across municipalities) and temporal (within municipality) dependence (Driscoll and Kraay 1998) in parentheses; significant at (*) 90 percent, (**) 95 percent, (***) 99
percent confidence levels. Mother characteristics’ controls include indicators for high school graduate, higher education (some or completed), teenage pregnancy, mother’s age at childbirth
of 40 years or greater, and a linear control for the mother’s age. The change in each of the variables from a one (1) standard deviation increase in the tons of ordnance per month is
calculated as the product of the relevant coefficient estimate and the standard deviation of the ordnance volume measure.

28

Table 7: Bombing Activity and Arsenic Pollution Levels in Water – Live Impact Area Inner Range Water,
1985-1999

Notes: Coefficient estimates from time series regressions; each set of estimates (by column) is from a different regression.
Heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors in parentheses; significant at (*) 90 percent, (**) 95 percent, (***) 99 percent confidence levels.
The change in each of the variables from a one (1) standard deviation increase in the tons of ordnance per month is calculated as the
product of the relevant coefficient estimate and the standard deviation of the ordnance volume measure (= coefficient estimate × 0.822).

29

Table 8: End of Naval Practices and Infant Health, Years 2000-2003

Notes: Coefficient estimates from municipality fixed effects regressions; each reported coefficient is from a different regression. Robust
standard errors to general forms of cross-sectional (across municipalities) and temporal (within municipality) dependence (Driscoll and
Kraay 1998) in parentheses; significant at (*) 90 percent, (**) 95 percent, (***) 99 percent confidence levels. Mother characteristics’
controls include indicators for high school graduate, higher education (some or completed), teenage pregnancy, mother’s age at childbirth
of 40 years or greater, and a linear control for the mother’s age.

30

Appendix Table A1: Bombing Activity and Birth Counts, 1990-2000

Notes: Coefficient estimates from municipality fixed effects regressions; each set of estimates (by panel and column) is from a different
regression. Robust standard errors to general forms of cross-sectional (across municipalities) and temporal (within municipality)
dependence (Driscoll and Kraay 1998) in parentheses; significant at (*) 90 percent, (**) 95 percent, (***) 99 percent confidence levels.
Mother characteristics’ controls include indicators for high school graduate, higher education (some or completed), teenage pregnancy,
mother’s age at childbirth of 40 years or greater, and a linear control for the mother’s age. The change in each of the variables from a one
(1) standard deviation increase in the tons of ordnance per month is calculated as the product of the relevant coefficient estimate and the
standard deviation of the ordnance volume measure.

31

Appendix Table A2: Sensitivity of Bombing Activity Effects Estimates to Lag Structure

Notes: Coefficient estimates from municipality fixed effects regressions; each set of estimates (by panel and column) is from a different regression. Heteroskedasticity-robust standard
errors in parentheses; significant at (*) 90 percent, (**) 95 percent, (***) 99 percent confidence levels. Mother characteristics’ controls include indicators for high school graduate, higher
education (some or completed), teenage pregnancy, mother’s age at childbirth of 40 years or greater, and a linear control for the mother's age. The change in each of the outcome variables
from a one (1) standard deviation increase in the tons of ordnance per month is calculated as the product of the relevant coefficient estimate and the standard deviation of the ordnance
volume measure.

32

Appendix Table A3: Water Pollution Levels – Live Impact Area Inner Range, 1985-1999

Source: U.S. Environmental Protection Agency Discharge Monitoring Reports, Atlantic Fleet Weapons Training Facility, Roosevelt Roads Base, Puerto Rico

33

Appendix Table A4: Bombing Activity and Local Economic Activity

Notes: Coefficient estimates from municipality fixed effects regressions; each coefficient is from a different regression. Robust standard
errors to general forms of cross-sectional (across municipalities) and temporal (within municipality) dependence (Driscoll and Kraay
1998) in parentheses; significant at (*) 90 percent, (**) 95 percent, (***) 99 percent confidence levels. The change in each of the
variables from a one (1) standard deviation increase in the tons of ordnance per month is calculated as the product of the relevant
coefficient estimate and the standard deviation of the ordnance volume measure.

34

Appendix Table A5: Sensitivity of Bombing Activity Effects Estimates to Local Economic Activity Controls

Notes: Coefficient estimates from municipality fixed effects regressions; each set of estimates (by panel and column) is from a different regression. Heteroskedasticity-robust standard
errors in parentheses; significant at (*) 90 percent, (**) 95 percent, (***) 99 percent confidence levels. Mother characteristics’ controls include indicators for high school graduate, higher
education (some or completed), teenage pregnancy, mother’s age at childbirth of 40 years or greater, and a linear control for the mother's age. The change in each of the outcome variables
from a one (1) standard deviation increase in the tons of ordnance per month is calculated as the product of the relevant coefficient estimate and the standard deviation of the ordnance
volume measure.

35

