NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE DEMAND FOR BAD POLICY WHEN VOTERS UNDERAPPRECIATE EQUILIBRIUM
EFFECTS
Ernesto Dal Bó
Pedro Dal Bó
Erik Eyster
Working Paper 22916
http://www.nber.org/papers/w22916

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2016

We thank Alexander Kiam, Jeongbin Kim, Daniel Prinz, Santiago Truffa and Stephen Yen for
excellent research assistance as well as Berkeley's XLab and Brown's BUSSEL for support. We
are grateful to Anna Aizer, Ned Augenblick, Eric Dickson, Willie Fuchs, Alessandro Lizzeri,
Matthew Rabin, Francesco Trebbi, Reed Walker, Georg Weizsäcker, and Noam Yuchtman for
helpful discussions. We thank participants at various conferences and seminars for their
comments and suggestions. Eyster thanks the ERC for financial support. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2016 by Ernesto Dal Bó, Pedro Dal Bó, and Erik Eyster. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

The Demand for Bad Policy when Voters Underappreciate Equilibrium Effects
Ernesto Dal Bó, Pedro Dal Bó, and Erik Eyster
NBER Working Paper No. 22916
December 2016
JEL No. D02,D7,H2
ABSTRACT
Although most of the political-economy literature blames inefficient policies on institutions or
politicians' motives to supply bad policy, voters may themselves be partially responsible by
demanding bad policy. In this paper, we posit that voters may systematically err when assessing
potential changes in policy by underappreciating how new policies lead to new equilibrium
behavior. This biases voters towards policy changes that create direct benefits—welfare would
rise if behavior were held constant—even if these policies lower welfare because people adjust
behavior. Conversely, voters are biased against policies that impose direct costs even if they
induce larger indirect benefits. Using a lab experiment, we find that a majority of subjects vote
against policies that, while inflicting negative direct effects, would help them to overcome social
dilemmas and thereby increase welfare; conversely, subjects support policies that, while
producing direct benefits, create social dilemmas and ultimately hurt welfare; both mistakes arise
because subjects fail to fully anticipate the equilibrium effects of new policies. More precisely,
we establish that subjects systematically underappreciate the extent to which policy changes
affect other people's behavior, and that these mistaken beliefs exert a causal effect on the demand
for bad policy.
Ernesto Dal Bó
University of California, Berkeley
Haas School of Business
545 Student Services Building #1900
Berkeley, CA 94720-1900
and NBER
dalbo@haas.berkeley.edu
Pedro Dal Bó
Department of Economics
Brown University
64 Waterman Street
Providence, RI 02912
and NBER
pdalbo@brown.edu

Erik Eyster
The London School of Economics
Houghton St.
London WC2A 2AE, UK
eeyster@gmail.com

1

Introduction

Theories of voting, and more broadly of democratic politics, rest on the premise that citizens
tend to assess correctly the relative merits of the policy options they face. Not surprisingly,
existing explanations for political failure (i.e., the selection of inefficient policies) typically
blame bad institutions, special interests, or the quality and motives of politicians.1 In this
paper, we articulate an account of political failure that assigns some of the blame to voters.
Our basic hypothesis is that when evaluating a new policy, voters tend to underappreciate equilibrium effects, which creates a systematic tendency for them to incorrectly rank
policies in welfare terms. Prior claims have been made that the average citizen may not
fully understand the implications of equilibrium and consequently misjudge policy. Adam
Smith (1776) emphasized the limited grasp of the implications of market equilibrium by the
general public, and North (1990) surmised that voters might misperceive the relative merits
of different policies and institutions and, hence, demand suboptimal ones. More recently,
Beilharz and Gersbach (2004) argued that unawareness of general equilibrium effects may
lead citizens to support minimum wages above market ones. Caplan (2007) documented
systematic divergences in the views of voters relative to those of experts on the benefits of,
for instance, markets and foreign trade. In political science, the field of political behavior
has long studied patterns of voter opinion with conflicting results on the quality of those
opinions (see Bartels 2012 for a review).
Several challenges make it difficult to prove that voters may demand bad policies because
they underestimate equilibrium effects. First, actual government policy occurs in environments so complex that it is almost impossible to conclude that voters’ expressed policy preferences rely upon mistaken reasoning. We overcome this challenge through an experiment in
which the welfare ranking of policies is certain, which allows us to identify mistaken votes.
1
Agency problems include discretion under limited electoral accountability (e.g., Barro 1973, Ferejohn
1986) and capture (e.g., Stigler 1971, Peltzman 1976, and Coate and Morris 1995). For accounts of why
inept people may self-select into policymaking, see Caselli and Morelli (2004), Messner and Polborn (2004),
Besley (2005), and Dal Bó, Dal Bó and Di Tella (2006) among others. Institutional failures to efficiently
resolve collective disagreements may take the form of status quo bias (e.g., Romer and Rosenthal 1978),
delay to reform (e.g., Alesina and Drazen 1991, and Fernandez and Rodrik 1991), and dynamic inefficiency
due to the threat of losing political control (e.g., Alesina and Tabellini 1990, De Figueiredo 2002, and Besley
and Coate 2007).

2

Second, documenting that voters err does not establish that they do so systematically, nor
that they do so because they underappreciate equilibrium effects. We overcome this second
challenge by developing a conceptual framework that isolates conditions for the underappreciation of equilibrium effects to result in a demand for bad policy, and by then investigating
experimentally whether perceived equilibrium effects influence voting as predicted by the
framework.
In our framework, a policy change takes the form of a change in payoffs of a game played
by citizens that changes citizens’ incentives to choose different actions. The key aspect of
the framework is to decompose the effects of the change in policy on a player’s payoffs into
two main parts: (i) the change in payoff attributable purely to the change in policy, holding
actions constant; (ii) the change in payoff attributable to players adjusting their actions. The
first effect is the “direct” effect of the policy change, while the second is the “indirect” effect
due to the change in equilibrium behavior. To arrive at their policy preferences, voters must
assess the sum of these two effects. Our main hypothesis is that voters will tend to focus on
the direct effects of the policy change and underappreciate the indirect effects. As a result,
voters will favor reforms with positive direct effects, even when undone by negative indirect
effects, and reject reforms with negative direct effects, even when more than compensated
by positive indirect effects.
To empirically show that the underappreciation of equilibrium effects can result in a
demand for bad policy, we focus on the simplest setting in which meaningful equilibrium effects can arise. We consider players who must choose between two 2x2 complete-information
games, each featuring a unique equilibrium in strictly dominant strategies. Specifically, in
our main treatments, subjects begin by playing a Prisoners’ Dilemma, and after a few rounds
vote on whether to levy a tax that would create a new game, which we call the Harmony
Game. The new game has lower payoffs across all action profiles due to the tax (the direct
effect is negative). But because the tax disproportionately lowers the payoffs of defection,
the Nash equilibrium in the new game involves cooperation rather than defection, and yields
higher equilibrium payoffs than the Prisoners’ Dilemma (the indirect effects are positive). As
a result, rational subjects who correctly predict behavior should prefer the Harmony Game.
However, subjects who expect behavior in the Harmony Game not to differ too much from
3

that in the Prisoners’ Dilemma will prefer the Prisoners’ Dilemma.
Our experiment yields three main findings. First, even though subjects cooperate and
earn more in the Harmony Game—which is expected in equilibrium—a majority of them vote
to play the Prisoners’ Dilemma over the Harmony Game. This finding illustrates political
failure in a precisely characterized situation: the indirect effects of equilibrium adjustment
outweigh the direct effects. This finding is robust to the voting institution, namely whether
the game is chosen by the majority or a randomly selected dictator. It is also robust to which
game subjects play first. That is, a majority of subjects who begin by playing the Prisoners’
Dilemma rejects a policy change (moving to the Harmony Game) that has negative direct
effects despite its larger positive indirect effects, just as a majority of subjects who begin by
playing the Harmony Game supports a policy change (moving to the Prisoners’ Dilemma)
that has positive direct effects despite its larger negative indirect effects. Second, since our
framework predicts that voter mistakes should be driven by a lack of appreciation of changes
in equilibrium behavior, in our experiment we elicit beliefs about behavior to ascertain
whether subjects do on average underappreciate the extent to which the change in policy will
affect behavior, and find that they do. Moreover, those subjects who most underappreciate
equilibrium effects vote for the Prisoners’ Dilemma. Third, we run an additional treatment
in which we randomly shock subjects’ beliefs about how others play the two games and show
that these beliefs affect their votes: the more subjects expect cooperation rates to increase
by moving to the Harmony Game, the less they vote for the Prisoners’ Dilemma. This shows
that the underappreciation of equilibrium effects causes the voting mistakes.
While the main treatments present subjects with a choice between one game for which
they had experience and another game for which they had none, we also study a treatment
in which subjects acquire experience by voting repeatedly. We find that support for the
Prisoners’ Dilemma decreases as players become familiar with the new game, suggesting that
experience can to some degree substitute for the ability to make equilibrium predictions.
From the perspective of any particular voter, policy changes create indirect effects for
two conceptually different reasons: first, they influence other people’s actions; second, they
influence the voter’s own action. It turns out that in the games which we examine, underappreciating how others react to policy changes is necessary and sufficient to cause people to
4

vote for the Prisoners’ Dilemma. Partly due to this feature of the environment, and partly
due to a suspicion that people predict others’ behavior less accurately than they predict
their own, we focus on demonstrating that people’s beliefs about others’ behavior drive their
voting. (In Section 6.4 we discuss how our findings connect to models of non-equilibrium
reasoning, including the level-k (Nagel 1995, Stahl and Wilson 1994) and cognitive-hierarchy
(Camerer, Ho and Chong 2004) models.) To supplement our main finding, however, we
explore the extent to which some subjects may also miss the fact that their own behavior
will adjust to the new policy, and estimate that nearly a third of subjects make this mistake.
As with all empirical work, it is important to consider external validity. The fact that
these experiments involve students from elite universities making choices in very simple
environments suggests that, if anything, our results may understate the extent to which
the average citizen underappreciates equilibrium effects in the more complex policy realm
in the field. Of course, outside of the laboratory, politicians or the media could mitigate
voters’ lack of understanding of equilibrium effects. But some politicians and media may
instead exacerbate, or at least exploit, voters’ biases. Indeed, most formal theories of electoral
politics view politicians not as educators but instead as panderers to voters’ policy positions,
even wrong ones (Harrington 1993, Canes-Wrone, Herron and Shotts 2001, and Maskin
and Tirole 2004). For-profit media may also pander rather than educate, since they have
incentives to bias reporting to match consumers’ priors (see Gentzkow and Shapiro 2006 for a
theoretical argument, and Gentzkow and Shapiro 2010 for evidence). Ultimately, as Blinder
and Krueger (2004, p.328) emphasize, even on matters admitting a technical answer “the
decisions of elected politicians are heavily influenced by public opinion.” For these reasons,
it is important to understand any potential problems in voters’ demand for policies. Our
experiments demonstrate the existence of problems and help understand their causes.
Our experimental finding that people underappreciate the equilibrium effect of policies
and that this affects their demand for policy suggests that, when considering the attractiveness of policies to voters, we must not look only at the total welfare effect of policies, but
instead pay particular attention to their direct effects. The underappreciation of equilibrium
effects may distort preferences across a broad class of problems. Voters may too frequently
oppose the lifting of price controls, including for instance on housing rents, when they focus
5

on the direct upward pressure on prices and neglect the benefits of expansion in supply.
Similarly, they may excessively trust in the congestion-reducing effects of building or enlarging roads when failing to consider how enhanced roads would encourage more commute
by car.2 Voters may not adequately oppose fiscal deficits that get monetized by printing
money when they neglect the effect that the expanded monetary base will have on prices.
Lastly, activities that generate negative externalities typically call for Pigouvian taxation to
help internalize externalities. Excessive carbon emissions is perhaps the single most serious,
and still unresolved, policy problem of this form. According to our framework, policymakers
could be reluctant to adopt Pigouvian taxes because such taxes do not appeal to voters:
their costs are direct (they tend to cause higher prices) while their benefits are indirect (they
reduce harmful activities).
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we situate our work in
the context of the literature. In Section 3, we introduce a framework for analyzing people
who underappreciate equilibrium effects. We describe our experiments in Section 4, and our
hypotheses in Section 5. In Section 6, we report data from the experiments, explaining how
they demonstrate that people underappreciate the extent to which others react to policy
changes, and that this causes them to form the wrong policy preferences and cast the wrong
vote. We conclude in Section 7.

2

Related Literature

This paper relates to the emerging political-economy literature incorporating behavioral
aspects. Examples include the study of the impact of cognitive dissonance on voting (Mullainathan and Washington 2009), the analysis of collective action with time-inconsistent
voters (Bisin, Lizzeri and Yariv 2015, and Lizzeri and Yariv 2012), and the behavior of voters who fail to extract the right information from other voters’ actions (Eyster and Rabin
2005, Esponda and Pouzo 2010, and Esponda and Vespa 2014). Our work adds to this literature by formalizing and empirically demonstrating a different behavioral mechanism for
2

Although possibly less familiar to economists than the other examples, Downs’ (1962) “Law of Congestion” that traffic arrives in proportion to road capacity receives empirical support (Duranton and Turner
2011).

6

voting anomalies. It is important to emphasize that our results do not imply that voters
will always make mistakes. In fact, there are studies where subjects with enough experience
using all of their options make adequate choices, even in fairly involved environments (Agranov and Palfrey 2015, Ertan, Page and Putterman 2009, Kosfeld, Okada and Riedl 2009).
Our contribution is to isolate a class of situations that pose a challenge to voters, namely
cases in which voters lack familiarity with one of their options and must make equilibrium
predictions, and where a tension arises between direct and indirect effects when ranking
policy.
Our paper also relates to a growing experimental literature studying the choice of selfregulatory institutions (see Dal Bó 2014 for a survey). A few findings in that literature
are worth highlighting here. Walker, Gardner, Herr and Ostrom (2000) study common-pool
problems where players who would benefit from reduced extraction vote on extraction rules.
They find that some voters propose inefficient extraction rules, and that the voting protocol
affects efficiency. Magreiter, Sutter, and Dittrich (2005) show that subject heterogeneity
exacerbates inefficiency. Dal Bó (2014) offers evidence consistent with the idea that a better
understanding of the strategic situation affects people’s ability to select efficient institutions.
Kallberkken, Kroll and Cherry (2011) use laboratory experiments to study people’s attitudes
towards Pigouvian taxes. Not only does their work focus on different issues than ours (the
effects of using the term “tax” versus “fees,” of education, and of the distribution of tax
revenue), but, more importantly, their experiments cannot shed light on whether the nonimposition of taxes derives from a failure to understand equilibrium effects: all five types
of voters predicted to benefit from imposing the tax in equilibrium would also (weakly)
benefit from imposing the taxes fixing others’ behavior (and strictly benefit in four of those
five cases). Closer to this paper, Sausgruber and Tyran (2005, 2011) provide experimental
evidence which suggests that people may not understand tax incidence: in a market where
buyers bear all the burden of a tax, they prefer to impose a larger tax on sellers than
a smaller tax on themselves. Because sellers’ behavior is mechanized in the experiments,
which buyers understand, it is unclear whether buyers choose the wrong tax because they
misunderstand how sellers react to taxes or due to some simple aversion to paying tax of the
form studied by Kallberkken, Kroll and Cherry (2011). Sausgruber and Tyran (2005) elicit
7

subjects’ beliefs on the effect of taxes on prices and find that a majority of subjects fail to
understand the effect of taxes. However, they do not study how beliefs correlate with voting
nor assess the existence of a causal effect. Finally, Dal Bó, Foster and Putterman (2010),
in their study of the direct effect of democracy, find that 46% of subjects prefer to play a
Prisoners’ Dilemma game over a coordination game derived from the Prisoners’ Dilemma by
taxing unilateral defections. This is not evidence that subjects do not understand equilibrium
effects as the coordination game has two pure-strategy equilibria, only one of which results
in higher equilibrium payoffs than under the Prisoners’ Dilemma. In this paper we focus on
demonstrating the connection between the underappreciation of equilibrium effects and the
demand for bad policy, both by grounding the experiment in a conceptual framework and by
choosing a design that can eliminate potential confounds challenging the identification of the
effects of interest. One advantage of our design is it minimizes computational complications
by presenting subjects with the simplest possible equilibrium change, involving 2x2 games
with dominant strategies. In addition, as explained after our main results, we rely on a
variety of treatments to eliminate alternative explanations.
At an abstract level, our paper relates to the experimental literature documenting failures of backward induction (e.g., McKelvey and Palfrey 1992, Bone, Hey and Suckling 2009,
Palacios-Huerta and Volij 2009, Levitt, List and Sadoff 2011, and Moinas and Pouget 2013).
We establish a systematic direction of departure from subgame perfection in a specific class
of games: players underestimate how differently their opponents play across subgames with
shared action spaces but different payoffs. This error resembles that embodied in Jehiel’s
(2005) Analogy-Based-Expectations Equilibrium (ABEE), where players think their opponents’ play is constant across certain decision nodes. Despite the resemblance, Section 6.7
explains how subjects in our experiment exhibit a degree of partial sophistication about the
relationship between the game and their opponents’ actions inconsistent with ABEE.

8

Table 1: The Games
Prisoners’ Dilemma
C
D
C b − c, b − c −c, b
D
b, −c
0, 0

3

Harmony Game
C
D
C b − c − tC , b − c − tC −c − tC , b − tD
D
b − tD , −c − tC
−tD , −tD

Underappreciation of Equilibrium Effects and Preferences over Policies: Conceptual Framework

In this section, we present a simple conceptual framework to define the meaning and types
of “underappreciation of equilibrium effects” and discuss how they affect voters’ preferences
over policies.
Consider an agent who will participate in a two-player Prisoners’ Dilemma game—see
left panel in Table 1. Participants in this game must choose between cooperate (C) and
defect (D). Cooperation results in a cost to the agent of c and a benefit b to the other
participant, with b > c > 0.3 Given that c > 0, it is a dominant strategy to defect, and
the Nash equilibrium of this game is that both participants defect leading to (D, D) with
payoffs (0, 0); since (C, C) gives both players b − c > 0, the equilibrium outcome (D, D) is
inefficient.
Now consider a policy proposal that would impose, on each player, taxes tC on cooperation
and tD on defection. These taxes would transform the game into the one in the right panel
in Table 1. Assume that these taxes satisfy the following condition: b > tD > tC + c. Given
the values of the taxes, the dominant strategy becomes cooperate, leading to an efficient
equilibrium: (C, C) with payoffs (b − c − tC , b − c − tC ). Since personal incentives do not
conflict with group objectives in this game, we call it the “Harmony Game.”
An agent who anticipates equilibrium behavior in both games will prefer to impose the
taxes and play the Harmony Game, given that the equilibrium payoff in the Harmony Game
3

This specification of a Prisoners’ Dilemma game has the property that a players’ gain from defection
does not depend upon the action of the other player. As discussed in Fudenberg, Rand and Dreber (2012),
not every Prisoners’ Dilemma game can be described this way. Regardless of the lack of generality, we follow
this description as it allows for a simpler analysis and includes the Prisoners’ Dilemma game used in the
experiment.

9

exceeds the equilibrium payoff in the Prisoners’ Dilemma game: b − c − tC > 0. Therefore,
if all agents think this way, they will vote for the imposition of taxes, resolving the social
dilemma.
However, voters may not correctly appreciate how changes in policy will affect behavior
and, as a result, may not demand the right policies: they may prefer the Prisoners’ Dilemma
to the Harmony Game. In this section, we offer a taxonomy of the types of mistakes that
voters may make when thinking about the effect of policies, and show how these mistakes
can affect voters’ demand for policy.
Assume that instead of holding equilibrium beliefs about behavior, voters may hold any
belief about their own behavior and the behavior of others in the two games. More precisely,
assume that a voter believes that she will cooperate with probability α in the Prisoners’
Dilemma and probability α0 in the Harmony Game while believing that the other player will
cooperate with probability β in the Prisoners’ Dilemma and probability β 0 in the Harmony
Game. Note that we do not attempt to explain here the origin of these beliefs. The goal
is to understand how these beliefs affect preferences for the two games. Given her beliefs,
and under the assumption that the voter is risk neutral and cares only about her material
payoffs, the voter’s preferences over the two games will depend on the difference in expected
payoff between the two games. The expected gain from moving to the Harmony Game is
G(α, α0 , β, β 0 ) = EU (HG|α0 , β 0 )−EU (P D|α, β), where EU (HG|α0 , β 0 ) is the expected payoff
under the Harmony Game and EU (P D|α, β) is the expected payoff under the Prisoners’
Dilemma game. The voter would prefer the Prisoners’ Dilemma if her beliefs are such that
the expected gain of imposing taxes is negative.
The expected gain can be decomposed into three terms. The first term is the direct
effect of the game change: DE = EU (HG|α, β) − EU (P D|α, β). The direct effect DE
captures the change in expected payoff from going from the Prisoners’ Dilemma to the
Harmony Game assuming that the behavior of both players is not affected by the game
change. The second term is the indirect effect due to the adjustment in behavior by self:
IS = EU (HG|α0 , β) − EU (HG|α, β). This indirect effect expresses the change in expected
payoffs due to the adjustment in one’s own behavior while leaving the behavior of the other
player unchanged. The third effect is the indirect effect due to the adjustment in behavior
10

by the other player: IO = EU (HG|α0 , β 0 ) − EU (HG|α0 , β). This indirect effect describes
the change in expected payoffs due to the change in the behavior of others while leaving the
behavior of the self constant at the new level (α0 ). Note that these three effects add up to
the total expected gain from a change in game: G = DE + IS + IO.4
For our two games, this decomposition can be simply expressed in terms of payoff parameters, taxes and beliefs. The direct effect is the expected payment of taxes under the belief
that behavior will be as in the Prisoners’ Dilemma: DE = − (αtC + (1 − α)tD ). This effect
is negative, and its magnitude is decreasing in α. The indirect effect from the adjustment
by self (IS) equals the change in the probability of cooperation by self times the amount
saved by cooperating (the tax to defection minus the cost of cooperation and the tax to
cooperation): IS = (α0 − α)(tD − c − tC ). This effect is increasing in the believed change in
cooperation by self (α0 − α). Finally, the indirect effect from the adjustment by other (IO)
equals the change in the probability of cooperation by other (β 0 − β) times the benefit from
the other’s cooperation (b): IO = (β 0 − β)b.
As an important benchmark, we can easily calculate the value of these effects if the
player predicts Nash equilibria in both games: α = β = 0 and α0 = β 0 = 1: DE N E = −tD ,
IS N E = tD − c − tC , and ION E = b. The total gain in equilibrium is GN E = b − c − tC
which is greater than zero given the assumptions on payoffs and taxes, so a voter predicting
equilibrium would prefer the Harmony Game.
We can compare these equilibrium effects on payoffs with those perceived by a voter who
does not predict equilibrium. For such a voter, the underappreciation of the indirect effect
on payoffs due to the adjustment by self is proportional to the underappreciation of how
much self will adjust behavior in equilibrium: IS = (α0 − α)IS N E ≤ IS N E . Similarly, a
voter who does not hold equilibrium beliefs underappreciates the indirect effect on payoffs
due to the adjustment by others in proportion to the underappreciation of how much the
other player will adjust behavior in equilibrium: IO = (β 0 − β)ION E ≤ ION E .5
4
An alternative decomposition would consider first a change in the behavior of others and then a change
in own behavior. As will be clear later, such a decomposition is equivalent to the one defined above for the
class of games considered in this section.
5
To be clear, a person who mistakes the sign of equilibrium effects (e.g., α = β = 1 and α0 = β 0 = 0) is
also said to underappreciate equilibrium effects.

11

The following proposition establishes a particular relationship between the underappreciation of equilibrium effects and a preference for the bad policy, namely for the Prisoners’
Dilemma game.
Proposition 1 A voter has a preference for the Prisoners’ Dilemma over the Harmony
Game if and only if she sufficiently underappreciates the indirect effect due to the adjustment
in behavior by the other player (IO) relative to Nash equilibrium predictions.
Proof. A voter has a preference for the Prisoners’ Dilemma over the Harmony Game if
and only if her perceived gains from moving to the Harmony Game are negative:
G = D + IS + IO = − (αtC + (1 − α)tD ) + (α0 − α)(tD − c − tC ) + (β 0 − β)b < 0.
C
This condition holds if and only if β 0 − β < α tbC + (1 − α) tbD − (α0 − α) tD −c−t
. Given that
b

b > tD > tC + c, the right hand side of the previous inequality attains a maximum of
with α = α0 = 0 and a minimum of

tC
b

tD
b

<1

< 1 with α = α0 = 1. It follows that if the voter has

expectations driven by Nash equilibrium predictions (i.e., β 0 − β = 1) she can never have
a preference of the Prisoners’ Dilemma. It also follows that a voter with a preference for
the Prisoners’ Dilemma must have β 0 − β <

tD
b

and that a voter with β 0 − β <

tC
b

must

have a preference for the Prisoners’ Dilemma. Therefore, a voter has a preference for the
Prisoners’ Dilemma if and only if β 0 − β is sufficiently small relative to its value of 1 under
Nash equilibrium predictions (how small depending on the direction of the implication); As
IO = (β 0 − β)b the proposition follows.
This proposition is developed for the case when the voter contemplates a move from the
Prisoners’ Dilemma to the Harmony Game, but it holds also for the reverse move from the
Harmony Game to the Prisoners’ Dilemma. In sum, the voter will have a preference for the
Prisoners’ Dilemma game if and only if she sufficiently underappreciates how the change in
game will affect the behavior of the other player relative to equilibrium. Of course, for voting
for the Prisoners’ Dilemma to be a mistake, actual behavior in the two games must resemble
equilibrium behavior. In the next section we explain how we bring this environment to the
laboratory to study whether actual behavior matches equilibrium behavior, whether subjects
12

Table 2: The Prisoners’ Dilemma and Harmony Games
Prisoners’ Dilemma (PD)
C
D
C 9, 9 3, 11
D 11, 3 5, 5

Harmony Game (HG)
C
D
C 8, 8 2, 7
D 7, 2 1, 1

underappreciate the indirect effect due to the adjustment of others, and whether this affects
subjects’ preferences over games.

4

The Experiment

The experiment brings to the laboratory the environment studied in the previous section
with a particular choice of parameters: b = 6, c = 2, tC = 1 and tD = 4 over a baseline
payoff of 5.6 This combination of parameters results in the payoff matrices in Table 2. The
actions C and D were respectively labeled “1” and “2” in the experiment to ensure a neutral
presentation. The exchange rate was $1 per 3 experimental points.
Our main experiment involved six treatments. In Section 6.4 we describe an additional
experiment. We begin by explaining here the basic structure of the experimental sessions
in all six treatments of the main experiment, and then describe the differences across the
treatments.
In Part 1 of the experiment, we divided subjects in each session into groups of six. Each
subject played against every other one in the group exactly once, resulting in five periods
of (one-shot) play in this part of the experiment. This was done to minimize reputational
concerns arising from repeated interaction, which could lead to cooperation in the Prisoners’
Dilemma without the need for taxation. The game played in Part 1 varied by treatment. In
some treatments, all groups played the Prisoners’ Dilemma in Table 2; in other treatments,
6

There are two reasons why we consider taxes on both actions. One is realism: Pigouvian taxes under
the socially optimal action are not necessarily zero in a general set-up with externalities. For example, that
would be the case if CO2 emissions were taxed and the socially optimal amount of emissions were positive.
By restricting attention to the socially optimal and individually optimal actions, the Prisoners’ Dilemma
simplifies a more general environment with a large number of actions, where typically most (if not all) of
the actions will be taxed to varying degrees. Second, we wanted to eliminate any unnecessary differences
between the two actions that would arise from taxing only D.

13

all groups played the Harmony Game in Table 2. All groups in a session belonged to the
same treatment.
After Part 1, new groups of six were formed randomly for Part 2, which included another
five periods of play (6 to 10). At the beginning of Part 2, the game to be played in the
next five periods was chosen. One of the main treatment variables is the way in which
this choice was made, as described below. After the choice of game for Part 2, but before
subjects learned that choice, subjects reported their beliefs about how a randomly selected
opponent in a similar experiment would act in each of the two games.7 The belief elicitation
occurred after voting, so as not to affect voting, and before subjects learned about the voting
outcome, so as not to have the outcome affect reported beliefs. Subjects were informed of
the implemented game and not the voting distribution. As in periods 1 to 5 in Part 1, in
periods 6 to 10 every subject faced each other subject in the group exactly once. Subjects
were paid for their earnings in all ten periods in Parts 1 and 2.
Table 3: Experimental Design - Treatments

Treatment
Control
Reverse Control
Random Dictator (RD)
Reverse RD
Majority Once
Majority Repeated

Part 1
Game
Game
PD
PD or HG
HG
PD or HG
PD
PD or HG
HG
PD or HG
PD
PD or HG
PD
PD or HG

Part 2
Game Choice Institution
Random
Random
Random Dictator
Random Dictator
Simple Majority
Simple Majority

Game Choice Before
Period 6
Period 6
Period 6
Period 6
Period 6
Periods 6 to 10

The two treatment variables are the game that subjects played in Part 1 and the mechanism used to choose the game for Part 2. The treatment arms labeled Control, Random
Dictator, Majority and Majority Once had the subjects play the Prisoners’ Dilemma game
in Part 1, while Reverse Control and Reverse Random Dictator had the subjects play the
7

Beliefs were elicited through an incentivized mechanism that is robust to variation in risk attitudes, as
in Karni (2009). See also Grether (1992), Holt (2007, pages 384-385) and Möbius, Niederle, Niehaus and
Rosenblat (2014). Tying incentives to the behavior of subjects in a different session may create uncertainty
in subjects’ minds about whether all details remain constant across experiments. Nevertheless, we wanted
to avoid subjects entertaining the notion that their own behavior in Part 2 of the experiment could affect
their belief-elicitation payout. Details of the elicitation screens are available in an online appendix (at
http://tinyurl.com/BadPolicy-OA).

14

Harmony Game in Part 1. We included treatments with different games in Part 1 to ensure
that any demand for the Prisoners’ Dilemma did not derive from status quo bias. The instructions for the conditions in which the Prisoners’ Dilemma was played first presented the
Harmony Game as derived from the Prisoners’ Dilemma by applying a tax of 1 experimental
point on action 1 (cooperation) and of 4 points on action 2 (defection). By contrast, the
treatments in which the Harmony Game was played first did not mention a tax, but rather
a subsidy. This difference should mitigate any concern that visceral reactions against the
notion of taxation drive voting for the Prisoners’ Dilemma. We employed the tax-subsidy
terminology because it conveys clearly the relation between the games and brings the exercise closer to the way in which policy debates are characterized. Table 3 summarizes the
experimental design.
In the control treatments (Control and Reverse Control), the game for Part 2 of the
experiment was chosen at random by the computer. This choice was made once at the
beginning of Part 2, and applied for all players in a group and all periods (i.e., all subjects in
a given group played the same game in all periods in Part 2). These treatments allow us to
incentivize the belief elicitation in the other treatments. Together with the other treatments,
they also allow us to compare behavior and payoffs between the two games and corroborate
that subjects would be better off in the Harmony Game than in the Prisoners’ Dilemma
game, as theory predicts.
The treatments Random Dictator and Reverse Random Dictator differed from the controls by asking all subjects to choose between the two games at the beginning of Part 2
and then implementing the choice of a randomly selected subject for the group. In the Majority Once treatment, the game chosen by the majority of the group before period 6 was
implemented for all periods in Part 2. Ties were randomly broken by the computer with
equal probability. In the Majority Repeated treatment, subjects voted for a game before
each period of Part 2. In this treatment, beliefs were not elicited so as not to affect voting
behavior in future periods.
Both random dictator and majority institutions were considered to make sure that the
choice of subjects was robust to the voting institution. The Majority Repeated treatment
was included to study the evolution of game choices by subjects.
15

Table 4: Number of Subjects and Sessions by Treatment and Place

Control
Reverse Control
Random Dictator
Reverse Random Dictator
Majority Once
Majority Repeated
Total

Subjects
Berkeley Brown
60
60
60
60
84
84
60
60
60
60
60
60
384
384

Total
120
120
168
120
120
120
768

Sessions
Berkeley Brown
3
4
3
4
3
5
4
4
3
4
3
3
19
24

Total
7
7
8
8
7
6
43

During play, subjects were shown the payoff function corresponding to the game they
were playing. This information was shown as a table with a row for each possible outcome of
the game as shown in the slides in the appendix. Subjects knew the game was symmetric, so
this representation carried the same information as the normal-form representation shown
in Table 2.8 At the time of voting, subjects were shown both tables side by side to facilitate
comparison between the games. Moreover, since they faced no time-limit to vote, participants
had ample time to think about the two different games.
At the end of the experiment, subjects played a p-beauty contest (Nagel 1995) to assess
their strategic sophistication in simultaneous-move games and filled out a questionnaire
providing basic demographics (gender, political ideology, class, major and SAT scores).
The experiment was programmed and run using z-Tree (Fischbacher 2007). We recruited
384 student subjects from UC Berkeley and 384 from Brown University to participate in 43
sessions of the experiment. Table 4 shows the number of subjects and sessions from each
university in each of the six treatments. Sessions lasted around half an hour and earnings
ranged from $16.75 to $37 with an average of $27.81 (earnings included a $5 show-up fee).
Appendix Table 11 displays summary statistics of demographics and beliefs.
8

We find no evidence that this representation affected behavior as the levels and evolution of cooperation
was consistent with those found in the literature.

16

5

Hypotheses

With the particular values of the parameters used in the experiment, we can now revisit
the conceptual framework so as to provide the precise hypotheses that we test with the
experimental data.
A voter who expects equilibrium behavior in both games will expect a gain of GN E =
8 − 5 = 3 from moving to the Harmony Game. This gain divides into the three effects
discussed in Section 3. The direct effect in equilibrium is just the reduction in payoff due to
the move from PD to HG leaving the outcome (D, D) constant: DE N E = −4. The indirect
effect due to the adjustment by self is the increase in payoff due to the move from (D, D) to
(C, D) in HG: IS N E = 2 − 1 = 1. The indirect effect due to the adjustment by other is the
increase in payoff due to the move from (C, D) to (C, C) in HG: ION E = 8 − 2 = 6.9
However, voters may have beliefs about their own behavior and the behavior of others
in the two games that disagree with equilibrium beliefs. As in Section 3, assume that a
voter believes that she will cooperate with probability α in the Prisoners’ Dilemma and
probability α0 in the Harmony Game, while believing that the other player will cooperate
with probability β in the Prisoners’ Dilemma and probability β 0 in the Harmony Game.
Given these beliefs, the advantage of moving from the Prisoners’ Dilemma to the Harmony
Game is:
G = EU (HG|α0 , β 0 ) − EU (P D|α, β) = −4 + 2α + α0 + 6(β 0 − β).

(1)

Proposition 1 establishes that a voter has a preference for the Prisoners’ Dilemma if and
only if she sufficiently underappreciates the indirect effect associated with the adjustment of
others. This means that β 0 − β must be sufficiently smaller than the Nash equilibrium value
of 1, as IO = 6(β 0 − β) in this case. We can calculate how small β 0 − β must be by finding
9

Similarly, a voter in a “reverse” treatment who expects equilibrium behavior in both games will expect
a (negative) gain from moving from HG to PD equal to GN E = 5 − 8 = −3. This total gain can again be
decomposed in the three effects: DE N E = 9 − 8 = 1, IS N E = 11 − 9 = 2, and ION E = 5 − 11 = −6. Note
that the absolute value of the indirect effect due to the adjustment by others is the same regardless of which
game is played first.

17

the condition on β 0 − β such that G < 0. This condition is:
β0 − β <

4 − α0 − 2α
.
6

Note that the right-hand side of this inequality defines a threshold that can reach values
between

1
6

and 23 , depending on the values of α and α0 . Voters who estimate a difference in

others’ cooperation rates across games below the threshold (i.e., those with lower estimates
of the indirect effect due to the adjustment of others) should prefer the Prisoners’ Dilemma
to the Harmony Game. Since the maximum value of this threshold lies below one, a player
with a preference for the Prisoners’ Dilemma must have beliefs such that β 0 − β < 1. In
other words, a voter with a preference for the Prisoners’ Dilemma must underappreciate the
adjustment by others. Consider for example a person who does not necessarily expect others
to play the dominant strategy in each game despite knowing that she will herself always play
the dominant strategy. This person will use parameters (α = 0, α0 = 1, β, β 0 ) and prefer the
Prisoners’ Dilemma if β 0 − β < 21 . That is, she will prefer the Prisoners’ Dilemma if she
expects cooperation in the Harmony Game to be at most 50 percentage points higher than
in the Prisoners’ Dilemma.10
The experiment was designed to test whether subjects underappreciate the response of
others to a change in game leading them to form the wrong preferences over games. For
a preference for the Prisoners’ Dilemma to be wrong, it must be that the Harmony Game
actually results in higher average payoffs than the Prisoners’ Dilemma. In other words, it is
necessary that the actual behavior in the two games resemble equilibrium behavior sufficienly
well that data and theory rank payoffs across the two games consistently. We expect this to
hold, leading to the following hypothesis.
10

This statement would not change much by introducing plausible risk aversion. For example, a subject
with a quadratic utility function with no other income and who believes there is 10% cooperation in the
Prisoners’ Dilemma would prefer the Harmony Game if β 0 − β is above approximately 0.56. If this subject
instead has a baseline income of as little as $10, then the critical value is below 0.51, and it becomes 0.5007
when baseline income is $100. Other utility functions yield a similar picture even for subjects who are
ρ
arbitrarily risk averse. Consider a subject with CRRA utility function u (x) = xρ and who believes there is
10% cooperation in the Prisoners’ Dilemma. The critical value of β 0 − β converges to 0.61 when the subject
becomes arbitrarily risk averse (ρ → 0) and he has no income outside of the experiment. For baseline incomes
of $10 and $100, the limit critical values become as low as 0.514 and 0.501 respectively.

18

Hypothesis 1 The Harmony Game results in higher average payoffs than the Prisoners’
Dilemma.
We expect that even when the Harmony Game results in higher average payoffs than the
Prisoners’ Dilemma, a majority of subjects may underappreciate equilibrium effects leading
to the following hypothesis.
Hypothesis 2 A majority of subjects prefer the Prisoners’ Dilemma to the Harmony Game.
As discussed before, the preference for the Prisoners’ Dilemma can only arise from an
underappreciation of the indirect effect due to the adjustment by others. This leads to the
next two hypotheses.
Hypothesis 3 A majority of subjects underappreciates the indirect effects associated with
the adjustment of behavior by others. The average belief differential about cooperation rates
β 0 − β is smaller than the equilibrium prediction β 0 − β = 1, and smaller than the empirical
difference in cooperation rates between games.
Hypothesis 4 Subjects who appreciate less the indirect effect due to the adjustment of others
are more likely to support the Prisoners’ Dilemma over the Harmony Game.
The core of our investigation concerns Hypotheses 1 to 4. We present next two secondary
hypotheses. To motivate the first, note that subjects who vote for the Prisoners’ Dilemma
because they do not expect the behavior of others to change fail to make predictions based
on equilibrium considerations; even more, those predictions fail to recognize that others will
follow dominant strategies. We conjecture that this failure may be related to poor strategic
reasoning. We obtained one measure of strategic sophistication in simultaneous-move games
by having subjects play a p-beauty contest. We then hold the following:
Hypothesis 5 Subjects who vote for the Prisoners’ Dilemma are measured to be less sophisticated in the p-beauty contest.

19

To motivate our other secondary hypothesis, note that some subjects may miss not only
the fact that others’ behavior depends upon the game, but also that their own behavior does
too. As discussed above, this is neither necessary nor sufficient to cause a preference for
PD in our setting, and hence not central to our main argument. However, it highlights that
subjects may display very basic departures from equilibrium thinking. Our last hypothesis
then is that:
Hypothesis 6 Some subjects underappreciate the indirect effect through the adjustment by
self.

6

Results

6.1

Benchmark: the Harmony Game leads to higher payoffs than
the Prisoners’ Dilemma

Do subjects play close enough to the Nash outcome in each game that cooperation and
payoffs in the Harmony Game exceed those in the Prisoners’ Dilemma? The answer is
yes, supporting Hypothesis 1. Consider first the two conditions that assigned games for
Part 2 exogenously. The game played in Part 2 does strongly affect behavior and payoffs.
On average, across all Part 2 periods, in the Control condition there is 92% cooperation
when playing the Harmony game, versus only 16% cooperation when playing the Prisoners’
Dilemma. In the Reverse Control condition, the respective cooperation rates are 93% in the
Harmony Game versus 30% in the Prisoners’ Dilemma. Although below the 100 percentage
points predicted by Nash equilibrium, both cooperation differentials (76% and 63%) are
significantly different from zero, and are also significantly larger than the 50 percentage
points needed for a rational player to prefer the Harmony Game to the Prisoners’ Dilemma.
The higher cooperation under the Harmony Game leads to higher earnings than in the
Prisoners’ Dilemma–this difference is significant at the 1% level in both Control and Reverse
Control.11 Figure 1 shows the period-by-period evolution of cooperation and payoffs as a
11

The p-values for all comparisons reported in this section are obtained from Wald tests. For these tests
we run OLS regressions of cooperation or payoffs on dummy variables for each game. We adopt the most

20

function of the game played in Part 2. One noteworthy pattern is that the change of game
affects behavior immediately, already in period 6.
While the Control and Reverse Control conditions help to determine the effects of exogenous game assignment, one may wonder whether these effects extend to the conditions
in which subjects themselves choose which game to play in Part 2. The answer is again a
strong yes. If we take all treatments together, and not just the Control conditions, in Part 2
there is 95% of cooperation in the Harmony Game versus 23% under the Prisoners’ Dilemma
- see Appendix Figure 5. Consequently, subjects playing the Harmony Game obtain significantly higher payoffs than those playing the Prisoners’ Dilemma (7.66 versus 5.91 points, a
30% increase, which amounts to almost $3 in Part 2 of the experiment). The differences in
cooperation rates and payoffs in Part 2 between the two games are statistically significant
at the 1% level and are robust to considering each treatment separately. Appendix Figures
6, and 7 display the evolution of cooperation for each separate treatment. Appendix Table
12 offers the associated quantitative information, namely the cooperation rates and payoffs
depending on the game that is played in Part 2 for each treatment.
Another way to see that behavior across games differs in the direction predicted by theory
is to compare the cooperation rates across the two games in period 5, once the players have
already gained experience. Pooling across all treatments, we find that the cooperation rate in
the Prisoners’ Dilemma is 15.5% while that in the Harmony Game is 95% (p-value < 0.0001).
The corresponding average payoffs are 5.62 and 7.65, respectively (p-value < 0.0001). Again,
the Harmony Game leads to higher payoffs.
In conclusion, behavior and payoffs across the two games vary enough in the direction
predicted by standard game theory that voting against the Harmony Game results in lower
payoffs in practice as well as in theory, as anticipated in Hypothesis 1.12 Having established
conservative clustering of standard errors, at the session level for overall Part 2 outcomes and period 6
payoffs, and at the level of group assignment in Part 1 for outcomes in Part 1 and behavior in period 6.
The significant results on cooperation and payoff comparisons when pooling treatments are robust to using
matching pairs sign-rank tests at the session level. This applies to cooperation and payoff comparisons in
Part 2 for the Control and Reverse Control conditions, but these tests are ill-suited for analyzing treatments
separately because voting may result in no variation within session in terms of what game subjects end up
playing, causing much data and power loss.
12
This ranking of games is unlikely to be affected by social preferences. For example, subjects with
inequity aversion as in Fehr and Schmidt (1999) will have a stronger taste for the Harmony Game, which
produces less inequality in practice than the Prisoners’ Dilemma. See the online appendix for substantiation

21

5

0

Payoff
6
7

8

Payoffs − Control

Cooperation Rate
.2 .4 .6 .8 1

Cooperation − Control

1

2

3

4

5
6
Period

7

8

9

10

1

3

4

5
6
Period

7

8

9

10

5

0

Payoff
6
7

8

Payoffs − Reverse Control

Cooperation Rate
.2 .4 .6 .8 1

Cooperation − Reverse Control

2

1

2

3

4

5
6
Period

7

8

9

10

1

Play PD in Part 2

2

3

4

5
6
Period

7

8

9

10

Play HG in Part 2

Figure 1: Comparing Prisoners’ Dilemma and Harmony Game for all Treatments
that the games’ payoffs rank empirically as they do theoretically, we turn our attention to
whether subjects choose games accordingly.

6.2

The demand for bad policy

Although choosing the Harmony Game leads to higher average payoffs for the subjects, a
slight majority of subjects (53.60%) across all treatments voted for the Prisoners’ Dilemma
game at the beginning of Part 2, supporting Hypothesis 2—see Table 5. The lowest share of
subjects voting for the Prisoners’ Dilemma game is 50.00% under Reverse Random Dictator,
while the largest is 60.83% under Majority Once. All of these shares differ significantly from
the 0% that would be expected if subjects chose games according to theory.
This is an important result of the paper—a majority of subjects demanded the wrong
game or policy. As a result of voting, a majority of subjects (54.55%) ended up in a game in
of this claim.

22

Table 5: Prisoners’ Dilemma Vote Shares by Treatment at Beginning of Part 2
Treatment
Random Dictator
Reverse Random Dictator
Majority Once
Majority Repeated
Total

Vote PD
52.98%
50.00%
60.83%
50.83%
53.60%

period 6 that led to lower payoffs than they would have achieved by voting for the Harmony
Game. The tendency of subjects to support bad policy is remarkably stable across our
various treatments varying the decision mechanism and timing; we will compare the voting
shares across treatments later in the paper. We also study later the evolution of votes as
subjects gain experience in Majority Repeated.
Note again that none of the usual explanations for the implementation of bad policies (bad
institutions, incompetent or corrupt policymakers, etc.) apply to the simple environments of
this experiment. Thus, responsibility for the implementation of bad policies falls entirely on
the subjects, the citizens of this environment. But, what explains why a majority of subjects
demanded bad policy?

6.3

Mechanism: failure to appreciate equilibrium effects

The conceptual framework presented in Section 3 showed that subjects in the environment
studied in the experiment can only have a preference for the Prisoners’ Dilemma if they
underappreciate the indirect effect due to the adjustment in the behavior of others. This
led to the hypotheses that a majority of subjects will underappreciate the indirect effect due
to the adjustment of others (Hypothesis 3) and that those who underappreciate this effect
more will be more likely to vote for the Prisoners’ Dilemma (Hypothesis 4). As we describe
next, we find evidence that strongly supports both hypotheses.
First, we find that, on average, subjects grossly underestimate the effect of the game
change on the behavior of others, consistent with Hypothesis 3. As Figure 2 shows, the
distribution of the difference in the beliefs of cooperation between the Harmony and the

23

Prisoners’ Dilemma games (β 0 − β) is far from both the observed difference in behavior and
the equilibrium one. The equilibrium difference is 100 percentage points and the observed
difference is marked by a red line in Figure 2. The average difference in belief of cooperation
between the Harmony and the Prisoners’ Dilemma games is 35 percentage points in the
pooled Random Dictator and Majority Once treatments (with a median of 45) while in
reality cooperation is 76 percentage points higher in the Harmony Game (as measured in the
Control treatment, in which games are randomly assigned).13 Similarly, the average belief
difference is 30 percentage points in Reverse Random Dictator (with a median of also 30)
while the true difference in behavior is 63 percentage points (as measured in the Reverse
Control treatment, in which games are randomly assigned). On average, subjects predict an
effect of the game change half the size of its true effect.14
Second, consistent with Hypothesis 4, subjects who more strongly underestimate the
effect of the game on behavior are more likely to vote for the Prisoners’ Dilemma. Figure
3 shows the average elicited belief of cooperation in each game broken down by vote of the
subject and treatment. The triangles show the belief of cooperation in each game held by
subjects who voted for the Prisoners’ Dilemma, while the squares show the beliefs of subjects
who voted for the Harmony Game. The dots represent the observed cooperation rates in
each game. The solid line connects across games the beliefs of subjects who voted for the
Prisoners’ Dilemma while the broken line connects across games the beliefs of subjects who
voted for the Harmony Game. In all three treatments in which beliefs were elicited, subjects
who voted for the Prisoners’ Dilemma expressed a lower belief that the behavior of others
will differ across games. That is, subjects who voted for the Prisoners’ Dilemma have a lower
estimate of the effect of the game change on behavior.
The relationship between the difference in the beliefs of cooperation and voting is highly
statistically significant across treatments—see Table 6. The “Belief Difference” variable
denotes the difference in the belief of cooperation of other subjects under the Harmony Game
13

The differences in cooperation by the very subjects who vote are not far from those in the Control
treatment, as can be seen in Table 12 in the appendix.
14
The underappreciation of equilibrium effects is driven both by an overestimation of cooperation in the
Prisoners’ Dilemma and an underestimation of cooperation in the Harmony Game in all treatments. This
suggests that subjects have difficulty making equilibrium predictions even for games with which they have
some experience. We return to the issue of experience when discussing learning in section 6.8

24

Percent
0

0

5

5

10

Percent

15

10

20

25

Reverse Random Dictator

15

Random Dictator + Majority Once

−100

−50
0
50
Belief Difference

100

−100

−50

0
50
Belief Difference

100

Note: Vertical lines denote observed cooperation difference in Control (left) and Reverse Control (right).

Figure 2: Distribution of Difference in Beliefs of Cooperation Between Games (Harmony
Game – Prisoners’ Dilemma)
relative to the Prisoners’ Dilemma (i.e., β 0 − β) which displays a significant correlation with
voting.
Table 6—columns 4 to 6—also shows that the relationship between voting for the Prisoners’ Dilemma and the belief difference is robust to controlling for personal characteristics.15
Most of these personal characteristics do not have a significant and consistent direct impact
on voting across treatments, with the exception of ideology.16
15

We exclude self-reported SAT scores for two reasons: first, because not all subjects provided this
information, including it would reduce the number of observations in the analysis; second, SAT scores do
not significantly predict voting, and excluding them does not change our results.
16
Appendix Table 13 shows the relationship between personal characteristics and voting for the Prisoners’
Dilemma without controlling for the belief difference. This is important as personal characteristics could
affect voting through their effect on beliefs. Appendix Table 13 shows that even when we do not control for
beliefs there is no robust relationship between the personal characteristics we consider and voting for the
Prisoners’ Dilemma.

25

Table 6: Beliefs and Voting for Prisoners’ Dilemma (Dependent Variable: Vote for PD)
Random Dictator, Reverse RD, Majority Once

Belief Difference

(1)

(2)

-0.005***
(0.001)

-0.005***
(0.001)

Male

-0.064
(0.066)

Year

0.031
(0.025)

Ideology

0.037***
(0.012)

Economics

0.042
(0.1)

Political Science

0.12
(0.019)

Brown University

0.88
(0.063)

Beauty Number

-0.000
(0.002)

Constant

0.697***
(0.04)

0.476***
(0.107)

Observations
2,568
2,568
Clusters
68
68
R-squared
0.108
0.142
Note: OLS specification. Belief Difference denotes the difference in beliefs of cooperation
under HG and PD. Year denotes year in college. Ideology from 0 (most liberal) to
10 (most conservative). Economics and Political Science denote subjects’ major.
Robust standard errors clustered by Part-1 group: *** significant at 1%, ** at 5%, * at 10%.

26

Belief of Cooperation
0 20 40 60 80 100

Reverse Random Dictator

Belief of Cooperation
0 20 40 60 80 100

Random Dictator

PD

HG

PD

Game

HG
Game

Belief of Cooperation
0 20 40 60 80 100

Majority Once

PD

HG
Game

Average belief among PD voters
Observed Cooperation

Average belief among HG voters

Figure 3: Belief of Cooperation and Voting

6.4

Underappreciation of equilibrium effects causes voting for the
Prisoners’ Dilemma

The correlation between beliefs and voting documented in Table 6, while predicted by our
framework, does not imply that subjects’ beliefs about how others will play the two games
exert a causal effect on how they vote. Indeed, an endogeneity problem may arise if people
with different beliefs also differ in unobservable dimensions that directly affect voting, or if
people introspect further about the games at the time of reporting their beliefs and report
beliefs to justify their past voting choice.17
Establishing a causal link between subjects’ beliefs and their votes requires a source of
exogenous variation in subjects’ beliefs. To create such a source, we conducted an additional
17

Costa-Gomes and Weizsäcker (2008) show evidence compatible with the idea that subjects re-examine
strategic situations during the belief-elicitation stage.

27

experiment very much analogous to the Random Dictator treatment presented before, except
that in the new experiment subjects received information about how past subjects played
the two different games in prior treatments. Providing different subjects with different (but
truthful) information generated random variation in their beliefs about how others played
the two games. Of course, information about how past subjects played might alter subjects’ beliefs about their own future behavior. To neutralize any such effect, we constrained
subjects to defect in the Prisoners’ Dilemma and cooperate in the Harmony Game.
To ensure that subjects perceived their information about others’ past behavior as relevant, we changed Part 2 of the experiment. Rather than interact with other human subjects
in Part 2, each subject interacted with a computerized counterpart that chose between cooperate and defect according to the actual choice rates of some groups in one of the treatments
of the main experiment.18 The main treatment of this new experiment was to show different
subjects different data about past subjects’ behavior, and thereby induce different beliefs
about the likely actions of their computerized counterpart. These data comprised the behavior of four groups of actual subjects in the Control treatment, two of which had played
the Prisoners’ Dilemma and two of which had played the Harmony Game in Part 2 of the
experiment. Denoting these groups PD-1, PD-2, HG-1 and HG-2, the computerized counterpart was programmed to cooperate in the Prisoners’ Dilemma (Harmony Game) according
to the average cooperation rate across both PD-1 and PD-2 (HG-1 and HG-2). Subjects
knew this, and that they would get some information about behavior in each game. Half
of the subjects learned cooperation rates in period 6 for groups PD-1 and HG-1, while the
other half learned cooperation rates in period 6 for groups PD-2 and HG-2. The first half
of subjects saw cooperation rates of 50% in period 6 of both games, while the second half
saw a cooperation rate of 17% in period 6 of the Prisoners’ Dilemma and 83% in period 6
of the Harmony Game. These different observed cooperation rates constitute the treatment
variable. All aspects of the information treatment were administered between Part 1 and
Part 2 of the experiment (namely, after Part 1 games, but before voting, belief elicitation,
and Part 2 games).
We recruited 96 student subjects from UC Berkeley and 96 from Brown University to
18

The computerized counterpart’s choices were independent across periods.

28

Table 7: Beliefs and Voting for Prisoners’ Dilemma in the Additional Experiment (Dependent
Variable: Vote for PD)

Belief Difference

(1)

(2)

-0.003***
(0.001)

-0.002**
(0.001)

N

Y

0.660***
(0.044)

0.618***
(0.114)

Personal Characteristics
Constant

Observations
192
192
Clusters
32
32
R-squared
0.037
0.049
Note: OLS specification.
Robust standard errors clustered by Part-1 group:
*** significant at 1%, ** at 5%.

participate in this additional experiment. Sessions lasted around half an hour, and earnings ranged from $17.75 to $34.50, with an average of $26.40 (including a $5 show-up fee).
Appendix Table 14 displays summary statistics of demographics and beliefs.
This additional experiment replicates the results obtained in the main treatments. A
majority of subjects vote for the Prisoners’ Dilemma (59%). Subjects, on average, underappreciate the equilibrium effect that changing the game has on behavior: the average belief
difference between games is 28% (median of 30%), less than half of the difference in cooperation observed between games. Finally, as seen in Table 7, subjects’ reported belief differences
are negatively correlated with voting for the Prisoners’ Dilemma.
As was the case with the correlation showed in Table 6, the correlation in Table 7 does not
establish causation. In this case, however, subjects’ belief differences depend in part on the
information provided to them about past behavior in both games. Since this information was
randomly assigned, and subjects’ own actions were fixed, the exogenous part of the variation
in subjects’ beliefs about the behavior of others can be used to identify the effect of beliefs
on voting. Equation (1) in Section 5 isolates the exclusion restriction assumption underlying
our exercise. With (α, α0 ) fixed by design, the only way in which information about the
29

behavior of past subjects affects voting is by altering a subject’s beliefs (β, β 0 ) about others’
likely behavior in each game, which in turn has implications for the expected utility of voting
for each game.19 Thus, the information treatment can be used as an instrument for subjects’
beliefs about others’ behavior.
Panel A in Table 8 shows the first-stage result of the instrumental-variable analysis. The
instrument is the variable Saw High Difference, which equals one if the subject saw the cooperation rates from the previous two groups with high difference in behavior (17% cooperation
in the Prisoners’ Dilemma and 83% cooperation in the Harmony Game) and equals zero if
the subject saw the two groups with no difference in behavior (50% cooperation in both
games). The instrumental variable Saw High Difference is highly statistically significant,
and it affected beliefs on average by increasing the belief difference by around 16 percentage
points. Those who received information displaying no changes in behavior across games
updated their beliefs, on average, to a belief differential of 20.4% (these subjects expected
on average 47.4% probability of cooperation in the Prisoners’ Dilemma and 68% in the Harmony Game). Subjects who received information indicating a large difference updated to a
larger belief difference in cooperation: 36% (with 38.4% in the Prisoners’ Dilemma and 74%
in the Harmony Game).20 As expected given random assignment, controlling for personal
characteristics of the subjects does not affect the results, as seen in column (2).
Panel B in Table 8 shows the second-stage results. We find that belief difference affects
the voting decisions of the subjects. An increase in the belief that behavior will change
across games results in a significant decrease in the probability of voting for the Prisoners’
Dilemma. A one percentage point change in a subject’s belief difference leads to a fall in the
propensity to vote for the Prisoners’ Dilemma of roughly two percentage points.21
19

This is plausible, as it is hard to hypothesize ways in which the information treatment could affect voting
directly, if not through its effects on the beliefs (β, β 0 ). Priming or emulation effects may arise, but these
pertain to the way one may behave in each game–which our design rules out by fixing own actions–while the
behavior of interest, voting, is of a different nature to the behavior on which information is given.
20
The effect is stronger if measured in terms of medians. The first group had a median expectation
of cooperation in the Prisoners’ Dilemma of 50% and 70% in the Harmony Game. Those treated with
information indicating a strong change in behavior had a median expectation of cooperation of 30% in the
Prisoners’ Dilemma and 80% in the Harmony Game.
21
The reduced form effect of the Saw High Difference treatment is to lower the vote share for the Prisoners’
Dilemma by 34.4 percentage points (from a vote share of 76% to slightly below 42%). This was attained
through an average change in the belief differential of about 16 percentage points, yielding the IV point

30

Table 8: Instrumenting for Beliefs
Panel A: First Stage (dependent variable: Belief Difference)
(1)
(2)
Saw High Difference
15.549***
16.232***
(5.444)
(5.467)
Personal Characteristics
Constant

Observations
R-squared
F-test of Saw High Difference=0

N

Y

20.396***
(4.135)

7.946
(9.669)

192
0.043
8.155

192
0.115
8.816

Panel B: Second Stage (dependent variable: Vote for PD)
(1)
(2)
Belief Difference
-0.022***
-0.022***
(0.008)
(0.008)
Personal Characteristics
Constant

N

Y

1.211***
(0.246)

0.933***
(0.213)

Observations
192
192
Clusters
32
32
Note: IV specification. Belief Difference denotes the difference
in beliefs of cooperation under HG and PD.
Robust standard errors clustered by Part-1 group:
*** significant at 1%.

31

Note that the IV estimates are larger than the OLS ones presented in Tables 6 and
7, suggesting that the OLS estimates underestimate the true effect of beliefs on voting.
This could be due both to omitted variables that biased the OLS estimate against our
hypothesis, or to measurement error in beliefs. It is also possible that the information shock
had heterogeneous effects, and that the IV estimate reflects the response of a subset of
subjects whose voting is more responsive to their beliefs. It is worth noting that our results
are robust to corrections for weak instruments.22
To sum up, the additional experimental evidence supports our core hypotheses that voters
may demand bad policies, and that this demand is due to their inability to fully appreciate
the equilibrium adjustments of others.

6.5

Voting for the Prisoners’ Dilemma and strategic sophistication

We now return to the original series of experiments and investigate our secondary hypotheses.
Going back to Table 6 and Appendix Table 13, we find that the strategic sophistication of
subjects in simultaneous-move games, as proxied by the number chosen in the p-beauty
contest game, is not related to the voting decision in any of the treatments. Given that
the p-beauty contest number may not be a perfect measure of strategic sophistication (for
example, it is not the case that smaller numbers are necessarily a better choice given that
others do not play Nash), we also studied whether there may be a non-linear relationship. We
find that including a quadratic term does not change the lack of relationship. There is also
no difference in voting between those with a number below and above the median, or below
and above 66.66 (numbers above 66.66 are dominated). This lack of relationship between
the the p-beauty contest number and voting refutes our secondary Hypothesis 5. This is not
so surprising in the light of recent research showing that subjects’ strategic sophistication is
not persistent across games (see Georganas, Healy and Weber 2013). Moreover, this result
could indicate that what is crucial in the voting decision is the capacity or inclination to
estimate of −0.022(≈ −0.344/16).
22
We construct weak-instrument-robust confidence intervals following the Hansen and Chernozhukov
(2008) approach, which allows for clustering, for both the estimates with and without controls. Working with a 5% confidence level for rejecting the null that beliefs do not affect voting, the intervals exclude
zero and are respectively [-0.06,-0.009] and [-0.07,-0.012].

32

think about the behavior of others in future stages and not in a simultaneous-move game as
in the p-beauty contest game.

6.6

Do subjects understand how changing the game will affect
their own behavior?

We have shown that subjects who vote for the bad policy greatly underestimate the effect that
a policy change has on others’ behavior. Some subjects may not only fail to anticipate how
others adjust to policy changes, but also how they themselves will respond. Our secondary
Hypothesis 6 postulates that there is a non-trivial share of such subjects.
To study the share of subjects who fail to think through how their own behavior depends
on policy, we postulate a simple mixture model where individuals can be one of two types
t ∈ (R, I) (for Rational, and Inertial, respectively) depending on the way they think about
their actions in each game.23 The Rational type is one who holds beliefs (β, β 0 ) about the
cooperation rates by others in the Prisoners’ Dilemma and the Harmony Game, respectively,
but recognizes he will play his dominant strategy in each game. The Inertial type does not
realize that his behavior will differ across games. This type considers that if he played action
D(C) in the last round, he will continue to play it in the next, even if the game changes.
If we compute the expected payoff differential between the Prisoners’ Dilemma and the
Harmony Game for beliefs [α, α0 , β, β 0 ], we obtain
∆ut (∆β) = −6∆β + 4 − α0 − 2α,
where ∆β = β 0 − β. The key aspect differentiating the types is that the term −α0 − 2α is
−1 for Rational types and is either 0 or −3 for Inertial types who defected or cooperated
in period 5, respectively. Thus, ∆uR (∆β) = −6∆β + 3 and ∆uI (∆β, c) = −6∆β + 4 − 3c,
where c is an indicator variable for whether the subject cooperated in period 5.
23

One way to test Hypothesis 6 would be to elicit beliefs about players’ own actions. We did not do this
in order not to disturb the elicitation of beliefs about others, which are key to our core hypotheses. An
alternative was to add another condition, but given the large size of the experiment (768 subjects), we opted
to investigate this secondary hypothesis via the structural approach presented in this section. While our
Hypothesis 6 was formulated ex ante, the precise assumptions on types presented here were developed ex
post.

33

We postulate the existence of a share s of Rational types, and 1 − s of Inertial types. For
the purposes of empirical identification of the share s, we assume that a Rational (Inertial)
type votes for the Prisoners’ Dilemma game with a probability that depends on the payoff
differential ∆uR (∆β) (∆uI (∆β, c)). To account for empirical errors, we will assume that
such probability is given by a logistic cdf with mean µ and standard deviation σ. Thus, a
player i with type t votes for Prisoners’ Dilemma with a probability F (∆ut (∆βi , ci ) , µ, σ) ,
where F denotes the logistic distribution. It follows that the probability of a Prisoners’
Dilemma vote by a player i, given a share s of Rational types is,


P (vi = P D|∆βi , ci , s, µ, σ) = sF ∆uR (∆βi ) , µ, σ + (1 − s) F ∆uI (∆βi , ci ) , µ, σ .
We define the profile of period 5 actions as c = [c1 , ..., cN ] where ci = 1 denotes cooperation
by subject i in period 5 and ci = 0 denotes defection. Similarly, we define the profile of
votes as v = [v1 , ..., vN ] where vi = 1 denotes a vote for Prisoners’ Dilemma by subject i,
and vi = 0 a vote for Harmony Game. We have that the overall probability of such a profile
of votes is,
N
Y

P (vi = 1|∆βi , ci , s, µ, σ)vi (1 − P (vi = 1|∆βi , ci , s, µ, σ))1−vi ,

i=1

which yields the log-likelihood,
L (s, µ, σ|v, ∆β, c) =




R
I

vi ln sF ∆u (∆βi ) , µ, σ + (1 − s) F ∆u (∆βi , ci ) , µ, σ
PN
.
i=1
 + (1 − v ) ln s 1 − F ∆uR (∆β ) , µ, σ  + (1 − s) 1 − F ∆uI (∆β , c ) , µ, σ  
i
i
i i



We estimate the parameter s, by maximizing L (s, µ, σ|v, ∆β, c) given the voting data v,
the period 5 behavior c and the vector of elicited beliefs ∆β. Clearly, in this estimation we
take beliefs to be exogenous—this is a maintained assumption with some support from the
exogeneity test performed earlier in relation with the instrumental-variables findings. We
pool the data for the three conditions where beliefs were elicited, namely Random Dictator,
Reverse Random Dictator, and Majority Once, for a total of 408 observations.
34

The estimate of the share of Rational types s, presented in Table 9, is 67% when we
consider all subjects. The Wald test for the share of Rational types being equal to 100%
yields p-values of 0.042 and 0.057 depending on whether the standard errors are clustered
respectively at the individual or group level, allowing us to reject the null of no Inertial types.
These findings support the notion that a fraction of the players vote without appreciating
how their own play will adjust following a policy change. The point estimate suggests that
a full third of the players commit this error. This is striking, given that all that is required
is to forecast that one will play a different, dominant, strategy in a 2x2 game following the
change in policy.
The existence of the logistic disturbance term implies that any voter could vote for or
against the Prisoners’ Dilemma; but the beliefs ∆β and the types (R,I) affect the likelihood
of the vote going one way or another. For voters with ∆β between

1
6

and 23 , however, the type

(R,I) alone can affect the vote, even with a zero realization of the disturbance term. One may
consider the empirical variation offered by those voters as more central, and wonder about
the robustness of the result to restricting the sample to those voters. We report the estimates
of our model on this restricted sample in the second column of Table 9. Although we lose
a large number of observations (from 408 to 232), the fraction of Rational types remains
significantly different from one (point estimate 0.4, p-value 0.084). The point estimate does
not significantly differ from the one obtained using the full sample.
We have heretofore assumed that the chance of being Rational versus Inertial does not
depend upon a subject’s beliefs ∆β. But a subject who holds Nash beliefs about others
(i.e., ∆β = 1) seems unlikely to ignore how her own action varies across games. To allow
for the possibility that those who better predict others’ behavior better predict their own
behavior, we re-estimate our model to allow for our parameter s to depend upon whether
the subject’s beliefs ∆β lies above or below the median value. This produces estimates of s
equal to 92% vs 26%, respectively. Note that this results on an average estimated prevalence
of Rational subjects of 59%, which is close to the original estimate. This suggests that our
estimate of the prevalence of Rational subjects is quite robust to relaxing the assumption of
independence of types and beliefs about others.

35

Table 9: Structural Estimates

All

Subjects
1
≤ ∆β ≤
6

s (Share of Rational Types)

0.670
(0.173)

0.399
(0.348)

µ

0.801
(0.149)

1.097
(0.549)

σ

1.336
(0.350)

0.978
(0.493)

2
3

Observations
408
232
p-value of Wald test s 6= 1
0.057
0.084
Note: Pooled sample from Random Dictator,
Reverse Random Dictator and Majority Once.
Robust standard errors clustered by Part-1
group in parentheses.

6.7

Ruling out alternative mechanisms

The variation of treatments allows us to rule out some alternative mechanisms. One possibility is that the Prisoners’ Dilemma attracts a majority in the Random Dictator and Majority
treatments because a status quo bias causes some people to choose their initial game even if
it is a suboptimal one. Instead, when the Harmony Game is played first, a reluctance to try
new things should reinforce a preference for the initial, and also optimal, game and secure
virtually unanimous support for the Harmony Game. However, in the Reverse Random Dictator condition the Prisoners’ Dilemma garnered 50% of the vote. This vote share is only 3
points smaller than (and statistically indistinguishable from) that under Random Dictator.
This evidence rules out the status quo bias possibility.
The Random Dictator treatment allows us to rule out forms of pivotal thinking as a source
of the demand for bad policy. Under majority rule, a vote matters only if pivotal. Two types
of reasoning may dilute a subject’s incentive to vote for the Harmony Game in that situation.
First, the subject may expect a large majority (in either direction), leaving her with negligible
chance of being pivotal and therefore with no incentive to carefully consider how to vote.
36

Second, even if the chance of pivotality is not negligible, a subject may interpret the event
of being pivotal as a sign that a large share of subjects do not expect behavior to correspond
to equilibrium (for if they did, they would vote for the Harmony Game). Subjects could
take this as a sign that other subjects will themselves not respond to the change in game
as theory predicts, and voting for the Harmony Game may be a bad idea. Under Random
Dictator, pivotality has a clear, and non-negligible chance of 1/6. Moreover, the event of
being pivotal does not depend on the votes of others and hence it cannot constitute a signal
of how others may play in the Harmony Game. Therefore, the majoritarian 52.98% of votes
for the Prisoners’ Dilemma under Random Dictator cannot be explained by the previous
pivotality concerns. The share of votes in favor of the Prisoners’ Dilemma is greater under
Majority Once (60.83%), but the difference is not statistically significant.
We derived our hypotheses from a framework where subjects may have difficulty appreciating how the behavior of others will adjust to a new game, and our main hypotheses
are supported by the data. Nevertheless, our framework would warrant less attention if the
majority vote for Prisoners’ Dilemma could be explained by strictly rational motives. Yet,
as shown above, a rational subject (one who knowingly plays the dominant action in each
game) cannot prefer the Prisoners’ Dilemma unless she expects cooperation in the Harmony
Game to be at most 50 percentage point greater than in the Prisoners’ Dilemma. Given the
actual difference in cooperation rates is much higher (e.g., 76 and 63 percentage points in
the Control and Reverse Control conditions, respectively), a rational subject who has fairly
accurate beliefs about real behavior cannot prefer the Prisoners’ Dilemma. Moreover, as
we showed in footnote 10, even sizeable risk aversion makes rational subjects only slightly
more willing to vote for the Prisoners’ Dilemma. Thus, rationalizing the Prisoners’ Dilemma
majority in a model where the majority of players are both rational and correct about their
environment appears difficult.
We have attributed the demand of bad policy to subjects’ failure to appreciate the equilibrium effects of policy changes. Several existing models of strategic naivety make predictions
other than subgame-perfect ones in our setting, and one may wonder whether the mistake
we identify is a particular case of the phenomena explained by those theories. Here we discuss three such theories, namely the level-k model of strategic thinking (Stahl and Wilson
37

1994, Nagel 1995), Camerer, Ho and Chong’s (2004) related “cognitive hierarchy model,”
and Jehiel’s (2005) analogy-based-expectation equilibrium (ABEE). Although each theory
captures some facet of subjects’ non-equilibrium behavior, each also falls short of providing
a fully satisfactory account of the patterns in our data.
The level-k model of strategic thinking summarizes players’ strategic sophistication by
the parameter k, where a level-k type of player best responds to beliefs that her opponent is
a level-k − 1 type of player (for k ≥ 1), and a level-0 type randomizes uniformly over actions.
Experimental work has estimated levels one and two to be the most frequent types across the
universe of laboratory games where the model has been estimated (see, e.g., Crawford, CostaGomes and Iriberri 2013). In our setting, a level-0 type would cooperate and defect with
equal probability in both games, leading a level-1 type to vote for the Prisoners’ Dilemma
and play the dominant strategy in both the Prisoners’ Dilemma and the Harmony Game.
Because level-1 types play dominant strategies, all higher levels vote for the Harmony Game.
Hence, the level-1 type, better than any other type, fits the behavior of the majority of
our subjects who vote for the Prisoners’ Dilemma. However, a theory predicated on level-1
makes at least one prediction that is contradicted by the data, namely that subjects voting
for the Prisoners’ Dilemma predict that cooperation rates do not vary across the Prisoners’
Dilemma and the Harmony Game. This does not match the fact that most individuals voting
for the Prisoners’ Dilemma in our experiments, even if they underestimate the difference in
cooperation across the two games, still predict more cooperation in the Harmony Game than
in the Prisoners’ Dilemma. Those voting for the Prisoners’ Dilemma estimate on average an
increase in cooperation of about 20 percentage points (which is significantly different from
zero with a p-value < 0.0001).
A similar prediction is made by Jehiel’s (2005) ABEE model. In this approach each player
is modeled as bundling her opponents’ decision nodes into partitional “analogy classes”; each
player holds correct beliefs about her opponents’ distribution of actions across each class, yet
mistakenly believes that the frequency of each action played is constant across every node
in an analogy class. There are two analogy classes of interest in our setting. Players with
the finest analogy classes put the Prisoners’ Dilemma and the Harmony Game in different
analogy classes; each game has a different dominant strategy, and because players correctly
38

predict actions in each class, the ABEE outcome coincides with subgame-perfect equilibrium.
Alternatively, players who bundle the Prisoners’ Dilemma and the Harmony Game into a
single, coarser analogy class would predict that their opponents play the same way in both
games. As with level-k models, this prediction is not supported by the data.
Since the level-k model constrains level-k players to believe their opponents are levelk − 1, one may think it is not flexible enough to match our data, but that a more flexible
framework in the same spirit could. Camerer, Ho and Chong’s (2004) “cognitive hierarchy”
model allows for more flexible beliefs: for instance, level-2 types believe that they face a
distribution of level-0 and level-1 types that coincides with the population distribution in
the experiment. This account faces the hurdle that few subjects play the dominated action
in either the Harmony Game or the Prisoners’ Dilemma, so level-2 types must assign a high
probability to level-1 types in the cognitive-hierarchy model. But, if there are few level-0
players, higher level players have no reason to vote for the Prisoners’ Dilemma in this model.
Yet, we observe majoritarian support for the Prisoners’ Dilemma in the data.
The underappreciation of indirect effects we document reflects a failure of contingent
reasoning as each subject compares how others would act across the two games. All three
theories just reviewed deal with contingent reasoning, but make too extreme a prediction
about the degree to which subjects will fail. While we think the main gist is correct that
inadequate contingent reasoning is to blame, more nuanced theorizing seems necessary to
fully understand the drivers of the underappreciation of equilibrium effects. We hope our
findings will spur further work in the area.
A concern about our main results is that a framing effect, in the form of an aversion to
the word “tax” used to introduce the Harmony Game, may create support for the Prisoners’
Dilemma.24 Three considerations mitigate this concern. First, the use of the word “tax”
was extremely sparse: it was used once in instructions read aloud, and did not appear in
the screens facing subjects during the experiment before voting (it was only present in the
feedback screen after the vote). Second, if the tax framing drove results under the Random
24

There is some evidence from non-incentivized, survey-choice experiments of tax aversion, i.e., people
declaring a stronger preference for avoiding costs of a given magnitude when these are portrayed as a tax
(Sussman and Olivola 2011).

39

Dictator and majority treatments, then the Reverse Random dictator treatment, in which
taxation was not mentioned, should have eliminated support for the Prisoners’ Dilemma. Yet
it did not. Third, our framework predicts that a manipulation of beliefs about the behavior of
others should affect voting, which we demonstrate in our second experiment. A tax-framing
effect cannot explain that result, since the frame did not change across belief-manipulation
treatments.
Finally, one might worry that social preferences transform the experiment’s monetary
payoffs into utilities in such a way that people may rationally vote for the Prisoners’ Dilemma.
The simplest and most direct evidence against this explanation for voting comes from our
final treatment. Because each subject in Part 2 of this experiment neither chooses an action
nor plays against a human opponent, the subject’s voting decision reduces to a single-person
decision problem as it has no implications for any other subject’s payoff. The fact that
subjects in this treatment that neutralizes social preferences behave in a similar way to
subjects in our main experiment—majorities of both vote for the PD—establishes that social
preferences do not drive our findings.

6.8

Learning under repeated majority voting

Our basic design presented subjects with a choice between a game with which they had
experience and one with which they lacked experience. This sought to capture substantive
situations of interest where some policy options are new to the population, as well as to
motivate subjects to make conjectures that ought to be informed by equilibrium predictions.
In that context, we showed that beliefs about behavior are not tightly driven by equilibrium
considerations and this led a majority of subjects to mistakenly prefer the Prisoners’ Dilemma
over the Harmony Game. Against such backdrop, one may conjecture that gaining experience
with the less familiar game will lead subjects to rank the games correctly, and one may also
wonder how quick and complete that learning will be.
The Majority Repeated treatment allows us to study the evolution of voting as subjects
gain experience. The percentage of subjects voting for the Prisoners’ Dilemma decreases
from 50.83% in period 6 to 28.33% in period 10—see Figure 4.

40

.5
.4
.3
Ratio
.2
.1
6

7

8
Period
Voted for PD

9

10

Played PD

Figure 4: Evolution of Votes and Outcomes in Majority Repeated
The fact that vote shares for the Prisoners’ Dilemma decrease with experience suggests
that there is learning and that in our context experience can substitute for the ability to
make equilibrium predictions based on theory. However, it is noteworthy that even in the
fifth period after the first vote, more than a quarter of subjects continued to choose the
wrong game. One possibility is that many subjects still vote for the Prisoners’ Dilemma
simply because they have not been exposed to the Harmony Game. But this is not the case.
The percentage of subjects playing the Prisoners’ Dilemma decreases from 45% in period 6
to 10% in period 10.25 In other words, a non-trivial share of votes for the Prisoners’ Dilemma
persists until period 10 despite the fact that by then most voters have been exposed to the
Harmony Game. More specifically, the second column in Table 10 shows, by period, the
percentage of Prisoners’ Dilemma voters who had played the Harmony Game before. Of
course, none of them had played the Harmony Game before voting in period 6. However, by
25

The reason is simple: given the simple majority rule, quickly after the vote share for the Prisoners’
Dilemma drops below 50%, the power of democracy kicks in: majorities for the Prisoners’ Dilemma in each
group become less frequent, and only a small share of subjects end up in the wrong game by period 10.

41

Table 10: The information of Prisoners’ Dilemma Voters
Period
6
7
8
9
10

Played HG Before

And Observed Cooperation Rate
50% over the one in PD

0%
32.60%
51.22%
57.58%
73.53%

80%
85.71%
78.95%
72%

period 8 more than half of the Prisoners’ Dilemma voters had played the Harmony Game
before.
Why do some subjects that have experienced both games continue to vote for the wrong
game? Is it the case that those subjects have met defectors in the Harmony Game? The
third column in Table 10 shows the percentage of Prisoners’ Dilemma voters who had played
the Harmony Game before and had observed a difference in cooperation rates greater than
50 percentage points, the cutoff to prefer the Harmony Game over the Prisoners’ Dilemma.
Note that in every period, more than 70% of Prisoners’ Dilemma voters who had played
the Harmony Game before had observed cooperation rates in the Prisoners’ Dilemma and
the Harmony Game such that voting for the Harmony Game was warranted. So, a large
fraction of Prisoners’ Dilemma voters had information in favor of the Harmony Game but
still preferred to vote for the Prisoners’ Dilemma by the end of the experiment.
In conclusion, while many subjects who started voting for the Prisoners’ Dilemma switch
to vote for the Harmony Game as they gain experience, other voters do not learn even
when they have observed behavior in both games that favors voting for the Harmony Game.
This evidence yields a nuanced message: lack of familiarity with a policy option that requires making equilibrium predictions can generate substantial bias in policy preference;
with more balanced experience, the bias in policy preference decreases, but it does not go
away completely—some fraction of the biased preferences identified in our main experiments
persists. While the particular levels of the demand for bad policy obtained in the lab are to
be taken with caution, one interpretation of our experimental results is that in the presence
of an unfamiliar policy option the prevalence of mistaken preference is such that groups may

42

often select the wrong policy even when relying on majority voting. With more balanced experience, majoritarian mistakes are rare, but policy distortions could still occur when groups
select policy through mechanisms that are less stark than majority voting, and which place
positive weight on the opinion of all voters (e.g., collective bargaining) or that may end up
selecting the loser of a plurality vote (e.g., electoral college).

7

Conclusion

We have experimentally identified a demand for bad policy driven by voters’ underappreciation of how behavior changes when policies change. Voters in our experiment underestimate,
on average, how much the behavior of others will change following a change in the game that
is played. In addition, a non-trivial share of voters appear to fail to appreciate that their
own behavior will differ across games. Our evidence suggests that unfamiliar policy options
can be a challenge for voters when these policies contain “hidden” costs or benefits that
will accrue once behavior adjusts. An example of such a policy is a Pigouvian tax, which
generates a direct monetary cost on taxpayers as well as indirect benefits in equilibrium
by inducing those same taxpayers to internalize negative externalities. More generally, our
results help explain why voters may not always support the policy proposals of economists
that are beneficial mainly through indirect equilibrium effects, but may support populist
proposals that are costly through indirect equilibrium effects.
Of course, identifying a demand for bad policy in connection with a tendency to underestimate equilibrium effects in the laboratory does not necessarily mean that outside of the
lab such demand will dominate forces promoting good policies. One could hope that public
discourse and political competition would result in voters learning about the total effect
of policies, thus bridging the gap between public opinion and reliable evidence. However,
as discussed in the introduction, a vast literature in economics and political science—both
theoretical and empirical—has considered politicians as reflecting, more than shaping, the
positions of voters. To the extent that public opinion and voter preferences matter for the
selection of policies, understanding how people think about policies appears relevant for our
knowledge of how societies choose to regulate themselves. This paper makes a contribution
43

to that understanding.

References
[1] Agranov, M. and T.R. Palfrey (2015). “Equilibrium tax rates and income redistribution:
A laboratory study,” Journal of Public Economics 130, 45–58.
[2] Alesina, A. and G. Tabellini (1990). “Voting on the Budget Deficit,” American Economic
Review 80(1), 37-49.
[3] Alesina, A. and A. Drazen (1991). “Why are Stabilizations Delayed?” American Economic Review 81, 1170-1188.
[4] Barro, R.J. (1973). “The Control of Politicians: An Economic Model,” Public Choice
14, 19-42.
[5] Bartels, L. (2012). “The Study of Electoral Behavior,” in Jan Leighley (ed.) The Oxford
Handbook of American Elections and Political Behavior. Oxford University Press.
[6] Beilharz, H.J., and H. Gersbach (2004). “General Equilibrium Effects and Voting into
a Crisis,” CEPR Discussion Paper no. 4454.
[7] Besley, T. (2005). “Political Selection,” Journal of Economic Perspectives 19(3), 43-60.
[8] Besley, T. and S. Coate (1998). “Sources of Inefficiency in a Representative Democracy:
A Dynamic Analysis,” American Economic Review 88(1), 139-56.
[9] Bisin, A., A. Lizzeri and L. Yariv (2015). “Government Policy with Time Inconsistent
Voters,” American Economic Review 105(6), pp. 1711-37.
[10] Blinder, A. and A. Krueger (2004), “What Does the Public Know about Economic
Policy, and How Does It Know It?” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 2004(1),
327-97.
[11] Bone, J., Hey, J.D., and J. Suckling (2009), “Do People Plan?” Experimental Economics
12, 12-25.
44

[12] Camerer, C.F., Ho, T.-H., and J. K. Chong (2004) “A Cognitive Hierarchy Model of
Games,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 119(3): 861-98.
[13] Canes-Wrone, B., M.C. Herron, and K.W. Shotts (2001). “Leadership and Pandering: A
Theory of Executive Policymaking,” American Journal of Political Science 45, 532-50.
[14] Caplan, B. (2007). The Myth of the Rational Voter: Why Democracies Choose Bad
Policies, Princeton: Princeton University Press.
[15] Caselli, F., and M. Morelli (2004). “Bad Politicians,” Journal of Public Economics 88(2),
759-82.
[16] Chernozhukov, V. and C. Hansen (2008). “The Reduced Form: A Simple Approach to
Inference with Weak Instruments,” Economics Letters 100(1), 68-71.
[17] Coate, S. and S. Morris (1995). “On the Form of Transfers to Special Interests,” Journal
of Political Economy 103(6), 1210-35.
[18] Costa-Gomes, M. and G. Weizsäcker (2008). “Stated Beliefs and Play in Normal-Form
Games,” Review of Economic Studies 75: 729-62.
[19] Crawford, V., M.A. Costa-Gomes, and N. Iriberri (2013). “Structural Models of
Nonequilibrium Strategic Thinking: Theory, Evidence, and Applications,” Journal of
Economic Literature 51(1): 5-62.
[20] Dal Bó, E., Dal Bó, P., and R. Di Tella (2006). “Plata o Plomo?: Bribe and Punishment
in a Theory of Political Influence,” American Political Science Review 100(1), 41-53.
[21] Dal Bó, P. (2014). “Experimental Evidence on the Workings of Democratic Institutions,”
in Economic Institutions, Rights, Growth, and Sustainability: the Legacy of Douglass
North, Cambridge University Press: Cambridge.
[22] Dal Bó, P., A. Foster and L. Putterman (2010). “Institutions and Behavior: Experimental Evidence on the Effects of Democracy,”
2205-29.
45

American Economic Review 100(5),

[23] De Figueiredo, R. (2002). “Electoral Competition, Political Uncertainty, and Policy
Insulation,” American Political Science Review 96(2), 321-33.
[24] Duranton, G., and M. Turner (2011). “The Fundamental Law of Road Congestion:
Evidence from US Cities,” American Economic Review 101(6), 2616-52.
[25] Downs, A. (1962). “The Law of Peak-Hour Expressway Congestion” Traffic Quarterly
16(3), 393-409.
[26] Ertan, A., Page T., and L. Putterman (2009). “Who to punish? Individual decisions
and majority rule in mitigating the free rider problem,” European Economic Review
53(5), 495-511.
[27] Esponda, I. and D. Pouzo (2010). “Conditional Retrospective Voting in Large Elections,” unpublished manuscript.
[28] Esponda, I. and E. Vespa (2014). “Hypothetical Thinking and Information Extraction:
Strategic Voting in the Laboratory,” American Economic Journal: Microeconomics
6(4), 180-202.
[29] Eyster, E. and M. Rabin (2005). “Cursed Equilibrium,” Econometrica 73(5), 1623-72.
[30] Ferejohn J. (1986). “Incumbent Performance and Electoral Control,” Public Choice
50(1/3), 5-25.
[31] Fernandez, R. and D. Rodrik (1991). “Resistance to Reform: Status Quo Bias in the
Presence of Individual-Specific Uncertainty,” American Economic Review 81(5), 114655.
[32] Fischbacher, U. (2007). “z-Tree: Zurich toolbox for ready-made economic experiments,”
Experimental Economics 10(2), 171-178.
[33] Fudenberg, D., D.G. Rand and A. Dreber. (2012). “Slow to Anger and Fast to Forgive:
Cooperation in an Uncertain World” American Economic Review 102(2), 720-49.

46

[34] Fehr, E. and K.M. Schmidt. (1999). “A Theory of Fairness, Competition, and Cooperation,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 114(3), 817-68.
[35] Gentzkow, M. and J. Shapiro (2006). “Media Bias and Reputation,” Journal of Political
Economy 114(2), 35-71.
[36] Gentzkow, M. and J. Shapiro (2010). “What Drives Media Slant? Evidence from U.S.
newspapers,” Econometrica 78(1), 35-71.
[37] Georganas, S., P.J. Healy and R.A. Weber (2013). “On the Persistence of Strategic
Sophistication,” unpublished manuscript.
[38] Grether, D.M. (1992). “Testing Bayes Rule and the Representativeness Heuristic: Some
Experimental Evidence” Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization 17(1), 31-57.
[39] Harrington, J.E. (1993). “Policy, Economic Performance, and Elections” American Economic Review 83(1), 27-42.
[40] Holt, C.A. (2007). Markets, Games, and Strategic Behavior, Boston: Pearson/Addison
Wesley.
[41] Jehiel, P. (2005). “Analogy-Based Expectation Equilibrium,” Journal of Economic Theory 123 (2), 81-104.
[42] Kallbekken, S., Kroll, S. and T. Cherry (2011). “Do You Not Like Pigou, Or Do You
Not Understand Him? Tax Aversion and Revenue Recycling in the Lab,” Journal of
Environmental Economics and Management 62, 53-63.
[43] Karni, E. (2009). “A Mechanism for Eliciting Probabilities,” Econometrica, 77, 603-06.
[44] Kosfeld, M., Okada, A. and A. Riedl (2009) “Institution Formation in Public Goods
Games,” American Economic Review 99, 1335-1355.
[45] Levitt, S., List, J. and S. Sadoff (2011). “Checkmate: Exploring Backward Induction
among Chess Players,” American Economic Review 101(2): 975-90.

47

[46] Lizzeri, A. and L. Yariv (2011). “Collective Self-Control,” Unpublished manuscript.
[47] Margreiter, M., M. Sutter, and D. Dittrich (2005). “Individual and Collective Choice and
Voting in Common Pool Resource Problem with Heterogeneous Actors,” Environmental
& Resource Economics 32, 241-71.
[48] Maskin, E. and J. Tirole (2004). “The Politician and the Judge: Accountability in
Government,” American Economic Review 94(4).
[49] McKelvey, R. and T. Palfrey (1992). “An Experimental Study of the Centipede Game”,
Econometrica 60: 803-36.
[50] Messner, M. and M.K. Polborn (2004). “Paying politicians,” Journal of Public Economics 88 (12), 2423-45.
[51] Möbius, M.M., M. Niederle, P. Niehaus and T. Rosenblat (2014) “Managing SelfConfidence: Theory and Experimental Evidence,” unpublished manuscript.
[52] Moinas, S. and S. Pouget (2013). “The Bubble Game: An Experimental Study of Speculation”, Econometrica 81(4): 1507-40.
[53] Mullainathan, S. and E. Washington (2009). “Sticking with Your Vote: Cognitive Dissonance and Political Attitudes,” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 1(1),
86-111.
[54] Nagel, R. (1995). “Unraveling in Guessing Games: An Experimental Study,” American
Economic Review 85(5), 1313-26.
[55] North, D. C. (1990). Institutions, Institutional Change and Economic Performance,
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
[56] Palacios-Huerta, I. and O. Volij (2009). “Field Centipedes,” American Economic Review
99(4): 1619-35.
[57] Peltzman, S. (1976). “Toward a More General Theory of Regulation,” Journal of Law
and Economics 19, 211-40.
48

[58] Romer, T. and H. Rosenthal (1978). “Political Resource Allocation, Controlled Agendas
and the Status Quo,” Public Choice 33, 27-43.
[59] Sausgruber, R. and J-R Tyran (2005). “Testing the Mill Hypothesis of Fiscal Illusion”,
Public Choice 122: 39-68.
[60] Sausgruber, R. and J-R Tyran (2011). “Are We Taxing Ourselves? How Deliberation
and Experience Shape Voting On Taxes,” Journal of Public Economics 95, 124-76.
[61] Smith, A. (1776). An Enquiry into the Nature and Causes of the Wealth of Nations W.
Strahan and T. Cadell: London.
[62] Stahl, D.O. and Wilson P.W. (1994). “Experimental Evidence on Players’ Models of
Other Players ,” Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization 25(3), 309-27.
[63] Stigler, G. (1971). “The Regulation of Industry” The Bell Journal of Economics and
Management Science 2, 3-21.
[64] Walker, J., R. Gardner, A. Herr and E. Ostrom (2000). “Collective Choices in the Commons: Experimental Results on Proposed Allocation Rules and Votes,” The Economic
Journal 110(1), 212-34.
[65] Webb, M. (2014). “Reworking Wild Bootstrap Based Inference for Clustered Errors,”
Queen’s Economics Department Working Paper No. 1315.

49

8

Appendix
Table 11: Summary Statistics

Male
Year
Ideology
Economics
Political Science
Brown U.
Beauty Contest Number
Math SAT
Verbal SAT
Belief of C in PD
Belief of C in HG
Belief Difference
Earnings

Obs.
768
768
768
768
768
768
768
662
644
408
408
408
768

Mean Std. Dev. Min
0.43
0.50
0
2.70
1.21
1
3.54
2.14
0
0.15
0.36
0
0.05
0.21
0
0.50
0.50
0
36.67
21.35
0
723.95
71.77
400
700.19
77.45
400
44.26
25.79
0
77.74
26.02
0
33.47
41.11
-100
27.81
3.27
16.75

50

Max
1
5
10
1
1
1
100
800
800
100
100
100
37

Table 12: Comparison between Prisoners’ Dilemma and Harmony Game by Treatment

Panel A: Cooperation
Control
Reverse Control
Random Dictator
Part 1
Part 2
Part 1
Part 2
Part 1
Part 2
Periods
All
6
All
All
6
All
All
6
All
HG in Part 2 27%
88% 92%
99%
92% 93%
28%
94%
96%
PD in Part 2
21%
30% 16%
95%
38% 30%
26%
21%
15%
Diff. p-value
0.186 0.000 0.006 0.209 0.000 0.004 0.72 0.000
0.000
Reverse RD
Majority Once
Majority Repeated
Part 1
Part 2
Part 1
Part 2
Part 1
Part 2
Periods
All
6
All
All
6
All
All
6
All
HG in Part 2 95%
94% 95%
37%
97% 94%
28%
97%
98%
PD in Part 2
93%
58% 36%
31%
33% 21%
24%
20%
17%
Diff. p-value
0.656 0.000 0.000 0.431 0.000 0.01 0.352 0.000
0.003
Panel B: Payoffs
Control
Reverse Control
Random Dictator
Part 1
Part 2
Part 1
Part 2
Part 1
Part 2
Periods
All
6
All
All
6
All
All
6
All
HG in Part 2 5.81
7.18 7.44
7.79
7.42 7.51
6.04
7.61
7.75
PD in Part 2
6.12
6.20 5.65
7.75
6.53 6.20
6.16
5.82
5.59
Diff. p-value
0.122 0.125 0.008 0.57 0.134 0.008 0.586 0.007
0.000
Reverse RD
Majority Once
Majority Repeated
Part 1
Part 2
Part 1
Part 2
Part 1
Part 2
Periods
All
6
All
All
6
All
All
6
All
HG in Part 2 7.70
7.61 7.66
5.95
7.77 7.58
5.82
7.79
7.83
PD in Part 2
7.48
7.30 6.44
6.42
6.33 5.85
6.35
5.81
5.67
Diff. p-value
0.211 0.326 0.000 0.048 0.034 0.02 0.052 0.019
0.006
Panel C: Number of Observations and Number of Sessions (in parentheses)
Control (7)
Reverse Control (7)
Random Dictator (8)
Part 1
Part 2
Part 1
Part 2
Part 1
Part 2
Periods
All
6
All
All
6
All
All
6
All
HG in Part 2
300
60
300
300
60
300
450
90
450
PD in Part 2
300
60
300
300
60
300
390
78
390
Reverse RD (8)
Majority Once (7)
Majority Repeated (6)
Part 1
Part 2
Part 1
Part 2
Part 1
Part 2
Periods
All
6
All
All
6
All
All
6
All
HG in Part 2
270
54
270
150
30
150
330
66
450
PD in Part 2
330
66
330
450
90
450
270
54
150
Note: p-values from Wald tests. Standard errors clustered by Part-1 group for Part-1
outcomes and period-6 cooperation, and by session for Part-2 outcomes and period-6
payoffs. Due to few clusters, session-clustered SEs are Webb (2014) wild bootstrapped.
For Majority Repeated, behavior in Part 151
as a function of game played in period 6.

Table 13: Personal Characteristics and Voting for Prisoners’ Dilemma (Dependent Variable:
Vote for PD)
(1)
RD

(2)
Reverse RD

(3)
Majority Once

(4)
Majority Repeated

Male

-0.208**
(0.083)

0.061
(0.116)

-0.219**
(0.097)

-0.272**
(0.100)

Year

0.006
(0.031)

-0.012
(0.040)

0.063
(0.041)

-0.023
(0.043)

Ideology

0.027
(0.018)

0.040**
(0.018)

0.049*
(0.025)

-0.004
(0.016)

Economics

-0.034
(0.083)

0.164
(0.171)

-0.081
(0.175)

-0.086
(0.149)

Political Science

-0.147
(0.215)

0.263*
(0.141)

0.070
(0.180)

-0.102
(0.164)

Brown University

0.066
(0.087)

0.044
(0.121)

0.136
(0.084)

0.043
(0.116)

Beauty Number

-0.001
(0.002)

0.001
(0.003)

-0.000
(0.002)

0.003
(0.002)

0.519***
(0.153)

0.260
(0.175)

0.321
(0.188)

0.589***
(0.185)

Constant

Observations
168
120
120
120
R-squared
0.058
0.063
0.083
0.107
Note: OLS specification. Year denotes year in college. Ideology from 0 to
10 from most liberal to most conservative. Economics and Political Science denote
subjects’ major. Robust standard errors clustered by Part-1 group:
*** significant at 1%, ** at 5%, * at 10%

52

Table 14: Summary Statistics - Additional Experiment
Obs.
192
192
192
192
192
192
192
161
159
192
192
192
192

Male
Year
Ideology
Economics
Political Science
Brown U.
Beauty Contest Number
Math SAT
Verbal SAT
Belief of C in PD
Belief of C in HG
Belief Difference
Earnings

Mean Std. Dev. Min
0.42
0.49
0
2.57
1.27
1
2.98
1.99
0
0.19
0.39
0
0.02
0.14
0
0.50
0.50
0
38.14
23.20
0
718.11
85.18
350
706.29
75.77
490
42.88
25.19
0
71.05
21.90
0
28.17
37.25
-100
27.81
3.27
16.75

Max
1
5
8
1
1
1
100
800
800
100
100
100
37

PD in Part 1
Control, Random Dictator, Majority Once, and Majority Repeated

5

Payoff
6
7

8

Payoffs

Cooperation Rate
0 .2 .4 .6 .8 1

Cooperation

1

2

3

4

5
6
Period

7

8

9

10

1

2

3

4

5
6
Period

7

8

9

10

7

8

9

10

HG in Part 1
Reverse Control, and Reverse Random Dictator

5

Payoff
6
7

8

Payoffs

Cooperation Rate
0 .2 .4 .6 .8 1

Cooperation

1

2

3

4

5
6
Period

7

8

9

10

Play PD in Part 2

1

2

3

4

5
6
Period

Play HG in Part 2

Figure 5: Comparing Prisoners’ Dilemma and Harmony Game: All Treatments Control

53

5

0

Payoff
6
7

8

Payoffs − RD

Cooperation Rate
.2 .4 .6 .8 1

Cooperation − RD

1

2

3

4

5
6
Period

7

8

9

10

1

2

4

5
6
Period

7

8

9

10

9

10

5

0

Payoff
6
7

8

Payoffs − Reverse RD

Cooperation Rate
.2 .4 .6 .8 1

Cooperation − Reverse RD

3

1

2

3

4

5
6
Period

7

8

9

10

1

Play PD in Part 2

2

3

4

5
6
Period

7

8

Play HG in Part 2

Figure 6: Comparing Prisoners’ Dilemma and Harmony Game: Random Dictator and Reverse Random Dictator

5

0

Payoff
6
7

8

Payoffs − Majority Once

Cooperation Rate
.2 .4 .6 .8 1

Cooperation − Majority Once

1

2

3

4

5
6
Period

7

8

9

10

1

3

4

5
6
Period

7

8

9

10

5

0

Payoff
6
7

8

Payoffs − Majority Repeated

Cooperation Rate
.2 .4 .6 .8 1

Cooperation − Majority Repeated

2

1

2

3

4

5
6
Period

7

8

9

10

1

Play PD in Part 2

2

3

4

5
6
Period

7

8

9

10

Play HG in Part 2

Figure 7: Comparing Prisoners’ Dilemma and Harmony Game: Majority Once and Majority
Repeated

54

