                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




            A POOR MEANS TEST? ECONOMETRIC TARGETING IN AFRICA

                                        Caitlin Brown
                                      Martin Ravallion
                                    Dominique van de Walle

                                      Working Paper 22919
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w22919


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   December 2016




For their comments the authors thank Arthur Alik-Lagrange, Kathleen Beegle, Mary Ann
Bronson, Raphael Calel, Phillippe Leite, Mead Over, Adam Wagstaff and seminar participants at
Georgetown University. The authors are grateful to the World Bank’s Strategic Research
Program for funding assistance for this research. These are the views of the authors, and need not
reflect those of their employers, including the World Bank, its member countries, or the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2016 by Caitlin Brown, Martin Ravallion, and Dominique van de Walle. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
A Poor Means Test? Econometric Targeting in Africa
Caitlin Brown, Martin Ravallion, and Dominique van de Walle
NBER Working Paper No. 22919
December 2016
JEL No. I32,I38,O15

                                         ABSTRACT

Proxy-means testing is a popular method of poverty targeting with imperfect information. In a
now widely-used version, a regression for log consumption calibrates a proxy-means test score
based on chosen covariates, which is then implemented for targeting out-of-sample. In this paper,
the performance of various proxy-means testing methods is assessed using data for nine African
countries. Standard proxy-means testing helps filter out the nonpoor, but excludes many poor
people, thus diminishing the impact on poverty. Some methodological changes perform better,
with a poverty-quantile method dominating in most cases. Even so, either a basic-income scheme
or transfers using a simple demographic scorecard are found to do as well, or almost as well, in
reducing poverty. However, even with a budget sufficient to eliminate poverty with full
information, none of these targeting methods brings the poverty rate below about three-quarters
of its initial value. The prevailing methods are particularly deficient in reaching the poorest.


Caitlin Brown                                   Dominique van de Walle
Department of Economics                         World Bank
Georgetown University                           1818 H Street NW
cb575@georgetown.edu                            Washington DC 20433
                                                dvandewalle@worldbank.org
Martin Ravallion
Department of Economics
Georgetown University
ICC 580
Washington, DC 20057
and NBER
mr1185@georgetown.edu
1.      Introduction

         While universal social programs—whereby everyone is covered—are excellent at reaching the
poorest, the beneficiaries can include many people who do not need this form of public help.
Governments have tried many ways of assuring better “targeting,” with the explicit aim of concentrating
the benefits of a social policy on poor people. The means used vary in their data requirements,
methodological sophistication and costs (both administrative and broader social costs).
        Readily measurable proxies for consumption or income are often used in efforts to reduce
poverty in settings in which the means-testing of benefits is not an administratively feasible option, as in
most low-income countries (and many middle-income countries). Efficiency considerations point to the
need for indicators that are not easily manipulated by actual or potential beneficiaries. Proxy variables,
such as gender and education, family size and housing conditions, have been common.2 A score based
on these variables is used in validating other targeting methods, such as those based on community-level
subjective assessments of who is “poor.” The scores are also entering many social-protection
registries—national data bases that are used in various ways including to flag ineligible households in
future schemes.
        The main challenge has been in setting the score’s weights. Various “poverty scorecards” or
“basic needs indicators” have been used. Some versions use ad hoc weights, such as taking a simple
average of the scores across components.3 Practitioners have turned to more sophisticated statistical
methods in an effort to further improve targeting accuracy. These methods have come to be known as
proxy means testing (PMT).4
        This paper assesses an increasingly popular solution in which the weights in the PMT are
identified from regression coefficients for household consumption or income as a function of readily
observed covariates. The regression is calibrated to survey data and then used to make the out-of-sample
predictions for the relevant population. This has the intuitive attraction that the dependent variable is a

2
  This idea appears to have emerged in social policy making in Chile in the 1980s (Grosh, 1994, Ch.5). Grosh et al. (2008)
provides a useful overview of PMT and other targeting methods found in practice in developing countries, with details on
many examples.
3
  A popular example of the poverty scorecard was proposed by Schreiner (2010); the Progress out of Poverty Index uses
Schreiner’s (2015) method. The scorecard includes 10 easily measured correlates of poverty which are used to form a
composite index. Diamond et al. (2016) argue that the predictive ability of such scorecards can be improved by calibrating
the variables and their weights to local (sub-national) conditions, for which purpose they advocate econometric methods.
4
  This term appears to be due to Grosh and Baker (1995, p. ix), who define PMT as “a situation where information on
household or individual characteristics correlated with welfare levels is used in a formal algorithm to proxy household
income, welfare or need.”

                                                              2
well-established measure of household economic welfare and, indeed, the same variable is typically
used in measuring poverty.5 To distinguish it from other methods of means testing, we will use the term
“econometric targeting” to refer to any PMT based on a regression model. An influential early
contribution by Grosh (1994) compared numerous social programs in Latin America and concluded that
this class of methods produced the best targeting outcomes, measured in terms of reducing inclusion
errors, whereby a nonpoor person is counted as poor. Various versions of econometric targeting have
since been proposed, and the method has been widely implemented in developing countries.6
         Econometric targeting has also been criticized for its seemingly poor predictions about who is
poor and who is not. For example, Kidd and Wylde (2011, p.ii) refer to the method’s “considerable
inaccuracy at low levels of coverage.” Transparency has also been a concern. Sometimes the score
variables and weights are deliberately kept secret for incentive reasons. In other cases, the method and
formula are too complicated, or too poorly explained, for public consumption. Either way, observers on
the ground do not always understand why some people are selected and some are not based on these
targeting methods. With reference to a conditional cash transfer scheme in Nicaragua using PMT, field
work by Adato and Roopnaraine (2004, p.15) led them to write that:
         “…the targeting process as a whole is poorly understood at the community level in both geographical-
         and household-targeted communities. When asked why some households were beneficiaries and others
         not, informants offered a range of explanations, from divine intervention to a random lottery. For
         example, one informant from a geographically-targeted community noted: ‘Well, some people wonder
         why they weren’t targeted even though they live in this same area. So we tell them that the Bible says that
         many are called but few are chosen.’”

In the context of a PMT in Indonesia, Cameron and Shah (2014) argue that considerable local social
unrest was generated by this lack of transparency in why some people were deemed beneficiaries and
some not. This came with an erosion of local social capital and greater distrust of local administrators.
         Another critique relates to the goals of social protection policies, which can be thought of as
involving both protection from uninsured risks as well as promotion from poverty over the longer-term.7
Some observers have questioned the effectiveness of PMT in responding to shocks or targeting
insurance. Instead, it is argued that, because it is largely based on long-term assets, PMT is suitable
“…for identifying the chronic poor and determining eligibility for programs that provide long-term
support” (Del Ninno and Mills, p.22). Nonetheless, PMT is widely used in implementing policies that


5
  For a critical review of the methods used see Ravallion (2016, Part 2).
6
  Useful overviews can be found in Mills et al. (2015) and USAID’s website on Poverty Assessment Tools.
7
  On this distinction and the implications for assessing social protection policies see Ravallion et al. (1995).

                                                                3
offer short-lived benefits and are seen to be justified by their provision of insurance or emergency relief
such as public works and cash transfer schemes.
        The criticisms of econometric targeting could reflect either methodological inadequacies or
informational/data limitations. On the former, standard regression-based calibration of the PMT score
will tend to work less well toward the extremes of the distribution of household consumption. By its
design, a standard regression line passes through the means of the data. The residuals will be positively
correlated with the dependent variable (more so the higher the variance of the residuals given exogenous
regressors).8 One can expect the method to have a tendency to overestimate living standards for the
poorest and underestimate them for the richest, though the degree to which this is problematic for
targeting accuracy is unclear. Indeed, it is theoretically possible that the PMT method predicts that
nobody lives below a poverty line for which even a sizable share of the population is deemed to be poor
based on observed consumptions. Another possibility is that the variables used are not sufficiently good
proxies for household consumption. In other words, that there is an information problem.
        The paper aims to provide a systematic assessment of the reliability of econometric targeting as a
tool for social policies aiming to reduce poverty. We assess what appears to be the most common form
of what we call “Basic PMT,” as well as some alternative methods using extra covariates and methods
that are arguably more appropriate when it is recognized explicitly that the PMT is for antipoverty
policy making. A natural counterfactual for assessing any form of PMT is a uniform allocation—the
same for everyone. Various other counterfactuals of interest to policy makers are examined. The study
also considers less finely-targeted options to econometric targeting, which are uniform only within
stipulated categories.
        While Latin America has attracted the bulk of the past research on PMT, we study the method
using survey data for the world’s poorest region, Sub-Saharan Africa (SSA). This is also the region
where existing social spending has been least effective in reaching the poorest.9 The specific countries
studied are Burkina Faso, Ethiopia, Ghana, Malawi, Mali, Niger, Nigeria, Tanzania and Uganda, being
all those countries in SSA with recent and reasonably comparable surveys in the World Bank’s Living
Standards Measurement Study (LSMS).10 For a subset of these countries we also have panel data.


8
  If the regression model is y  x   with Cov ( x,  )  0 then Cov ( y , ˆ )  Var(ˆ )  0 (in obvious notation).
9
  For evidence on the point see Ravallion (2016, Chapter 10).
10
   Existing government safety net programs in Ghana, Malawi, Nigeria, and Tanzania, and World Bank projects in Burkina
Faso, Ethiopia, Ghana, Malawi and Niger use PMT, often in combination with geographic and community-based targeting.
At the time of writing, PMT is also being considered for Mali.

                                                            4
         In advocating and assessing PMT, social policy making in developing countries has often
emphasized the need to avoid the “leakage” of benefits to the non-poor, and to assure broad coverage of
the poor. Following the literature, one can term failures with regard to these two aspects of targeting as
the aforementioned “errors of inclusion” (i.e., counting someone as poor who is not) and “errors of
exclusion” (i.e., counting someone as non-poor who is in fact poor).11 The difference is important when
deciding how much to spend on a program. Inclusion errors are generally costly to the public budget
while exclusion errors save public money. Governments and international financial institutions
concerned about the fiscal cost of social policies have thus put greater emphasis on avoiding inclusion
errors as a means of cutting the cost to the government without hurting poor people.12 Some observers
have questioned this prioritization, arguing that exclusion errors should get higher weight when the
policy objective is to minimize poverty.13 In this paper we consider various measures of both targeting
performance and impacts on poverty.
         Some assessments of econometric targeting are already available in the literature.14 The methods
appear to vary considerably across the studies to date, such as in how many variables are used in the
PMT, how targeting performance is assessed, and what poverty cutoff point is used. However,
documentation is rarely ideal, often leaving the reader to guess what has been done. This makes it
difficult to compare results. We provide similar tests on a consistent basis.
         We go further than past work in a number of other respects. We consider alternative econometric
methods for calibrating the PMT scores. These include methods that recognize explicitly that the goal of
PMT is poverty reduction rather than obtaining unbiased estimates of conditional means. We also
simulate stylized policies to see how well econometric targeting works. Here we consider simpler
alternatives to PMT that have a long history, going back to the state-contingent transfers that were
introduced under England’s Poor Laws, and the various proposals that have been made over the last 200
years for a “basic-income scheme.”15 Additionally, we compare PMT to optimally differentiated


11
   The distinction between these two targeting errors goes back to Weisbrod (1970) who called them “vertical” and
“horizontal targeting efficiency.” Smolensky et al. (1995) called them “errors of inclusion” and “errors of exclusion.” Some
authors refer to exclusion as “under-coverage” and refer to inclusion as “leakage.” In development contexts, influential early
contributions were made by Cornia and Stewart (1995) and Grosh and Baker (1995).
12
   This emphasis on reducing inclusion errors appears to have emerged during macroeconomic adjustment efforts, notably in
Latin America in the 1980s (Smolensky et al., 1995).
13
   See Cornia and Stewart (1995), Smolensky et al. (1995) and Ravallion (2009).
14
   See Grosh and Baker (1995) (Jamaica, Bolivia, Peru), Ahmed and Bouis (2002) (Arab Republic of Egypt), Narayan and
Yoshida (2005) (Sri Lanka), Sharif (2009) (Bangladesh), Stoeffler et al. (2015) (Cameroon), Pop (2015) (Ghana) and
Cnobloch et al. (2015) (Malawi).
15
   On the history of these policy options see Ravallion (2016, Part 1).

                                                              5
transfers based on the same information set. In considering these options, we focus directly on the
impacts on poverty rather than looking solely at measures of targeting performance. Here we take the
view that “better targeting” should not be seen as an end in itself but rather as a possible means of
assuring a greater impact on poverty.
         The panel data that are available for a subset of countries help us address concerns about
measurement errors in consumption. To some degree, what are called “targeting errors” are likely to be
measurement errors (Ravallion 2008). By using the panel data to calculate time-mean consumption we
can at least partly reduce the effect of measurement error, as a robustness test of our main findings.
         Another departure from past work is that we allow for likely lags in implementation; past
assessments have ignored the fact that PMT invariably entails such lags, given that the score must be set
in advance of implementation. There are lags between the survey year and the release of the PMT
formula, and further lags to implementation.16 We can expect a degree of churning, with households
moving in and out of poverty.17 So implementation lags are likely to constrain the performance of
econometric targeting in identifying the currently poor. We exploit the panel nature of our data for a
subset of countries to explicitly introduce lags.
         There are a number of issues that we do not take up. One of these is whether household
consumption obtained from a survey is an adequate welfare indicator. The methods of econometric
targeting studied here make that assumption, and we accept it for the purpose of evaluating the
performance of these methods. Another issue not taken up here is how well a low level of household
consumption identifies deprived individuals; Brown et al. (2016) take up this issue in the context of
attempts to reach undernourished women and children. While we do address the performance of
econometric targeting for stylized cash transfer programs we do not consider alternatives such as self-
targeting using work requirements (“workfare”) or community-based targeting in which local
communities are engaged directly in deciding who is poor and who is not.18 Nor do we consider the
(economic, social and political) costs of targeting, which have received some attention in the literature. 19


16
   For example, even for a relatively simple PMT such as the Progress out of Poverty Index, we find that across the 59
countries for which the index is currently available, the number of years between the survey year and the release date of the
index ranges from 1 to 9, with a mean of 3.9 years and a median of 3.5.
17
   The implications of such churning for assessing the performance of social protection policies are examined further in
Ravallion et al. (1995).
18
   On workfare see, for example, Murgai et al. (2016) and on community-based targeting see Alatas et al. (2012), Karlan and
Thuysbaert (2013) and Stoeffler et al. (2016). Barrientos (2013) provides a useful overview of the whole class of social
assistance policies in developing countries.
19
   See the discussions in van de Walle (1998), Gelbach and Pritchett (2000) and Ravallion (2016, Ch. 10).

                                                              6
For example, we do not discuss behavioral responses, social stigmas, or implications for social cohesion
and political support for poverty programs.20
         The paper finds that when the counterfactual is a uniform allocation of the same budget, even our
Basic PMT allows a substantial reduction in the rate of inclusion errors; in this setting it should be
possible to roughly halve the rate of inclusion errors using econometric targeting. When judged against
a fixed poverty line, this success at avoiding leakage to the nonpoor comes with seemingly weak
coverage of poor people—a high rate of exclusion errors. In other words, the method helps exclude the
poor as well as the non-poor. The paper finds that econometric targeting typically provides at most
modest gains in the poverty impacts over other policy-relevant alternatives. Indeed, in a number of cases
and depending on the country and the nature of its poverty profile, simpler state-contingent targeting
methods or even a “basic-income scheme” (in which everyone is covered) dominate in certain policy-
relevant cases, such as when one allows for plausible lags in PMT implementation. However, none of
these methods can be considered to perform especially well. Prevailing methods do not reliably reach
the poorest. The costs of each method in practice may then be decisive in the choice.
         The following section describes the PMT method that we assess, while Section 3 describes the
measures we use in assessing econometric targeting. Section 4 studies the basic version of PMT, while
Section 5 turns to various extensions and revisions to that version. For stylized transfer programs,
Section 6 compares the poverty impacts of econometric targeting to those of less methodologically
sophisticated methods, including un-targeted (universal) transfers and simple demographic “scorecard”
methods. Section 7 presents our results for (informationally-feasible) differentiated transfers, including
optimal transfer schemes for poverty reduction with a given budget but limited information. Section 8
uses the panel surveys to introduce lags in implementation. Section 9 offers some cross-country
comparisons of the performance of econometric targeting; here we ask how much the impacts of PMT
on poverty for a given budget are explicable in terms of the alternative targeting measures and the
predictive ability of the PMT regressions. Section 10 concludes.

2.       Econometric targeting

         Quite generally, we can think of any PMT as some weighted function of a vector of covariates
xijt . The specific form of this function that has become popular and that we focus on uses household-

20
  Smolensky et al. (1995) conclude that none of these issues is likely to be decisive for or against targeting. Atkinson (1995)
argues that broader objectives of social policy (including social solidarity) warn against targeting.

                                                               7
consumption regression coefficients as the weights. We can write the following empirical regression
function for the consumption of household i in country j at date t on a vector of covariates xijt using a

survey sample of size N jt :

                           yijt   jt   jt xijt   ijt (i=1,…, N jt )                                           (1)

The PMT is then based on:
                           yˆ ijt  ˆ jt  ˆ jt xijt                                                              (2)

        The most common method in practice for estimating  jt and  jt in (1) appears to be Ordinary

Least Squares (OLS) using log consumption per capita as the dependent variable. As usual, OLS
chooses the parameter estimates to minimize the sum of squared errors with no difference in the weights
attached to poor versus non-poor households (i.e., choosing ̂ jt and ˆ jt to minimize  ˆ ijt2 for each j, t).

We also considered the option of using a binary indicator for whether a household’s actual consumption
falls below the poverty line as the dependent variable (equal to one if a household is poor, and zero
otherwise). We tried this for both OLS (giving a linear probability model) and a Probit. However, we
found that targeting errors were substantially higher with a binary dependent variable in all cases. So we
confine attention to the continuous dependent variable in the rest of this paper.
        Another option to OLS in estimating equation (1) is to try to better tailor the estimator to the
specific policy problem, in this case poverty reduction. Two ways of doing this can be suggested. The
first is the quantile regression method of Koenker and Bassett (1978). This is more robust to outliers
than OLS, and (importantly) the method can be tailored to the problem at hand in that the quantile can
be set at the overall poverty rate.21 In other words, we calibrate the PMT score to how that specific
quantile in the distribution of log consumption, given the covariates, changes with those covariates. The
second method entails placing higher weight on the squared errors of poorer people, giving “poverty-
weighted least-squares” (PLS). Among the various weighting schemes that might be used, we choose the
method proposed by Mapa and Albis (2013), which weights equally all observations below the poverty
line but gives zero weight to those above the line. In other words, we run the regression on poor
households only. We extend this method by including households somewhat above the line. Once we
have the PLS parameter estimates we calculate the revised PMT scores using the actual values of xijt .


21
  For example, this is one of the methods used by USAID (2011) in calibrating a PMT for Peru. This method is also
discussed in Mills et al. (2015).

                                                               8
        Any PMT method is likely to be quite constrained in practice in the choice of covariates.
Practitioners are restricted to using xijt variables that are considered easy to observe or verify in the field.

There are feasibility constraints associated with the number and nature of the variables used in practice;
administrative costs almost certainly rise with the number of variables. There are also incentive
constraints, stemming from the scope for manipulation by local agents when there are many variables in
the PMT (Niehaus et al. 2013).
        The variables used in practice typically cover readily observed living conditions of the
household, such as basic consumer durables or assets, demographic variables (size and composition) and
attributes of the head.22 Two important exclusions are notable. First, prices are rarely used and assets are
identified in broad categories; clearly, two households can each own a “fridge” but in one case it is 30
years old and works poorly while in the other case it is a fancy new model. Second, an important
exclusion is that one cannot use fine geographic effects, such as at the level of the village, since one is
constrained to estimating on a sample survey that will typically only cover a sample of villages
(typically determined by the first stage of a two-stage sampling design). One does not know the
geographic effect for the population, as required for implementing the PMT.23 However, in one version
we include community-level variables that go some way toward addressing this concern.
        There is a degree of judgement required in selecting covariates. Here we consider various
options, starting with a “Basic PMT” that seems to capture well the set of variables found in practice.
We also consider “Extended PMT” methods that include variables that have extra explanatory power;
while this provides a useful indication of the gains from more data, it is acknowledged that this version
may not be easily implemented in the field. The Statistical Addendum provides descriptive statistics.

3.      Measures of targeting and poverty
        An early strand of the literature formulated the targeting problem as that of choosing a schedule
of transfer payments across types of households to minimize a measure of poverty subject to a budget
constraint.24 The subsequent literature has instead emphasized “targeting efficiency,” defined in terms of
reducing targeting errors as defined below. Here we shall study both types of measures. We start with
targeting measures.
22
   See, for example, the various studies in the compilation by Del Ninno and Mills (2015).
23
   The same limitation is shared by small-area estimation methods (“poverty mapping”) as in Elbers et al. (2003).
24
   The idea was developed in theoretical terms by Kanbur (1987) and the problem was formulated and solved numerically in
Ravallion and Chao (1989) for the squared poverty gap index of Foster et al. (1984). Glewwe (1992) generalized this
approach to allow for continuous variables.

                                                            9
         Measures of targeting performance: The relevant counts corresponding to the joint distribution
of y ijt and ŷ ijt are shown in Table 1, which helps clarify our notation and some of the properties of our

measures.
         We focus on three main measures of targeting performance. The first is the Inclusion Error Rate
(IER), defined by the proportion of those identified as poor who are not. This can be written as:25

                                        
                                            N jt
                                                   wijt1( yijt  z jt yˆ ijt  z jt )
                           IER jt          i 1
                                                                                                                     (3)
                                                 i1 wijt1( yˆ ijt  z jt )
                                                      N jt




Here the poverty line (in consumption space) is z jt and the sample size is N jt with households indexed

i=1,…, N jt and wijt denotes the appropriate sample weights (to deal with differences in household size

                         
                             N jt
and sample design);         i 1
                                    wijt  1 .

         Inclusion errors have received much attention in efforts to reduce the budgetary cost of social
policies aiming to use transfer payments (in cash or kind) to reduce poverty. Inclusion errors imply a
fiscal cost without any direct impact on poverty. For a uniform transfer paid to all those who are deemed
to be poor, the IER gives the share of the transfers going to the non-poor.26 If everyone is deemed
“poor,” so the transfer payment is universal, then IER is simply one minus the poverty rate.
         The IER is often normalized by the poverty rate when the latter varies, which we will also do in
some cases. The resulting measure has been used extensively—clearly more than any other targeting
measure—in comparing the targeting performance of social programs across developing countries.27
Critics of the focus on reducing inclusion errors have pointed to a number of issues, including
measurement errors and the need for more inclusive policies in the interest of social
coherence/stability.28
         The second measure is the Exclusion Error Rate (EER), given by the proportion of the poor who
are not identified as poor. (Sometimes the term “coverage rate” is used instead, which is simply one
minus the EER.) For a social program providing a uniform transfer payment to all—variously called a
“basic income guarantee” or “citizenship income”—the EER is of course zero, since everyone is
covered. One might expect measures based on the EER to be better predictors of a social program’s
25
   The indicator function 1(.) takes the value unity when the condition in parentheses is true and zero otherwise.
26
   This is what Weisbrod (1970) dubbed “vertical efficiency.”
27
   This normalized share of transfers going to the poor was used by Coady et al. (2004a, b) to compare 85 programs across
many countries.
28
   Weisbrod (1970) raised concerns about focusing solely on reducing inclusion errors (vertical efficiency in his terms). On
measurement errors in targeting see the discussion in Ravallion (2008).

                                                                         10
impact on poverty.29 While that is intuitive—the more the poor are covered, the greater their expected
gain—it does not necessarily hold as it will depend on the measure of poverty used, the distribution of
coverage and the budget.30 The Exclusion Error Rate can be written as:

                                            
                                                  N jt
                                                         wijt1( yˆ ijt  z jt y ijt  z jt )
                                EER jt          i 1
                                                                                                                                  (4)
                                                     
                                                            N jt
                                                                w 1( y ijt  z jt )
                                                            i 1 ijt


           To better understand the properties of these measures it helps to also think of IER and EER in
probabilistic terms as:
                     IER jt  Pr( yijt  z jt yˆ ijt  z jt )  Pr( yijt  z jt , yˆ ijt  z jt ) Pr( yˆ ijt  z jt )             (5.1)

                     EER jt  Pr( yˆ ijt  z jt yijt  z jt )  Pr( yˆ ijt  z jt , yijt  z jt ) Pr( yijt  z jt )               (5.2)

Plainly, when the predictions are perfect ( y ijt  yˆ ijt for all i,j,t) IER jt  EER jt  0 for all j,t. Note that:

                     Pr( y ijt  z jt , yˆ ijt  z jt )  Pr( y ijt  z jt , yˆ ijt  z jt )  Pr( yˆ ijt  z jt )

                     Pr( yijt  z jt , yˆ ijt  z jt )  Pr( yijt  z jt , yˆ ijt  z jt )  Pr( yijt  z jt )

Also note that Pr( yˆ ijt  z jt )  Pr( yijt  z jt ) implies Pr( yijt  z jt , yˆ ijt  z jt )  Pr( yijt  z jt , yˆ ijt  z jt ).

Then, from (5.1) and (5.2), we see that IER jt  EER jt . Thus the two error rates are equalized (though

not at zero unless all levels are predicted correctly) when the poverty rates are equal ( Hˆ jt  H jt ), i.e.,

Pr( yˆ ijt  z jt )  Pr( y ijt  z jt ) implies that IER jt  EER jt . Intuitively, this is because each time a person

who is in fact poor (based on the survey-based consumption) is incorrectly identified as non-poor, that
person has to be replaced by someone who is in fact non-poor, so as to keep the total count of the poor
constant. In other words, every exclusion error must generate an inclusion error once the poverty rate is
identical when comparing actual and predicted values. Of course, we do not expect the actual and
predicted poverty rates to be equal in general. However, in the methodology of PMT there is the option
of fixing the poverty rate for predicted values according to the survey-based measure using actuals. For
example, if the survey indicates that 20% of the population is poor then one targets the poorest 20%
based on the PMT scores. When the poverty rate is fixed this way we will simply refer to the “Targeting
Error Rate” (TER).
           The third measure is the Normalized Targeting Differential (NTD). In the context of a transfer
program, the (ordinary) Targeting Differential (TD) is defined as the mean transfer made to the poor less

29
     See Ravallion (2009) who finds supportive evidence using data for a large cash transfer program in China.
30
     For example, for the headcount index of poverty one focuses on whether there is exclusion at the poverty line.

                                                                              11
that made to the non-poor.31 For a uniform transfer paid to all those who are deemed eligible, the TD
becomes the difference between the proportion of the poor who are predicted to be poor and the
proportion of the non-poor who are predicted to be poor. (In the case of a specific antipoverty program it
is the difference between the program’s coverage rate for the poor and that for the non-poor.) The NTD
divides this measure by the mean transfer receipt, to make the resulting measure more comparable
across countries and programs. For a basic income guarantee, NTD=0. When only the poor get help from
the program and all of them are covered, the NTD reaches its upper bound of 1; when only the non-poor
get the program and all of them do, the NTD is at its lower bound of -1. For a uniform transfer to all
recipients in the amount  jt we have:

                                                                
                                                                      N jt
                                 TD jt                                       wijt1( yˆ ijt  z jt yijt  z jt )       1  Hˆ jt  EER jt
                    NTD jt               1  EER jt               i 1
                                                                                                                                          (6)
                                   jt                                   i1 wijt1( yijt  z jt )
                                                                                N jt
                                                                                                                           1  H jt

where H jt is the headcount index of poverty (or poverty rate), defined as the proportion of the relevant

population living in households with consumption per person below the poverty line, and Ĥ jt is the

headcount index obtained based on predicted consumptions.
          Another concept of targeting errors occasionally found in the literature makes the distinction
between “Type 1” (T1) and “Type 2” (T2) errors of targeting (borrowing the terms from statistics).32 The
former is defined as the proportion of the (ineligible) non-poor who are assigned a program targeted to
the poor; thus, in this context:33

                                         
                                             N jt
                                                    wijt1( yˆ ijt  z jt yijt  z jt )        Hˆ jt  (1  EER jt ) H jt
                              T 1 jt      i 1
                                                                                                                                          (7)
                                                
                                                       N jt
                                                          w 1( yijt  z jt )                           (1  H jt )
                                                      i 1 ijt


When the poverty rate is fixed ( Hˆ jt  H jt  H for all (j, t)), T1 jt is directly proportional to EER jt ;

specifically, T 1 jt  EER jt H /(1  H ) . On the other hand, the Type 2 error rate is T 2 jt  EER jt . This

yields another interpretation of the NTD as (one minus) the aggregate of Type 1 and 2 errors:

31
   This measure was proposed by Ravallion (2000). Also see Galasso and Ravallion (2005) and Ravallion (2009) on the
properties of this measure and the discussions in Stifel and Alderman (2005) and Stoeffler et al. (2016).
32
   The designation of which is Type 1 and which Type 2 is arbitrary, and usage has varied. For example, Wodon (1997) and
Ravallion (2009) define them our way but Grosh and Baker (1995) and Barrientos (2013) swap the two labels while Van
Domelen (2007) has both usages. Appeals to statistics (whereby a Type 1 error is the incorrect rejection of a true null
hypothesis while Type 2 is the failure to reject a false null) cannot resolve the matter since one can define the relevant null
hypotheses consistently with either interpretation. (For our interpretation the hypothesis being tested is that a specific person
is poor; the null is that she is not poor.) Readers are free to swap the labels and nothing substantive changes in our argument.
   Note that i 1jt wijt 1( yˆ ijt  z jt yijt  z jt )  H jt N jt  i 1jt wijt 1( yˆ ijt  z jt yijt  z jt ) H jt N jt (1  EERjt ) .
33               N                                                      N




                                                                                12
                              NTD jt  1  (T 1 jt  T 2 jt )                                                            (8)

When the poverty rate is fixed the NTD is also a simple linear transform of the exclusion rate; i.e.
NTD jt  1  EER jt /(1  H ) ). We will not use T1 and T2 given that they are so closely related to EER

and NTD.
           Poverty measures: Given that poverty reduction is typically the primary (or even sole) objective
of this class of policies it is appropriate that we also study impacts on poverty measures. The first
measure we use is the popular headcount index, defined already. We denote the empirical cumulative
distribution function (CDF) of consumption as p  F jt ( y )  [0,1] , which gives the proportion of the

population of country (or group) j at date t consuming less than the amount y  [ y min , y max ] . Then the
headcount index can be written as:

                              H jt  F jt ( z jt )  i 1jt wijt1( yijt  z jt )
                                                                      N
                                                                                                                         (9)

The calculated poverty rate when based on the empirical distribution of ŷ ijt (i=1,…, N jt ) is Ĥ jt .

           While H is (by far) the most popular measure in practice, its limitations are widely appreciated,
notably that the measure does not reflect changes in living standards below the poverty line. We also
consider two “higher-order” measures. The first is the poverty gap index, as given by the mean distance
below the poverty line as a proportion of the line where the mean is taken over the whole population,
counting those above the line as having zero gap.34 The poverty gap index can be written as:
                              PG jt         w            ijt   (1  yijt / z jt )                                      (10)
                                           yijt  z jt


           We also make use of a distribution-sensitive measure, namely the Watts index proposed by
Watts (1968) given by the mean proportionate poverty gap (counting the non-poor as having zero gap).
This measure penalizes inequality among the poor, by putting higher weight on poorer people.35 The
Watts index can be written as:
                             W jt       w          ijt   ln( z jt /( yijt )]                                           (11)
                                       yijt  z jt


           Optimal transfers for a given budget: It appears to be a near-universal practice to provide a
uniform transfer payment to all those who are identified as poor by the PMT. Transfer size may vary
according to the number or age of children in the household (as in some conditional cash transfer

34
     The Statistical Addendum gives selected results for the squared poverty gap index of Foster et al. (1984).
35
     The Watts index is known to have a number of other desirable theoretical properties, as detailed in Zheng (1993).

                                                                                      13
schemes) but not with respect to predicted poverty levels based on the PMT. The popularity of such
uniform transfers to those predicted to be poor can be thought of as a feasibility constraint on PMT; in
the field it is likely to be difficult to make finely differentiated transfers. However, it is still of interest to
see how much this constraint is limiting the impact on poverty.
           We explore the effect of this constraint in two ways. The first is to vary the size of transfers
based on the PMT scores. The second is to reformulate the problem as one of optimizing the transfers as
a function of the variables going into the PMT. Quite generally one can think of the informationally-
feasible transfers as a function of m observed x’s. The policy maker only observes the covariates x for
each person; it is not known who is poor and who is not. However, the policy maker has a survey with
much more information available for a sample. The problem is to choose the parameters of a score for
assigning the real-world transfers based on the x’s, as given by:
                                     m
                             ijt   ( kjt xijtk )  0                                                  (12)
                                   k 0


(Here xijt0  1 so that  0jt is the intercept—the transfer received by someone with xijtk  0 for k=1,…,m.)

In one version transfers are linear in the x’s, i.e.,   1 . We call this the linear optimization. We also
estimate a nonlinear version with   2 , which introduces squared terms and interaction effects among
the x’s.36 The choice of the score parameters  kjt is made to minimize the Watts index in the sample

survey data:
                            W jt        w         ijt   ln[ z jt /( yijt   ijt )]                      (13)
                                      yijt  z jt


The choice is constrained by the budget:
                                     N jt

                             B jt   wijt ijt                                                            (14)
                                     i 1


           We solve this problem numerically.37 One start value we use for the optimization is the uniform
case obtained by setting  0jt  B jt and  ijtk  0 for k=1,…,m. Other start values are tested. When there are

multiple local optima the solution for the parameters  kjt that gives the lowest value of the poverty

measure is chosen.



36
     Glewwe (1992) recommended this in his formulation of the optimal targeting problem.
37
     We use the “fmincon” program in Matlab.

                                                                               14
        Data: The data for implementing these measures come from the World Bank’s well-known
LSMS.38 Table 2 lists the countries, years of survey, and numbers of households surveyed. In keeping
with the bulk of the literature, our dependent variable is log total consumption per capita.39 Consumption
is measured in local currency units. Spatially deflated consumption values are available for all countries
except Burkina Faso.40 We use two poverty lines, corresponding to H jt  0.2 and 0.4 for all (j, t). The

40% figure coincides fairly closely with the overall poverty rate found for the Africa region using the
World Bank’s international line.41 The 20% rate allows us to focus on how well the method does at
identifying those who can be considered extremely poor. When comparing the actual values and the
PMT scores one can chose to either fix the poverty rate (at 0.2 or 0.4) or fix the poverty line in the
consumption space (i.e., fixing z jt  F jt1 (0.2) or F jt1 (0.4) ). This choice makes a difference and practice

varies so we present results for both options.

4.      Results for Basic PMT

        The “Basic PMT” follows our reading of prevailing practice. Variables used include the type of
toilet a household has; floor, wall and roofing material; type of fuel used for cooking; certain
characteristics of the head, including gender, education and occupation; the household’s religion and
demographic size and composition. All regressions have dummy variables for categories of household
size, age of head, month of survey and region of residence; the latter is measured at an aggregate level
(typically a state or province) for which the surveys can be considered representative. The Statistical
Addendum gives the OLS regression results for the Basic PMT. The simple average R2 is 0.53, with a
range from 0.32 (for Ethiopia) to 0.64 (Burkina Faso); Table 3 provides summary statistics for the Basic
PMT (as well as for the extended version discussed below). This explanatory power is typical of past
studies.42 We did not try to prune this model, by either ad hoc or more systematic methods (such as

38
   The LSMS has designed and implemented household surveys across many countries since the 1980s. These are nationally
representative multi-purpose surveys spanning a quite wide range of topics. Further information can be found at the LSMS
website. All surveys except for Ghana are LSMS-ISA surveys.
39
   We also considered the option of using log consumption per equivalent single adult using the scales provided by the
LSMS. We focus on the “per capita” case in this paper although the Addendum also gives regressions and key results using
scales.
40
   We use nominal consumption for Burkina Faso.
41
   Using the World Bank’s international line of $1.90 a day at 2011 purchasing power parity, 43% of the population of Sub-
Saharan Africa are found to be poor in 2013 (based on PovcalNet).
42
   A seemingly representative set of studies is Grosh and Baker (1995) (R2 from 0.3 to 0.4), Ahmed and Bouis (2002)
(R2=0.43), Narayan and Yoshida (2005) (R2=0.59), Sharif (2009) (R2=0.57), Stoeffler et al. (2015) (R2=0.62), Pop (2015)
(R2=0.54) and Cnobloch et al. (2015) (R2=0.5 to 0.7). The simple average is 0.52.

                                                            15
stepwise regression). This would reduce the number of predictors but (of course) also reduce R2 and
probably increase targeting errors. However, we do consider stepwise regression as an option in Section
5 when using a much larger set of explanatory variables.
       Using the lower poverty line, fixed across the comparisons between distributions of y ijt and ŷ ijt ,

the Basic PMT substantially under-predicts the poverty rate in all countries. This is not unexpected
given the properties of OLS, as noted in the Introduction. The extent of the problem can be seen in Table
4. While the poverty rate based on the data is 20%, that based on the predicted values ranges from 0 (for
Mali) to 12% (Nigeria); the simple (population weighted) average is 8%. This improves considerably
when one switches to the higher poverty line ( F jt1 (0.4) ), for which the average Ĥ jt is 37% with a range

from 29% to 44%.
       OLS results for Basic PMT: We turn now to the targeting measures. Table 5 gives the results.
Let us focus first on the fixed poverty line case with H=0.2. On average, the rate of inclusion errors
implies that 48% of those identified as poor by the Basic PMT method are in fact non-poor, i.e., just
over half of those identified as poor using Basic PMT are in the poorest 20% when measured using the
survey-based consumption. For a poverty rate of 20% and a fixed line, the PMT method has nearly
halved the rate of inclusion errors that would be obtained with a uniform transfer payment. However,
this has come at the expense of exclusion. The average exclusion error is sizeable, with 81% of those
who are in the poorest 20% in terms of survey-based consumption being incorrectly identified as non-
poor by the PMT method.
       There is considerable variation across countries, with IER ranging from 33% to 100%, and EER
from 55% to 100%. In the country with the lowest coverage rate of the poor implied by PMT, Mali, all
poor families are incorrectly identified as non-poor. Unsurprisingly, we also find a tendency for the
PMT to do better at correctly identifying poor households when the R2 in the PMT regression is higher
(comparing Tables 5 and 3). However, the proportion of households correctly included is less than half
of those who are poor under a poverty line corresponding to H=0.2.
       Both inclusion and exclusion errors are lower for H=0.4. Taking a (population weighted)
average of our estimates of IER and EER for H=0.4, we find that 36% of those who are poor are
excluded on average, while 31% of those who are deemed poor are actually not poor. So we again find
that econometric targeting halves the inclusion error rate of 0.6 that would be implied by uniform
transfers. There is also less spread in the values across countries with IER ranging from 25% to 40%
and EER from 24% to 56%.

                                                      16
        The finding that the errors tend to be higher using the lower poverty line again suggests that
econometric targeting may have difficulty in identifying those who are very poor. This is supported by
Figure 1, which plots actual consumption against predicted consumption. The lines represent the poverty
lines at H=0.2. The bottom left quadrant represents households that are correctly identified as poor by
the Basic PMT. The top left quadrant is the inclusion error, and the bottom right quadrant is exclusion.
In one case, Mali, there are no data points in the bottom left quadrant; only one household is
(incorrectly) predicted to be poor (thus giving the result that IER=EER=1.0 from Table 5). While Mali is
exceptional in this respect, the point remains that PMT is missing many of the poorest households in all
countries. Figure 2 gives the implied residuals. As expected, these tend to be lower (more negative) for
poor people, but it is notable just how much the PMT regression is over-estimating the living standards
of the poorest. For the poorest 20% in terms of actual consumption, the mean residual ranges from -0.73
to -0.37, implying that the PMT regressions yield predicted consumptions for the poor between 50% and
100% above their actual consumption.43 (The fact that consumptions of the poor are overestimated by
the PMT regressions at the poverty line, as is evident in Figure 2, echoes our finding above that Basic
PMT underestimates the poverty rate.)
        Looking at Figures 1 and 2, one can understand why many of those accepted or rejected might be
tempted to believe that econometric targeting is something like a random lottery, or maybe even divine
intervention (with reference to the quote from Adato and Roopnaraine, 2004, in the Introduction). At a
given level of consumption, the predicted values generated from the PMT can vary considerably – see,
for example, Ethiopia. A more encouraging finding is that households who are incorrectly included do
not seem to be among the wealthiest households, that is, many of these households have actual
consumption values that are relatively close to the poverty line.
        So far we have focused on PMT using a fixed poverty line in consumption space. As we have
seen, this tends to predict far fewer households as poor than the actual poverty rate, particularly when
the poverty line corresponds to H=0.2 (Table 4). Table 5 also provides the results for the case where we
instead fix the poverty rate. For example, we calculate the mean targeting error for the poorest 20% in
the distribution of predicted consumption to be 51%, falling to 32% using H=0.4. Note that fixing the
poverty rate instead of the poverty line will typically increase the number of predicted poor households
thus resulting in higher IER and lower EER.


43
  The mean residuals for the poorest 20% by country are -0.371 (Burkina Faso), -0.711 (Ethiopia), -0.497 (Ghana), -0.564
(Malawi), -0.725 (Mali), -0.402 (Niger), -0.401 (Nigeria), -0.555 (Tanzania), and -0.543 (Uganda).

                                                            17
       As noted in the introduction, “targeting errors” may reflect to some extent time-varying
measurement errors in the cross-sectional data. For those countries with panel data we can address this
problem by assessing targeting performance using the time-mean consumption instead of current
consumption. This will reduce, though probably not eliminate, any bias due to time-varying
measurement errors. The lower panel of Table 5 gives the results. In the majority of cases, the measures
of targeting performance improve, although this is less evident for exclusion errors than inclusion errors
when using a fixed line. (Ethiopia accounts for about half of the exceptions.) Overall, the results are
broadly consistent with the view that measurement errors are playing some role, but the panel data do
not overturn our main conclusions about PMT. (Section 8 returns to the panel data, as a means of
allowing for implementation lags in PMT.)
       Results using “poverty-focused” estimation methods: As noted, the OLS method used for the
Basic PMT chooses the parameter estimates to minimize the unweighted sum of squared errors. Recall
that we consider two “poverty-focused” options to OLS. The first is a quantile regression using the
poverty rate as the quantile. For this estimator, Table 6 gives the analogous results to Table 5. This
method allows a substantial reduction in the exclusion error rate using a fixed poverty line. This comes
at the cost of higher inclusion errors, especially when using the lower poverty line (anchored to a
quantile of 0.2). Targeting errors are similar to those for Basic PMT when using a fixed poverty rate
instead.
       Table 7 reports the targeting errors using our PLS method when a fixed poverty line is used to
classify predicted poor households, as well as the results when a fixed poverty rate is used instead. (The
Statistical Addendum gives the coefficients for our PLS regression with the Basic PMT variables.) In
both cases, the weighted regressions correctly include almost all poor households. However, as with the
poverty-quantile regression, inclusion errors are also high. The PMT using PLS regression is better at
covering the poor but predicts that too many households are poor.
       An alternative is to include some households who are above the poverty line in the PLS
regression. We did this by also including in the sample all households at or below the poverty line, plus
the next 20% of households, as ranked by their consumption. For example, at the poverty line for H=0.2,
the bottom 40% of households is used in the regression. For H=0.4, the bottom 60% is used. Table 8
provides the inclusion and exclusion errors for this version. There is a decrease in the IER relative to
Table 7, but with higher EER (though still lower than for the OLS).



                                                     18
       Targeting subgroups within a national population: So far we have used a basic PMT calibrated
to national populations. However, when using PMT to target programs meant for a specific group it will
typically be better to calibrate the PMT to that group. We tested this by estimating the PMT model on
the samples restricted to two groups of households, namely those containing elderly and/or disabled
members, and those households with children under 5. Next we compared the targeting measures based
on the predicted values for each group with those predicted for the same household subgroups using a
nationally calibrated PMT. We found that there is a modest improvement in targeting performance when
using the sub-group-specific PMT. For example, to focus on the elderly and disabled subgroup case: for
a fixed poverty rate of 0.2, average targeting errors go down from 0.50 to 0.47. Both inclusion and
exclusion errors also fall using a fixed line, from 0.40 to 0.37 and 0.74 to 0.70, respectively. But again
the gains are small (see Statistical Addendum for full results).

5.     Extended PMT

       We now test an extended specification with far more data, including the household’s water
source; more detailed information about housing materials; the number of household members per room;
whether the household has a separate room for cooking; whether the household has electricity;
household assets; and more details on the characteristics of the household. Regression results for the
extended PMT are shown in the Addendum. The values of R2 are higher but in most cases the gains are
relatively small; although the number of explanatory variables has almost doubled there are clearly some
strong correlations between the extra variables and those in the core set used for the Basic PMT.
       As expected, the Extended PMT does better than Basic PMT with respect to targeting errors
(Table 9). However, the improvement would have to be judged as modest (comparing Tables 9 and 5).
For example, many more than half of the poorest 20% are still misidentified as non-poor. Table 4 also
gives the average proportion of households that are predicted as poor using the poverty line
methodology under the extended PMT method. At H=0.2, we see a slight improvement over the Basic
PMT, with 11% of the sample predicted to be poor using the poverty line corresponding to H=0.2 (as
compared to 8% using Basic PMT). The results are more similar between Basic PMT and Extended
PMT for a line corresponding to H=0.4.
       We also reran the poverty-weighted PMT regressions as in Section 3 for the extended PMT
model. The Addendum gives the regression results when the extended PMT model is estimated on the
bottom 20th, 40th and 60th percentiles. The Addendum also gives the targeting errors for the poverty line

                                                     19
and poverty rate method when the PMT is fitted using poor households only as well as the results when
the poor plus the next 20 percent of the distribution are used. The key findings for Basic PMT using the
poverty-weighted regression (Table 6) were confirmed using the Extended PMT.
       The field implementation of a PMT formula with many variables is expensive and difficult, so
some practitioners have opted for stepwise regression to obtain a more parsimonious PMT. We tested a
backwards stepwise regression on the extended model to identify the key variables in the PMT. We used
a cut-off of p = 0.01. The targeting errors for the more parsimonious regressions are given in the
Addendum. We see a modest increase in the targeting errors, which are now back to approximately the
same values we found for Basic PMT.
       A further methodological change we considered is to include variables that are not as readily
available as those in our Extended PMT regressions, but are likely to have extra explanatory power. In
one case we used extra data on households’ food security as well as on any shocks the household may
have experienced. (Note that these variables are only available for four countries.) We augment the
extended PMT model with these food security and shock variables. (The Addendum lists the variables,
their means and the regression results for this model.) The R2 increases slightly for all countries (Table
3). However, this version produced negligible improvement in targeting (Addendum). In another
variation on the Extended PMT we included a range of community-level variables; again this was not
possible for all countries. And (again) there was only a modest reduction in targeting errors, as can be
seen in the Addendum.
       We also tried other versions of PMT that might be of interest. In one case we used quantile
regression at the median (in both the Basic and Extended PMTs). In another we used log consumption
per equivalent single adult as the dependent variable. The Addendum gives the results. There was little
improvement in the targeting performance of the PMT.
       So far we have focused solely on the inclusion and exclusion rates as the measures of targeting
performance. These appear to be the most popular measures in the literature, though others have been
proposed and used in some studies. Probably the most promising example of the latter when the policy
objective is poverty reduction is the targeting differential (Ravallion, 2000, 2009). Recall that the
normalized TD is in the range [-1, 1], with zero corresponding to a uniform (un-targeted) transfer.
       Table 10 gives summary statistics on the normalized targeting differential using both the Basic
and Extended PMTs. The mean NTD for Basic PMT is 0.21, meaning that if program participation was
based on the PMT scores the participation rate for the poor would be 21% points higher than that for the

                                                     20
non-poor. Using Basic PMT, in four of the five countries with panel data, the NTD is higher using time-
mean consumption; this rises to five out of five using the Extended PMT. Returning to the cross-section
surveys, the poverty-quantile method yields the highest NTD, at around 0.49 on average for Basic PMT,
rising to 0.53 for the Extended PMT. For all nine countries, the poverty-quantile regression method
comes out best. The poverty-weighted method does almost as well provided that the 20% of households
above the line are included.

6.      Poverty impacts of stylized transfer schemes using various targeting methods

        PMT is typically used to identify eligible recipients of a specific transfer scheme with the aim of
reducing poverty. So we now study the poverty impacts of stylized transfers that are allocated according
to various PMT specifications and selected counterfactuals.
        Our comparisons are all budget neutral with the budget for each stylized scheme set at the
aggregate poverty gap ( PG jt z jt N jt ) for that country. We assume a poverty line corresponding to H=0.2.

(The Addendum gives the average transfer amounts by country.) If the PMT worked perfectly—so that
predicted consumption equaled actual consumption—then the transfers differentiated to exactly fill the
poverty gaps would eliminate poverty. In this section we confine attention to uniform transfers among
those deemed eligible, as is common in practice; in the next section we consider more finely
differentiated transfers.
        A natural benchmark is a universal (“basic income”) scheme in which every person (whatever
their characteristics) receives the same transfer payment. We then calculate the impacts on poverty of
transfers using the various versions of PMT discussed above. We measure the impact of a uniform
transfer per capita given to all households who are predicted to be below the line according to the PMT.
The total transfer amount for a given country (as given by the country’s aggregate poverty gap) is
divided by the total number of individuals who reside in designated poor households, and distributed to
households according to their size. (For example, if a poor household has two members, the transfer will
be two times the per capita amount.)
        We also consider counterfactual policies that use categorical targeting rather than PMT. These
policies make uniform transfers within a specified category of people, as defined by a “poverty




                                                     21
scorecard.” Here we consider an especially simple form of demographic scorecard.44 The first category
is the set of persons 65 years or older. The second is any person who is a (female) widow, disabled
(where disabled is defined as an illness or condition that significantly impairs a person over the age of
14 and their ability to work or study), or orphaned (defined as any child 14 or younger whose parents
have both died or whose whereabouts are unknown). The third is a combination of the first two: a
transfer to the elderly, widowed, disabled or orphaned. Note that if a person fits two categories, the score
and (hence) transfer is doubled. The fourth transfer is a payment to households with children – whereby
up to three children are each alloted a transfer. Finally, the last scheme combines all previous schemes,
where children, the elderly, widowed, disabled or orphaned are eligible. (Recall that all stylized
schemes considered have the same aggregate budget.)
        Table 11 shows the implied headcount index for each case. (Recall that the baseline headcount
index across all countries is 20%.) Most methods bring the poverty rate down to around 16%, well short
of eliminating poverty; indeed, more than three-quarters of the poor remain poor. On average, Basic
PMT does only slightly better than the universal basic income with the same budget, and Basic PMT
does not do as well as the universal transfer in one third of the countries. Using the time-mean
consumptions for the countries with panel data makes little difference on average. The quantile
regression method does noticeably better on average, bringing the poverty rate down to one percentage
point below the level attainable with the Basic PMT. Extended PMT does slightly better. However, it is
notable how well categorical targeting does in many cases. On average, categorical targeting to
households with elderly, widows, disabled and children does as well as Basic PMT. Nevertheless,
categorical targeting never does as well as the poverty quantile regression method, which typically has
the greatest impact on poverty. While categorical targeting does not have quite as much impact on
poverty as the Basic PMT, it clearly comes close and is simpler and more transparent.
        Tables 12 and 13 give the corresponding results for the poverty gap index and Watts index
respectively; the pre-transfer poverty measures are shown in the first row. Aggregating across countries,
the Basic PMT methods reduce the poverty gap by around 27% and the Watts index by 28%. As for the
headcount index, the Extended PMT gives a larger reduction, namely 35% and 39% respectively.
Simply giving a uniform transfer based on household size does as well as Basic PMT on average for
both PG and the Watts index.


44
  Indeed, our method is even simpler than the “Simple Poverty Scorecard” developed by Schreiner (2010, 2015) and used for
the Progress out of Poverty Index.

                                                           22
7.     Allowing differentiated transfers

       So far we have focused on the standard practice of giving the same transfer payment to all those
predicted to be poor using PMT. While this is the most relevant case in practice, differentiating the
transfers could be expected to work better if the predicted poverty gaps are quite accurate. However, we
have already seen that this is not the case—that PMT works poorly in predicting the levels of living of
the poorest. So it is unclear on a priori grounds whether differentiated transfers will have larger impacts
on poverty.
       How much better can PMT do using the same information if the transfers are differentiated, with
more going to those who appear to be poorer? To put the question another way: how much does the
constraint of relying on uniform transfers to the “predicted poor” limit the effectiveness of PMT? We
address these questions in two ways. First, we simply fill the predicted poverty gaps, scaling up (or
down) to attain the same budget. That is, each household predicted as poor receives the difference
between the poverty line and its predicted consumption value, scaled such that the sum of all transfers
equals the aggregate poverty gap. “PMT Gap” refers to this first method.
       The allocation of transfers obtained this way need not be optimal in the sense of minimizing an
agreed poverty index for a given budget. Following Ravallion and Chao (1989) and Glewwe (1992), we
also devised a program for calculating the optimal allocation based on the set of PMT covariates. We
chose the Watts index as the objective function given its desirable properties as a poverty measure
(Section 2), which also provides suitable curvature to the objective function. Multiple solutions were
common but we also found that the objective function tended to be quite flat in the sub-set of the
parameter space corresponding to the various solutions found. Indeed, for all nine countries the
minimum value of the Watts index was the same up to two decimal places whatever start value we used
(though the parameter estimates themselves often differed for a given country).
       Table 14 gives the results for the Watts index for H=0.2 using differentiated transfers that are
determined by both the PMT gaps and optimization. (The Addendum gives those for the headcount
index, though note that the solutions are only optimal for the Watts index.) Overall, filling the predicted
gaps does little to reduce the poverty measure. As expected, the non-linear specification in the
optimization routine (   2 in equation 12) does better than the linear one in reducing poverty, and the
nonlinear version does as well on average as the PMT.



                                                    23
8.       Allowing for lags in PMT implementation

         Lags in the implementation of a PMT are almost certainly universal. It takes some time to set up
the data and the administrative apparatus for implementation. Yet there is undoubtedly some “churning”
in living standards over time, even when using consumption as the welfare indicator. So the lags in
implementation have bearing on the performance of PMT in reducing current poverty.
         We have panel data for a subset of our study countries, namely Ethiopia, Malawi, Nigeria,
Tanzania and Uganda. By exploiting the panel data, we can introduce a 1 to 2 year lag in the
implementation of PMT. The precise lags are one year for Uganda, and two years for the other
countries.45 In other words, we develop the PMT on the Round 1 survey data and then apply it in Round
2. If anything, our lags appear to be less than found in practice.46
         We consider two types of lags. In the first (Method 1), we take the regression parameters from
Round 1, but use the covariates from the Round 2 data. Here there is no lag in the observations of the
covariates; the lag is only due to the need to estimate the PMT scores. In the second (Method 2), we
simply use the PMT score from Round 1, which we then compare to the survey data on consumptions in
Round 2. The lag then applies to all aspects of the PMT method (both parameter estimates and covariate
values).
         The targeting errors obtained using Methods 1 and 2 are found in Tables 15 and 16, respectively.
Comparing the results in Table 15 (top panel) with Table 5 we see that allowing for lags increases the
targeting errors on average.47 For the lower line, we now find that, on average, about half of those
predicted to be poor are not in fact poor based on the survey data (a mean IER of 0.553, as compared to
0.481 from Table 5). Exclusion errors are also affected, though these errors rose less markedly. Using
the Extended PMT we also find a substantial increase in the targeting errors, especially for inclusion,
when we allow for lags using Method 1. A similar pattern is found for Method 2.
         In Table 17 we give the targeting differentials. Allowing for lags, we find mixed results.
Ethiopia and Nigeria have better pro-poor targeting with lags, while Malawi, Tanzania and Uganda see
increases in targeting of the non-poor. Malawi in particular has negative TD’s, indicating that the
correction for lags now means that a uniform (un-targeted) policy would do better.

45
   The survey years are as follows: Ethiopia 2011/12 and 2013/14; Malawi 2010/11 and 2013; Nigeria 2010/11 and 2012/13;
Tanzania 2010/11 and 2012/13; Uganda 2010/11 and 2011/12.
46
   For example, recall that the mean lag between the survey year and the release date of the Progress out of Poverty Index is
3.9 years (Introduction).
47
   Switching to the panel samples changes the targeting measures somewhat but the following observations still hold.

                                                             24
       The post-transfer poverty rates allowing for lags are provided in Table 18. PMT still brings the
poverty measures down, but by about two percentage points less when allowing for lags. For example,
allowing for lags achieves an average post-transfer headcount index of 19% instead of 17%. The stylized
categorical targeting schemes now attain similar or somewhat lower post-transfer poverty rates. On
average, the simple demographic scorecards bring the poverty rate down by an extra one and in some
cases two percentage points once one allows for plausible lags in PMT implementation. The Addendum
gives results for other poverty measures, which follow a similar pattern.

9.     Predictors of poverty impacts

       We can bring a number of the results from previous sections together to quantify the relative
importance of targeting errors and estimator fit to the impacts of PMT on poverty. With only nine
country observations, cross-country comparisons should be treated with caution. Nonetheless, some
strong patterns emerge even with so few degrees of freedom.
       As noted in the Introduction, inclusion errors have tended to receive more attention in the policy
community although it has been argued by some that exclusion errors may well be more important to the
impacts on poverty. There is a clear pattern in our results whereby the exclusion error rate is generally a
better predictor of the poverty impact of PMT than the inclusion error rate. This can be seen in Table 19
which gives regressions of the final “post-PMT” poverty measure on the two error rates (with controls
for the initial poverty measure, which is of course a constant in the case of the headcount index). In all
instances, the EER is the stronger predictor of impacts on poverty, and it is a strong (statistically
significant) predictor in all but one case (the exception being for the method of filling the “PMT gap”
described in section 7).
       Another plausible predictor of both the targeting performance of PMT and its impact on poverty
is the R2 of the original regression used to calibrate the PMT. Indeed, it appears that this is often the
main parameter that practitioners focus on in PMT applications. Table 20 gives the regressions across
countries for both Basic and Extended PMT. The value of R2 has only weak predictive power for the
main measure used in practice, the headcount index. The R2 does emerge as a strong predictor of the
poverty impacts of standard PMT for the higher-order poverty measures (PG and the Watts index). This
is not the case when we allow for differentiated transfers using either of the methods from the last
section, although (as noted) the practical relevance of differentiated transfers is a moot point. For the



                                                     25
more relevant case of uniform transfers across those predicted to be poor, R2 can only be considered a
useful predictor of impacts on poverty for the higher-order measures.

10.    Conclusions

       Highly imperfect information and limited administrative capabilities create challenges for
implementing effective antipoverty programs in most developing-countries. Practitioners have often
turned to some form of proxy means test. While these methods have an a priori appeal, users should
have realistic expectations of what the methods can deliver.
       Our results point to both strengths and weaknesses of standard econometric targeting methods.
While these methods can substantially reduce inclusion errors in an antipoverty program—in most cases
studied here the inclusion error rate can be at least halved—this comes at the cost of substantial
exclusion errors when judged against the data on household consumption used to calibrate the test
scores. Standard methods found in practice may look fine when the sole aim is to reduce inclusion
errors—to prevent non-poor people receiving benefits when judged against a fixed poverty line.
However, if poverty-reduction relative to a fixed line is the objective then policy makers with a given
budget should be more worried about exclusion errors than inclusion errors. When attention switches to
the problem of assuring broad coverage of the poor (reducing exclusion errors), better methods can be
proposed, which give higher weight to performance in predicting the living standards of poor people.
The method we find to generally perform best from the point of view of reducing exclusion errors is a
“poverty-quantile regression.” This method generates more inclusion errors than prevailing PMT
methods, though still less than un-targeted transfers.
       When judged in terms of the impact on poverty for a given budget (set equal to the aggregate
poverty gap), we find that what appears to be the most widely-used form of PMT in practice does only
slightly better on average than a universal basic income, in which everyone gets the same transfer,
whatever their characteristics. One can achieve somewhat larger impacts on poverty using other PMT
methods considered here, with either a richer data set or using the poverty-quantile regression method.
However, even under seemingly ideal conditions, the “high-tech” solutions to the targeting problem with
imperfect information do not do much better than age-old methods using state-contingent transfers or
even simpler basic income schemes. We find that an especially simple demographic “scorecard”
method can do almost as well as econometric targeting in terms of the impacts on poverty. Indeed, on
allowing for likely lags in implementing PMT, the simpler categorical targeting methods perform better

                                                     26
on average in bringing down the current poverty rate. This conclusion would undoubtedly be
strengthened once the full costs of fine targeting are taken into account.
       We were surprised that econometric targeting only allowed such small (or even negative) gains
in reaching poor people compared to simpler methods. For practitioners deciding on targeting methods
going forward, we suspect that other criteria besides targeting accuracy should take precedence in the
choice, such as the specifics of the poverty profile, administrative capabilities and cost, the need for
transparency, and the scope for fine targeting to undermine political support for social policies.
       Looking at our findings as a whole, it would be fair to say that none of these methods performs
particularly well when one is striving to reduce poverty. When the budget required for a set of transfer
payments that would eliminate poverty (ignoring behavioral responses) is allocated by any of these
methods, about three-quarters of the original (pre-intervention) count of poor people remain poor. The
world’s poorest should hope for something better.




                                                     27
References
Adato, Michelle, and Terry Roopnaraine, 2004, “A Social Analysis of the Red de Proteccion Social
       (RPS) in Nicaragua.” IFPRI Report, International Food Policy Research Institute, Washington
       DC.
Ahmed, Akhter and Howarth Bouis, 2002, “Weighing what’s Practical: Proxy Means Tests for
       Targeting Food Subsidies in Egypt.” Food Policy 27: 519-540.
Alatas, Vivi, Abhijit Banerjee, Rema Hanna, Benjamin Olken and Julia Tobias, 2012, “Targeting the
       Poor: Evidence from a Field Experiment in Indonesia.” American Economic Review 102(4):
       1206-1240.
Atkinson, Anthony B., 1995, “On Targeting Social Security: Theory and Western Experience with
       Family Benefits,” in Dominique van de Walle and Kimberly Nead (eds) Public Spending and the
       Poor, Johns Hopkins University Press.
Barrientos, Armando, 2013, Social Assistance in Developing Countries, Cambridge: Cambridge
       University Press.
Beckerman, Wilfred, 1979, “The Impact of Income Maintenance Payments on Poverty in Britain, 1975,”
       Economic Journal 89: 261-279.
Brown, Caitlin, Martin Ravallion and Dominique van de Walle, 2016, “How well do Household Poverty
       Data Identify Africa’s Nutritionally Vulnerable Women and Children,” mimeo.
Cameron, Lisa, and Manisha Shah, 2014, “Mistargeting of Cash Transfers, Social Capital Destruction,
       and Crime in Indonesia,” Economic Development and Cultural Change 62(2): 381-415.
Cnobloch, Rodica, and Kalidni Subbarao, 2015, “Targeting Methods to Identify the Poorest in Malawi.”
       In C. Del Ninno and B. Mills (Eds.), Safety Nets in Africa: Effective Mechanisms to Reach the
       Poor and Most Vulnerable. The World Bank, Washington D.C.
Coady, David, Margaret Grosh and John Hoddinott, 2004a, “Targeting Outcomes Redux,” World Bank
       Research Observer 19(1): 61-86.
__________, 2004b, Targeting Transfers in Developing Countries: Review of Lessons and Experience,
       Washington D.C.: World Bank.
Cornia, Giovanni, and Frances Stewart, 1995, “Two Errors of Targeting,” in Dominique van de Walle
       and Kimberly Nead (eds) Public Spending and the Poor, Johns Hopkins University Press.
Diamond, Alexis, Michael Gill, Miguel Rebolledo Dellepiane, Emmanuel Skoufias, Katja Vinha, and
       Yiqing Xu, 2016, “Estimating Poverty Rates in Target Populations: An Assessment of the

                                                  28
       Simple Poverty Scorecard and Alternative Approaches,” Policy Research Working Paper 7793,
       World Bank.
Del Ninno, Carlo and Bradford Mills, 2015 (Eds.), Safety Nets in Africa: Effective Mechanisms to Reach
       the Poor and Most Vulnerable. The World Bank, Washington D.C.
Elbers, Chris, Jean Lanjouw and Peter Lanjouw, 2003, “Micro–Level Estimation of Poverty and
       Inequality,” Econometrica 71(1): 355-364.
Flores, Mario González, 2014, “Evaluation of the Progress Out of Poverty Index (PPI):
       The Case Of Peru,” in Three Essays on Evaluation and Measurement in Developing Economies,
       Doctoral Dissertation, American University.
Foster, James, Joel Greer, and Erik Thorbecke, 1984, “A Class of Decomposable Poverty
       Measures,”Econometrica 52: 761-765.
Galasso, Emanuela and Martin Ravallion, 2005, “Decentralized Targeting of an Antipoverty
       Program,” Journal of Public Economics 85: 705-727.
Gelbach, Jonah and Lant Pritchett, 2000, “Indicator Targeting in a Political Economy: Leakier
       Can be Better,” Journal of Policy Reform 4: 113–45.
Glewwe, Paul, 1992, “Targeting Assistance to the Poor: Efficient Allocation of Transfers when
       Household Income is not Observed,” Journal of Development Economics 38(2): 297-321.
Grosh, Margaret, 1994, Administering Targeted Social Programs in Latin America: From
       Platitudes to Practice. Washington D.C.: World Bank.
Grosh, Margaret and Judy Baker, 1995, “Proxy Means Tests for Targeting Social Programs: Simulations
       and Speculation,” Living Standards and Measurement Study Working Paper 118, World Bank,
       Washington DC.
USAID, 2011, “Poverty Assessment Tool Submission for Peru,” USAID.
Kanbur, Ravi, 1987, “Measurement and Alleviation of Poverty,” IMF Staff Papers 36: 60-85.
Karlan, Dean, and Bram Thuysbaert, 2013, “Targeting Ultra-Poor Households in Honduras and Peru,”
       NBER Working Paper 19646.
Kidd, Stephen and Emily Wylde, 2011, “Targeting the Poorest: An Assessment of the Proxy Means Test
       Methodology,” AusAID Working Paper, Government of Australia.
Koenker, R., and G. Bassett, 1978, “Regression Quantiles,” Econometrica 46: 33-50.




                                                   29
Mapa, Dennis S. and Manuel Leonard F. Albis, 2013, “New Proxy Means Test (PMT) Models:
       Improving Targeting of the Poor For Social Protection,” 12th National Convention on Statistics
       (NCS) EDSA Shangri-La Hotel.
Mills, Bradford, Carlo Del Ninno and Phillippe Leite, 2015, “Effective Targeting Mechanisms in Africa:
       Existing and New Methods,” in Del Ninno and Mills (2015).
Murgai, Rinku, Martin Ravallion and Dominique van de Walle, 2016, “Is Workfare Cost Effective
       against Poverty in a Poor Labor-Surplus Economy?” World Bank Economic Review,
       forthcoming.
Narayan, A. and Yoshida, N., 2005, “Proxy Means Test for Targeting Welfare Benefits in Sri Lanka.”
       South Asia Region Working Paper. Report No. SASPR-7.
Niehaus, Paul, Antonia Atanassova, Marianne Bertrand and Sendhil Mullainathan, 2013, “Targeting
       with Agents,” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy 5(1): 206-238.
Pop, Lucian, 2015, “Options for Improving the Targeting of Safety Nets in Ghana,” In C. Del Ninno and
       B. Mills (Eds.), Safety Nets in Africa: Effective Mechanisms to Reach the Poor and Most
       Vulnerable. The World Bank, Washington D.C.
Ravallion, Martin, 2000, “Monitoring Targeting Performance when Decentralized Allocations to
       the Poor are Unobserved,” World Bank Economic Review 14(2): 331-45.
______________, 2008, “Miss-Targeted, or Miss-Measured?” Economics Letters, 100: 9-12.
______________, 2009, “How Relevant is Targeting to the Success of the Antipoverty Program?”
       World Bank Research Observer 24(3): 205-231.
______________, 2016, The Economics of Poverty. History, Measurement, and Policy. New York:
       Oxford University Press.
Ravallion, Martin, and Kalvin Chao, 1989, “Targeted Policies for Poverty Alleviation Under
       Imperfect Information: Algorithms and Applications,” Journal of Policy Modeling 11(2):
       213-224.
Ravallion, Martin, Dominique van de Walle and Madhur Gautam, 1995, “Testing a Social Safety Net,”
       Journal of Public Economics 57(2): 175-199.
Schreiner, Mark, 2010, “A Simple Poverty Scorecard for Jordan,” mimeo.
_____________, 2015, “A Comparison of Two Simple, Low-Cost Ways for Local, Pro-Poor
       Organizations to Measure the Poverty of Their Participants,” Social Indicators Research 124:
       537–569.

                                                  30
Smolensky, Eugene, Siobhand Reilly and Erik Evenhouse, 1995, “Should Public Assistance be
       Targeted?” Journal of Post Keynesian Economics 18: 3-28.
Stifel, David and Harold Alderman, 2005, “Targeting at the Margin: The ‘Glass of Milk’
       Subsidy Programme in Peru,” Journal of Development Studies 41(5): 839-864.
Stoeffler, Quentin, Bradford Mills, and Carlo Del Ninno, 2016, “Reaching the Poor: Cash Transfer
       Program Targeting in Cameroon,” World Development 83: 244-263.
Stoeffler, Quentin, P. Nguetse-Tegoum, and Bradford Mills, 2015, “Generating a System for Targeting
       Unconditional Cash Transfers in Cameroon.” In C. Del Ninno and B. Mills (Eds.), Safety Nets in
       Africa: Effective Mechanisms to Reach the Poor and Most Vulnerable. The World Bank,
       Washington D.C.
van de Walle, Dominique, 1998, “Targeting Revisited,” World Bank Research Observer,
       13(2): 231-48.
Van Domelen, Julie, 2007, “Reaching the Poor and Vulnerable: Targeting Strategies for Social Funds
       and other Community-Driven Programs,” Social Protection Discussion Paper No. 711.
Watts, Harold W., 1968, “An Economic Definition of Poverty,” in Daniel P. Moynihan (ed.),
       On Understanding Poverty, New York, Basic Books.
Weisbrod, Burton, 1970, “Collective Action and the Distribution of Income: A Conceptual
       Approach,” in R. H. Haverman and J. Margolis (eds.) Public Expenditure and Policy Analysis,
       Chicago, Ill.: Markham. (Reprinted in Nicholas Barr (ed.) Economic Theory and the Welfare
       State, Volume 2, Edward Elgar, Cheltenham, UK, 2001.)
Wodon, Quentin, 1997, “Targeting the Poor using ROC Curves,” World Development 25(12): 2083-
       2092.
Zheng, Buhong, 1993, “Axiomatic Characterization of the Watts Index,” Economics Letters 42: 81-86.




                                                 31
Figure 1: Actual and predicted consumption for Basic PMT




                          32
Note: The figure shows actual and predicted consumption in logged values using Basic PMT. The red lines represent the
poverty line at the 20th percentile in logged values. Points in the top left corner are incorrectly predicted as poor (inclusion
errors). Points in the bottom right corner are incorrectly predicted as non-poor (exclusion errors). Points in the bottom left
and top right corners are correctly predicted as poor and non-poor respectively.




                                                                33
          Figure 2: Residuals for Basic PMT plotted against log real consumption per capita




Note: The figure shows log real household consumption per capita and the residuals for the predicted consumption values.
Basic PMT is used to predict consumption. The red lines represent the poverty line at the 20 th percentile.




                                                            34
                                           Table 1: Counts of inclusion and exclusion

                                                                          Based on proxy-means test
                                                         yˆ ijt  z jt                                                             yˆ ijt  z jt
                                                 Poor either way                                                           Exclusion errors                                             H jt N jt
                               w 1( yˆ  z y  z )                                                         w 1( yˆ  z y  z )
                                   N jt                                                                      N jt
                                   i 1      ijt         ijt         jt        ijt         jt                i 1      ijt         ijt           jt        ijt         jt
              yijt  z jt
                                w 1( y  z yˆ  z                                                          w 1( y  z yˆ  z
                                          N jt                                                                      N jt
                                                                                                     )                                                                           )
Based on                                  i 1     ijt         ijt        jt         ijt        jt                  i 1     ijt         ijt          jt         ijt        jt

survey
data                                             Inclusion errors                                                    Non-poor either way                                             (1  H jt ) N jt
                               w 1( yˆ  z y  z )                                                         w 1( yˆ  z y  z )
                                   N jt                                                                      N jt
              yijt  z jt          i 1      ijt         ijt         jt        ijt         jt                i 1      ijt         ijt           jt        ijt         jt


                                w 1( y  z yˆ  z                                                          w 1( y  z yˆ  z
                                          N jt                                                                      N jt
                                          i 1     ijt         ijt        jt         ijt        jt   )              i 1     ijt         ijt          jt         ijt        jt   )

                                                         Ĥ jt N jt                                                           (1  Hˆ jt ) N jt                                            N jt
Note: Notation explained in the main text.




                                                 Table 2: Countries and survey rounds

                            Country                                                                       Year                                  N
                            Burkina Faso                                                                  2014                             10,265
                            Ethiopia                                                                     2013/14                               5,017
                            Ghana                                                                         2009                                 4,224
                            Malawi                                                                       2013/14                               3,931
                            Mali                                                                          2014                                 3,212
                            Niger                                                                         2011                                 3,833
                            Nigeria                                                                      2012/13                               3,720
                            Tanzania                                                                     2012/13                               4,753
                            Uganda                                                                       2011/12                               2,650
                            Note: All surveys except for Ghana are LSMS-ISA surveys.




                                                                                                35
                                  Table 3: Summary table for the regressions
                      Burkina Faso    Ethiopia   Ghana    Malawi      Mali    Niger   Nigeria   Tanzania   Uganda
Basic PMT
Basic PMT
             R2          0.644         0.319     0.561        0.573   0.418   0.634   0.581      0.585     0.498
             N           10265         5017      4224         3931    3212    3833    3720       4753      2650
Poor 20
              R2          0.175        0.136     0.290        0.151   0.126   0.156   0.274      0.176     0.231
              N          10265         5017      4224         3931    3212    3833    3720       4753      2650
Poor 20 Probit
              R2          0.227        0.183     0.361        0.222   0.192   0.239   0.332      0.28       0.25
              N           9151         5017      4224         3498    2776    3193    3491       4123       2558
Poor 40
              R2          0.285        0.192     0.393        0.242   0.228   0.261   0.392      0.306     0.299
              N          10265         5017      4224         3931    3212    3833    3720       4753      2650
Poor 40 Probit
              R2          0.292        0.186     0.368        0.244   0.223   0.271   0.383      0.319     0.275
              N          10265         5017      4224         3734    2922    3638    3720       4753      2647
Weighted Bottom 20
              R2          0.112        0.192     0.214        0.091   0.150   0.110   0.203      0.182     0.193
              N           1395          762       755          558     422     456     871        618       628
Weighted Bottom 40
              R2          0.112        0.152     0.277        0.105   0.101   0.113   0.264      0.162     0.206
              N           3024         1473      1508         1186     927     961    1685       1385      1105
Weighted Bottom 60
              R2          0.170        0.143     0.329        0.155   0.162   0.155   0.353      0.202     0.257
              N           4895         2307      2325         1929    1599    1629    2427       2293      1595
Adult Equivalent Consumption
              R2                       0.287                  0.542           0.595              0.544     0.502
              N                        5017                   3931            3833               4753      2650
Rural Only
              R2          0.465        0.201     0.475        0.462   0.356   0.355   0.538      0.449     0.426
              N           6298         3148      2557         2900    2068    2326    2627       3089      2120
Urban Only
              R2          0.710        0.310     0.446        0.685   0.452   0.614   0.522      0.561     0.539
              N           3967         1869      1667         1031    1144    1507    1093       1664       530
Extended PMT
Extended PMT
              R2          0.724        0.381     0.587        0.674   0.520   0.718   0.666      0.647     0.596
              N          10265         5017      4224         3931    3212    3833    3720       4753      2650
Weighted Bottom 20
              R2          0.191        0.242     0.259        0.148   0.226   0.186   0.292      0.228     0.288
              N           1395          762       755          558     422     456     871        618       628
Weighted Bottom 40
              R2          0.193        0.205     0.321        0.181   0.173   0.166   0.355      0.226     0.292
              N           3024         1473      1508         1186     927     961    1685       1385      1105
Weighted Bottom 60
              R2          0.267        0.192     0.358        0.256   0.235   0.225   0.435      0.274     0.357
              N           4895         2307      2325         1929    1599    1629    2427       2293      1595

                                                         36
Stepwise (p=0.01)
               R2            0.687       0.344        0.579      0.676    0.534    0.701     0.606        0.632       0.553
               N            10265         5017        4224        3931    3212     3833      3720         4753        2650
Stepwise (p=0.05)
               R2            0.688       0.349        0.582      0.679    0.539    0.703     0.607        0.634       0.559
               N            10265         5017        4224        3931    3212     3833      3720         4753        2650
Household Shocks and Food Security
               R2            0.726       0.395                   0.690             0.722     0.670        0.654       0.604
               N            10265         5017                    3931             3833      3720         4753        2650
Shocks, Food Security and Community Variables
               R2                        0.400                   0.698             0.725     0.672        0.655       0.607
               N                          5017                    3931             3833      3720         4753        2650
Note: Values are taken from the regression tables presented in the Addendum. (Results from the quantile regressions are not
included in the above table.)



                Table 4: Proportion of sample predicted to be poor using PMT regressions

                                                                      Fixed poverty line
                                                            -1
                                                     z = F (0.2)                              z = F-1(0.4)
                                            Basic PMT            Extended PMT      Basic PMT         Extended PMT
      Burkina Faso                             0.083                0.112             0.359                  0.358
      Ethiopia                                 0.023                0.049             0.291                  0.348
      Ghana                                    0.115                0.126             0.350                  0.360
      Malawi                                   0.042                0.108             0.329                  0.356
      Mali                                     0.000                0.017             0.316                  0.339
      Niger                                    0.054                0.092             0.429                  0.404
      Nigeria                                  0.117                0.151             0.393                  0.406
      Tanzania                                 0.059                0.111             0.419                  0.403
      Uganda                                   0.104                0.144             0.439                  0.424
      Mean                                     0.079                0.113             0.372                  0.387
    Note: Predicted values are calculated from the Basic PMT and Extended PMT regressions (Addendum). Statistic
    are population weighted.




                                                            37
                                    Table 5: Targeting errors using Basic PMT
               Inclusion error      Exclusion error    Inclusion error     Exclusion error      Targeting        Targeting
                    rate                 rate               rate                rate              Error            Error
                    (IER)                (EER)              (IER)                  (EER)          (TER)            (TER)
                                             Fixed poverty line                                     Fixed poverty rate
                            z = F -1 (0.2)                          z = F-1(0.4)                  H = 0.2         H = 0.4
Burkina
Faso                0.401                0.751              0.304                  0.375           0.522           0.329
Ethiopia            0.515                0.945              0.396                  0.562           0.621           0.413
Ghana               0.354                0.628              0.257                  0.350           0.428           0.288
Malawi              0.431                0.880              0.333                  0.451           0.553           0.373
Mali                1.000                1.000              0.348                  0.485           0.553           0.375
Niger               0.539                0.875              0.384                  0.340           0.584           0.362
Nigeria             0.332                0.548              0.247                  0.243           0.392           0.244
Tanzania            0.396                0.822              0.323                  0.291           0.513           0.314
Uganda              0.357                0.663              0.350                  0.294           0.455           0.335
Mean                0.481                0.807              0.309                  0.359           0.505           0.319
                                       Using time-mean consumption from panel data
Ethiopia            0.310                0.947              0.366                  0.746           0.638           0.427
Malawi              0.311                0.837              0.321                  0.429           0.517           0.341
Nigeria             0.309                0.544              0.245                  0.261           0.412           0.249
Tanzania            0.340                0.765              0.291                  0.339           0.461           0.303
Uganda              0.370                0.687              0.328                  0.293           0.483           0.318
Mean                0.317                0.691              0.276                  0.397           0.482           0.307
Note: Errors are calculated using the predicted values from the regression given in the Addendum. Statistics are population
weighted.




                                                             38
  Table 6: Targeting errors for Basic PMT using quantile regression centered at the poverty line
                     Inclusion            Exclusion         Inclusion          Exclusion          Targeting          Targeting
                     error rate           error rate        error rate         error rate           Error              Error
                       (IER)               (EER)              (IER)             (EER)              (TER)              (TER)
                                              Fixed poverty line                                      Fixed poverty rate
                                    -1                                    -1
                              z = F (0.2)                           z = F (0.4)                    H = 0.2            H = 0.4
Burkina Faso            0.627               0.218             0.365               0.228             0.525              0.326
Ethiopia                0.684               0.260             0.441               0.292             0.621              0.420
Ghana                   0.540               0.163             0.301               0.228             0.426              0.290
Malawi                  0.636               0.267             0.383               0.304             0.548              0.364
Mali                    0.660               0.231             0.401               0.253             0.630              0.375
Niger                   0.663               0.199             0.408               0.212             0.603              0.378
Nigeria                 0.519               0.136             0.299               0.164             0.372              0.241
Tanzania                0.632               0.173             0.364               0.153             0.528              0.327
Uganda                  0.661               0.147             0.407               0.172             0.488              0.336
Mean                    0.615               0.191             0.363               0.204             0.505              0.324
Note: Errors are calculated using the predicted values from the regressions given in the Addendum. A quantile regression
centered at the poverty line at the 20th and 40th percentile is used to estimate the model. Statistics are population weighted.


             Table 7: Targeting errors for Basic PMT using a poverty-weighted regression
                    Inclusion            Exclusion        Inclusion            Exclusion         Targeting           Targeting
                    error rate           error rate       error rate           error rate          Error               Error
                      (IER)               (EER)             (IER)               (EER)             (TER)               (TER)
                                              Fixed poverty line                                      Fixed poverty rate
                                   -1                                    -1
                            z = F (0.2)                             z = F (0.4)                   H = 0.2             H = 0.4
Burkina Faso          0.798                0.000            0.582                0.000              0.695              0.380
Ethiopia              0.799                0.002            0.598                0.000              0.707              0.512
Ghana                 0.788                0.004            0.567                0.003              0.589              0.335
Malawi                0.795                0.000            0.597                0.000              0.624              0.385
Mali                  0.790                0.004            0.596                0.000              0.646              0.418
Niger                 0.798                0.000            0.593                0.000              0.729              0.434
Nigeria               0.756                0.007            0.560                0.004              0.619              0.325
Tanzania              0.791                0.001            0.588                0.001              0.721              0.398
Uganda                0.782                0.002            0.581                0.001              0.573              0.408
Mean                  0.781                0.004            0.579                0.002              0.655              0.391
Note: Errors are calculated using the predicted values from the regression given in the Addendum with full weight on the
bottom 20 and 40 percentiles respectively. Statistics are population weighted.



                                                               39
  Table 8: Targeting errors using a Basic PMT weighted regression with “poor plus 20 percent”

                   Inclusion            Exclusion       Inclusion           Exclusion       Targeting          Targeting
                   error rate           error rate      error rate          error rate        Error              Error
                     (IER)               (EER)            (IER)              (EER)           (TER)              (TER)
                                             Fixed poverty line                                  Fixed poverty rate
                           z = F -1 (0.2)                         z = F-1(0.4)               H = 0.2            H = 0.4
Burkina Faso         0.666                0.181           0.501               0.038           0.566              0.339
Ethiopia             0.756                0.172           0.577               0.024           0.663              0.475
Ghana                0.539                0.197           0.425               0.062           0.439              0.297
Malawi               0.681                0.160           0.521               0.040           0.564              0.363
Mali                 0.702                0.173           0.520               0.040           0.653              0.380
Niger                0.708                0.099           0.525               0.027           0.624              0.390
Nigeria              0.573                0.166           0.428               0.051           0.485              0.274
Tanzania             0.653                0.172           0.466               0.049           0.584              0.334
Uganda               0.695                0.127           0.500               0.037           0.508              0.369
Mean                 0.665                0.164           0.491               0.042           0.551              0.347
Note: Errors are calculated using the predicted values from the regression in the Addendum with full weight on the bottom 40
and 60 percentiles respectively. Statistics are population weighted.


                                Table 9: Targeting errors using the Extended PMT
                   Inclusion            Exclusion       Inclusion           Exclusion       Targeting          Targeting
                   error rate           error rate      error rate          error rate        Error              Error
                     (IER)               (EER)            (IER)              (EER)           (TER)              (TER)
                                             Fixed poverty line                                  Fixed poverty rate
                                   -1                                  -1
                           z = F (0.2)                            z = F (0.4)                H = 0.2            H = 0.4
Burkina Faso         0.334                0.626           0.257               0.336           0.449              0.282
Ethiopia             0.419                0.857           0.373               0.455           0.541              0.405
Ghana                0.349                0.591           0.256               0.331           0.421              0.267
Malawi               0.439                0.698           0.295               0.374           0.470              0.315
Mali                 0.444                0.951           0.344               0.444           0.572              0.341
Niger                0.458                0.751           0.328               0.323           0.539              0.327
Nigeria              0.330                0.496           0.228               0.217           0.384              0.223
Tanzania             0.403                0.670           0.283               0.279           0.481              0.281
Uganda               0.379                0.552           0.313               0.279           0.467              0.307
Mean                 0.362                0.639           0.283               0.308           0.456              0292
Note: Errors are calculated using the predicted values from the extended PMT regressions shown in the Addendum. Statistics
are population weighted.


                                                             40
                      Table 10: Targeting differential for various PMT specifications

                                    Burkina Faso          Ethiopia             Ghana              Malawi               Mali
Basic PMT covariates
Basic PMT                               0.207              0.040               0.321               0.098               0.000
Using means from panel data              n.a.              0.380                n.a.               0.378                n.a.
Poverty quantile regression             0.453              0.338               0.591               0.412               0.395
Poverty weighted: Poor only             0.012              0.004               0.068               0.031               0.060
Poverty weighted: Poor + 20             0.411              0.185               0.568               0.392               0.339
PMT with Urban/Rural                    0.210              0.073               0.321               0.123               0.001
Extended PMT covariates
Extended PMT                            0.327              0.117               0.354               0.243               0.039
Using means from panel data              n.a.              0.182                n.a.               0.354                n.a.
Poverty quantile regression             0.523              0.372               0.605               0.507               0.427
Poverty weighted: Poor only             0.117              0.042               0.124               0.138               0.147
Poverty weighted: Poor + 20             0.494              0.283               0.557               0.492               0.443
Stepwise (p=0.01)                       0.292              0.064               0.350               0.289               0.162
HH Shocks + Food Security               0.327              0.121                                   0.298
Shocks, Food Security +
Community Variables                                        0.120                                   0.324
                                        Niger             Nigeria            Tanzania             Uganda               Mean
Basic PMT covariates
Basic PMT                               0.088              0.339               0.149               0.289               0.214
Using means from panel data              n.a.              0.382               0.319               0.259               0.366
Poverty quantile regression             0.408              0.594               0.471               0.437               0.485
Poverty weighted: Poor only             0.010              0.222               0.051               0.100               0.107
Poverty weighted: Poor + 20             0.354              0.554               0.437               0.375               0.421
PMT with Urban/Rural                    0.095              0.383               0.163               0.313               0242
Extended PMT covariates
Extended PMT                            0.196              0.442               0.275               0.380               0.309
Using means from panel data              n.a.              0.317               0.455               0.411               0.334
Poverty quantile regression             0.455              0.635               0.524               0.509               0.531
Poverty weighted: Poor only             0.122              0.353               0.084               0.201               0.196
Poverty weighted: Poor + 20             0.359              0.606               0.491               0.450               0.484
Stepwise (p=0.01)                       0.169              0.307               0.274               0.373               0.249
HH Shocks + Food Security               0.225              0.464               0.300               0.386               0.333
Shocks, Food Security +
Community Variables                     0.227              0.451               0.308               0.405               0.331
Note: The targeting differential is computed using the poverty line at the 20 th percentile. Statistics are population weighted.




                                                               41
                           Table 11: Headcount index of poverty post transfer

                                     Burkina Faso   Ethiopia     Ghana          Malawi   Mali
Universal (basic income)                0.176        0.171       0.166          0.171    0.166
Basic PMT covariates
Basic PMT                               0.152        0.190       0.149          0.176    0.200
Using means from panel data              n.a.        0.189        n.a.          0.167     n.a.
Poverty quantile regression             0.154        0.160       0.154          0.157    0.155
Poverty weighted: Poor only             0.175        0.171       0.164          0.170    0.167
Poverty weighted: Poor + 20             0.162        0.174       0.156          0.163    0.159
PMT with Urban/Rural                    0.152        0.182       0.153          0.170    0.200
Extended PMT covariates
Extended PMT                            0.147        0.172       0.147          0.154    0.190
Using means from panel data              n.a.        0.182        n.a.          0.151     n.a.
Poverty quantile regression             0.153        0.158       0.153          0.149    0.147
Poverty weighted: Poor only             0.173        0.170       0.163          0.167    0.162
Poverty weighted: Poor + 20             0.155        0.169       0.156          0.155    0.152
Stepwise (p=0.01)                       0.153        0.184       0.151          0.150    0.163
HH Shocks + Food Security               0.147        0.171                      0.154
Shocks, Food Security +
Community Variables                                  0.170                      0.148
Categorical targeting
Elderly 65+                             0.176        0.184       0.178          0.185    0.178
Widowed or disabled                     0.179        0.186       0.171          0.177    0.180
Elderly, widows & disabled              0.176        0.186       0.169          0.180    0.175
Children under 14 (max 3)               0.178        0.168       0.161          0.166    0.174
Elderly, widows, disabled &
children                                0.175        0.170       0.166          0.168    0.170
Female heads with children              0.189        0.189       0.181          0.176    0.191
Shock: drought, flood or livestock
death                                   0.198        0.196                      0.195
Shock: drought, flood, livestock
death, job loss                         0.198        0.197                       0.195
                                        Niger       Nigeria     Tanzania        Uganda   Mean
Universal (basic income)                0.177        0.169       0.183           0.168   0.171
Basic PMT covariates
Basic PMT                               0.175        0.149       0.165          0.153    0.163
Using means from panel data              n.a.        0.147       0.153          0.150    0.159
Poverty quantile regression             0.166        0.150       0.162          0.154    0.155
Poverty weighted: Poor only             0.177        0.166       0.180          0.166    0.170
Poverty weighted: Poor + 20             0.164        0.156       0.165          0.157    0.162
PMT with Urban/Rural                    0.173        0.145       0.161          0.147    0.159

                                                    42
Extended PMT covariates
Extended PMT                                  0.159             0.144             0.150            0.149             0.154
Using means from panel data                    n.a.             0.151             0.137            0.128             0.155
Poverty quantile regression                   0.168             0.151             0.159            0.146             0.154
Poverty weighted: Poor only                   0.175             0.163             0.181            0.162             0.168
Poverty weighted: Poor + 20                   0.168             0.151             0.164            0.151             0.157
Stepwise (p=0.01)                             0.161             0.153             0.154            0.149             0.160
HH Shocks + Food Security                     0.155             0.140             0.148            0.149             0.155
Shocks, Food Security +
Community Variables                           0.156             0.142             0.147            0.146             0.157
Categorical Targeting
Elderly 65+                                   0.185             0.182             0.185            0.171             0.181
Widowed or disabled                           0.192             0.181             0.187            0.174             0.182
Elderly, widows & disabled                    0.182             0.180             0.188            0.169             0.180
Children under 14 (max 3)                     0.179             0.169             0.178            0.165             0.170
Elderly, widows, disabled &
children                                      0.179             0.170             0.183            0.163             0.171
Female heads with children                    0.191             0.190             0.179            0.166             0.185
Shock: drought, flood or livestock
death                                         0.192             0.196             0.196            0.197             0.196
Shock: drought, flood, livestock
death, job loss                               0.192             0.196             0.195            0.198             0.197
Note: Eligible households receive uniform per capita transfers. The total transfer amount for each country is equal to the
country’s aggregate poverty gap. In the top two panels uniform transfers are based on their predicted consumption under the
various PMT models. The poverty line is used to determine whether a household is eligible. The statistics in the table give the
change in the country’s headcount index following the transfer. The starting value of the headcount index is 0.2. Statistics are
population weighted. Categorical targeting gives transfers to each household member who meets the specified category. If a
member meets the category twice he receives two transfers (e.g. elderly and disabled). The number of children who can
receive transfers under the Children category is capped at 3. If a household satisfies either of the Shock categories, every
household member receives a transfer.




                                                              43
                              Table 12: Poverty gap index post transfer

                              Burkina Faso     Ethiopia       Ghana       Malawi   Mali
Pre-transfer poverty gap         0.037          0.055         0.054       0.047    0.049
Universal (basic income)         0.030          0.045         0.040       0.039    0.039
Basic PMT covariates
Basic PMT                         0.027         0.051         0.034       0.039    0.049
Using means from panel data        n.a.         0.042          n.a.       0.037     n.a.
Poverty quantile regression       0.025         0.037         0.032       0.033    0.033
Poverty weighted: Poor only       0.030         0.045         0.039       0.038    0.039
Poverty weighted: Poor + 20       0.026         0.042         0.031       0.034    0.035
PMT with Urban/Rural              0.026         0.048         0.033       0.038    0.049
Extended PMT covariates
Extended PMT                      0.021         0.046         0.032       0.032    0.046
Using means from panel data        n.a.         0.040          n.a.       0.030     n.a.
Poverty quantile regression       0.025         0.037         0.032       0.033    0.033
Poverty weighted: Poor only       0.030         0.044         0.038       0.037    0.038
Poverty weighted: Poor + 20       0.024         0.041         0.031       0.031    0.033
Stepwise (p=0.01)                 0.024         0.049         0.032       0.030    0.036
HH Shocks + Food Security         0.022         0.043                     0.029
Shocks, Food Security +
Community Variables                             0.043                     0.028
Categorical targeting
Elderly 65+                       0.031         0.049         0.047       0.043    0.043
Widowed or disabled               0.032         0.050         0.042       0.042    0.044
Elderly, widows & disabled        0.031         0.049         0.043       0.041    0.043
Children under 14 (max 3)         0.031         0.044         0.038       0.038    0.042
Elderly, widows, disabled &
children                          0.031         0.044         0.040       0.038    0.043
Female heads with children        0.035         0.051         0.046       0.040    0.047
Shock: drought, flood or
livestock death                   0.036         0.053                     0.045
Shock: drought, flood,
livestock death, job loss         0.036         0.053                      0.045
                                  Niger        Nigeria      Tanzania      Uganda   Mean
Pre-transfer poverty gap          0.039         0.050        0.053         0.059   0.051
Universal (basic income)          0.034         0.039        0.044         0.045   0.041
Basic PMT covariates
Basic PMT                         0.034         0.029         0.041       0.038    0.037
Using means from panel data        n.a.         0.026         0.031       0.033    0.031
Poverty quantile regression       0.026         0.030         0.036       0.038    0.033
Poverty weighted: Poor only       0.034         0.038         0.044       0.044    0.040


                                                 44
Poverty weighted: Poor + 20                0.029              0.031             0.037              0.040               0.035
PMT with Urban/Rural                       0.033              0.028             0.040              0.036               0.036
Extended PMT covariates
Extended PMT                               0.028              0.027             0.033              0.033               0.033
Using means from panel data                 n.a.              0.025             0.022              0.026               0.029
Poverty quantile regression                0.026              0.030             0.036              0.038               0.033
Poverty weighted: Poor only                0.033              0.036             0.044              0.043               0.039
Poverty weighted: Poor + 20                0.029              0.029             0.035              0.038               0.033
Stepwise (p=0.01)                          0.031              0.032             0.034              0.032               0.035
HH Shocks + Food Security                  0.026              0.026             0.031              0.032               0.033
Shocks, Food Security +
Community Variables                        0.026              0.027             0.031              0.032               0.034
Categorical targeting
Elderly 65+                                0.036              0.044             0.048              0.044               0.045
Widowed or disabled                        0.036              0.044             0.047              0.048               0.045
Elderly, widows & disabled                 0.036              0.043             0.047              0.044               0.044
Children under 14 (max 3)                  0.034              0.039             0.043              0.045               0.040
Elderly, widows, disabled &
children                                   0.034              0.040             0.043              0.044               0.041
Female heads with children                 0.038              0.047             0.045              0.046               0.047
Shock: drought, flood or
livestock death                            0.038              0.049             0.051              0.057               0.050
Shock: drought, flood,
livestock death, job loss                  0.038              0.049             0.051              0.057               0.050
Note: The initial value of the poverty gap index is shown in the first row. See notes to Table 11 for other details.




                                                               45
                               Table 13: Watts index post transfer

                              Burkina Faso   Ethiopia       Ghana     Malawi   Mali
Actual                           0.044        0.074         0.069     0.060    0.064
Universal (basic income)         0.036        0.059         0.049     0.049    0.050
Basic PMT covariates
Basic PMT                        0.032        0.069         0.042     0.050    0.064
Using means from panel data       n.a.        0.053          n.a.     0.046     n.a.
Poverty quantile regression      0.029        0.048         0.038     0.040    0.041
Poverty weighted: Poor only      0.035        0.059         0.048     0.049    0.049
Poverty weighted: Poor + 20      0.030        0.055         0.037     0.042    0.044
PMT with Urban/Rural             0.031        0.064         0.040     0.048    0.064
Extended PMT covariates
Extended PMT                     0.025        0.061         0.040     0.041    0.059
Using means from panel data       n.a.        0.050          n.a.     0.036     n.a.
Poverty quantile regression      0.027        0.047         0.038     0.037    0.041
Poverty weighted: Poor only      0.035        0.058         0.047     0.047    0.048
Poverty weighted: Poor + 20      0.027        0.053         0.037     0.038    0.041
Stepwise (p=0.01)                0.027        0.066         0.040     0.037    0.046
HH Shocks + Food Security        0.025        0.057                   0.036
Shocks, Food Security +
Community Variables                           0.057                   0.034
Categorical targeting
Elderly 65+                      0.037        0.066         0.060     0.055    0.056
Widowed or disabled              0.038        0.067         0.052     0.053    0.057
Elderly, widows & disabled       0.037        0.065         0.053     0.052    0.056
Children under 14 (max 3)        0.037        0.057         0.047     0.048    0.055
Elderly, widows, disabled &
children                         0.037        0.058         0.049     0.048    0.055
Female heads with children       0.042        0.069         0.059     0.051    0.061
Shock: drought, flood or
livestock death                  0.043        0.071                   0.058
Shock: drought, flood,
livestock death, job loss        0.043        0.071                    0.058
                                 Niger       Nigeria       Tanzania   Uganda   Mean
Actual                           0.048        0.064         0.069      0.085   0.067
Universal (basic income)         0.040        0.049         0.057      0.062   0.052
Basic PMT covariates
Basic PMT                        0.041        0.036         0.053     0.049    0.048
Using means from panel data       n.a.        0.031         0.037     0.040    0.038
Poverty quantile regression      0.030        0.037         0.046     0.050    0.041
Poverty weighted: Poor only      0.040        0.047         0.056     0.061    0.051


                                               46
Poverty weighted: Poor + 20                0.034              0.038              0.047              0.054        0.044
PMT with Urban/Rural                       0.040              0.035              0.051              0.047        0.046
Extended PMT covariates
Extended PMT                               0.033              0.032              0.042              0.040        0.041
Using means from panel data                 n.a.              0.030              0.026              0.032        0.035
Poverty quantile regression                0.030              0.036              0.043              0.047        0.040
Poverty weighted: Poor only                0.039              0.045              0.056              0.059        0.050
Poverty weighted: Poor + 20                0.035              0.035              0.044              0.050        0.041
Stepwise (p=0.01)                          0.038              0.039              0.043              0.042        0.045
HH Shocks + Food Security                  0.031              0.032              0.040              0.040        0.041
Shocks, Food Security +
Community Variables                        0.031              0.032              0.039              0.039        0.042
Categorical targeting
Elderly 65+                                0.043              0.055              0.063              0.058        0.058
Widowed or disabled                        0.043              0.056              0.062              0.066        0.058
Elderly, widows & disabled                 0.043              0.054              0.062              0.058        0.056
Children under 14 (max 3)                  0.041              0.049              0.055              0.064        0.052
Elderly, widows, disabled &
children                                   0.041              0.050              0.056              0.061        0.052
Female heads with children                 0.045              0.061              0.059              0.067        0.061
Shock: drought, flood or
livestock death                            0.046              0.062              0.067              0.083        0.065
Shock: drought, flood,
livestock death, job loss                  0.046              0.062              0.067              0.083        0.065
Note: The initial value of the Watts index is shown in the first row. See notes to Table 11 for other details.




                                                               47
                      Table 14: Watts index post transfer using differentiated transfers

                                                                                       Optimal transfers
                                   Actual            PMT           PMT Gap           Linear        Non-linear
               Burkina
               Faso                 0.044           0.032            0.044           0.038            0.036
               Ethiopia             0.074           0.069            0.074           0.056            0.053
               Ghana                0.069           0.042            0.066           0.048            0.044
               Malawi               0.060           0.050            0.060           0.051            0.044
               Mali                 0.064           0.064            0.064           0.057            0.053
               Niger                0.048           0.041            0.048           0.042            0.039
               Nigeria              0.064           0.036            0.062           0.049            0.043
               Tanzania             0.069           0.053            0.069           0.060            0.051
               Uganda               0.085           0.049            0.083           0.061            0.053
               Mean                 0.067           0.048            0.066           0.054            0.049
Note: This table shows the Watts index for each country following the transfers made using the Basic PMT and the
differentiated transfers implied by the optimization procedure based on both linear and quadratic transfers as a function of the
same variables used in the PMT with weights chosen to minimize the Watts index (see text).




                                                              48
                              Table 15: Targeting errors with lags using Method 1
                    Inclusion          Exclusion        Inclusion          Exclusion       Targeting         Targeting
                    error rate         error rate       error rate         error rate      error rate        error rate
                      (IER)             (EER)             (IER)             (EER)            (TER)             (TER)
                                                       Basic PMT
                                            Fixed poverty line                                 Fixed poverty rate
                                  -1                                  -1
                           z = F (0.2)                           z = F (0.4)                H = 0.2           H = 0.4
Ethiopia              0.000              0.993            0.302              0.882           0.677             0.445
Malawi                0.674              0.244            0.491              0.085           0.593             0.382
Nigeria               0.333              0.959            0.183              0.704           0.481             0.303
Tanzania              0.481              0.848            0.319              0.321           0.556             0.321
Uganda                0.489              0.699            0.376              0.429           0.541             0.393
Mean                  0.553              0.903            0.304              0.650           0.551             0.351
                                                     Extended PMT
                                            Fixed poverty line                                 Fixed poverty rate
                           z = F -1 (0.2)                        z = F-1(0.4)               H = 0.2           H = 0.4
Ethiopia              0.540              0.989            0.284              0.831           0.598             0.422
Malawi                0.644              0.178            0.470              0.053           0.514             0.332
Nigeria               0.163              0.948            0.140              0.723           0.455             0.287
Tanzania              0.424              0.773            0.277              0.348           0.501             0.295
Uganda                0.472              0.474            0.348              0.290           0.475             0.342
Mean                  0.496              0.869            0.276              0.640           0.502             0.328
 Note: The parameters of the PMT score are estimated using Round 1 data, then predicted values are generated using Round 2
covariate values. Underlying regressions are found in the Addendum. Statistics are population weighted.




                                                           49
                               Table 16: Targeting errors with lags using method 2
                     Inclusion           Exclusion        Inclusion           Exclusion         Targeting         Targeting
                     error rate          error rate       error rate          error rate        error rate        error rate
                       (IER)              (EER)             (IER)               (EER)            (TER)              (TER)
                                                         Basic PMT
                                              Fixed poverty line                                      Fixed poverty rate
                                    -1                                  -1
                             z = F (0.2)                           z = F (0.4)                   H = 0.2           H = 0.4
Ethiopia               0.207               0.985            0.322               0.873             0.677             0.446
Malawi                 0.570               0.720            0.409               0.434             0.604             0.418
Nigeria                0.184               0.964            0.182               0.745             0.475             0.304
Tanzania               0.444               0.851            0.345               0.382             0.569             0.352
Uganda                 0.547               0.851            0.385               0.390             0.576             0.387
Mean                   0.436               0.935            0.295               0.690             0.548             0.355
                                                       Extended PMT
                                              Fixed poverty line                                      Fixed poverty rate
                             z = F -1 (0.2)                        z = F-1(0.4)                  H = 0.2           H = 0.4
Ethiopia               0.359               0.967            0.343               0.793             0.613             0.437
Malawi                 0.568               0.648            0.396               0.404             0.585             0.401
Nigeria                0.259               0.928            0.142               0.696             0.482             0.301
Tanzania               0.395               0.731            0.334               0.340             0.507             0.333
Uganda                 0.465               0.658            0.354               0.382             0.504             0.362
Mean                   0.407               0.880            0.273               0.637             0.523             0.346
Note: The PMT is calibrated using Round 1 panel data, then predicted values are compared to actual consumption values in
Round 2 panel data. Regressions are found in the Addendum. Statistics are population weighted.

                                  Table 17: Targeting differentials for panel PMTs

                                         Basic PMT                                           Extended PMT
                  No lags          Method 1            Method 2              No lags       Method 1        Method 2
Ethiopia             0.100               1.000             0.585               0.126         -0.079              0.282
Malawi               0.102               -0.349            -0.141              0.178         -0.288              -0.136
Nigeria              0.317               0.334             0.633               0.403          0.675              0.482
Tanzania             0.207               0.039             0.111               0.212          0.153              0.209
Uganda               0.188               0.022             -0.094              0.221          0.056              0.070
Mean                 0.275               -0.106            0.128               0.321          0.007              0.187
 Note: The targeting differential is computed using the poverty line at the 20 th percentile. Method 1 uses Round 1 PMT
calibration and Round 2 data to generate predicted values. Method 2 uses Round 1 predicted values and Round 2 actual
consumption. “No lags” refers to results when the PMT is calibrated and compared to Round 2 data (i.e. the panel structure is
not used but only panel households are included). Statistics are population weighted.

                                                             50
                             Table 18: Headcount index post transfer, round 2

                               Ethiopia        Malawi         Nigeria       Tanzania        Uganda          Mean
PMT Targeting
Basic PMT                        0.187          0.176          0.146          0.165          0.153          0.161
Extended PMT                     0.172          0.155          0.137          0.153          0.146          0.150
Method 1 Basic                   0.199          0.160          0.193          0.170          0.143          0.186
Method 1 Extended                0.198          0.154          0.191          0.160          0.143          0.183
Method 2 Basic                   0.197          0.163          0.194          0.176          0.170          0.189
Method 2 Extended                0.194          0.161          0.187          0.157          0.152          0.181
Categorical Targeting
Household size                   0.168          0.164          0.171          0.173          0.164          0.170
Elderly 65+                      0.182          0.180          0.176          0.179          0.168          0.178
Widowed or disabled              0.177          0.173          0.181          0.178          0.173          0.179
Elderly, widows&
disabled                         0.180          0.169          0.177          0.178          0.163          0.176
Children under 14 (max
3)                               0.166          0.163          0.171          0.168          0.157          0.168
Elderly, widows, disabled
& children                       0.164          0.160          0.169          0.171          0.158          0.167
Female heads with
children                         0.181          0.171          0.190          0.167          0.158          0.182
Note: Method 1 uses Round 1 PMT calibration and Round 2 data to generate predicted values. Method 2 uses Round 1
predicted values and compares to Round 2 actual consumption. The Basic and Extended PMT methods (rows 1 and 2) are
using Round 2 data only (i.e. no lags). Only panel households are included. Statistics are population weighted.




                                                         51
                  Table 19: Targeting errors as predictors of the post-transfer poverty measures obtained by PMT

                        Headcount index                 Poverty gap index                                         Watts index
                  Basic PMT       Extended         Basic PMT        Extended            Basic PMT          Extended        PMT gaps    Optimal
                                    PMT                                PMT                                   PMT                      (nonlinear)
   Constant        0.083***       0.116***         -0.035***        -0.031***           -0.047***          -0.035**         -0.041*      -0.001
                    (0.012)        (0.014)           (0.004)          (0.006)             (0.010)           (0.014)         (0.020)     (0.004)
Initial poverty       n.a.           n.a.           0.750***         0.731***            0.657***          0.584***        1.119***    0.483***
   measure                                           (0.062)          (0.074)             (0.095)           (0.098)         (0.182)     (0.041)
Inclusion error      0.028          0.070             0.005           -0.008               0.005            -0.015           -0.025       0.003
      rate          (0.015)        (0.045)           (0.003)          (0.014)             (0.009)           (0.032)         (0.016)     (0.004)
  Exclusion        0.090***       0.098***          0.043***         0.046***            0.065***          0.065***           0.034     0.018**
   error rate       (0.020)        (0.014)           (0.004)          (0.004)             (0.012)           (0.010)         (0.022)     (0.005)
       R2            0.927          0.913             0.986            0.980               0.954             0.946            0.886       0.969
   F (prob)         38.240         31.337            114.373          81.257              34.458            29.259           12.917      48.725
                    (0.000)        (0.001)           (0.000)          (0.000)             (0.001)           (0.001)         (0.009)     (0.000)
                                Note: Standard errors in parentheses. ***: significant at 1% level; **: 5%; *: 10%. N=9.


                    Table 20: R-squared in PMT regression as a predictor of the post-transfer poverty measures

                        Headcount index                 Poverty gap index                                        Watts index
                  Basic PMT        Extended        Basic PMT        Extended           Basic PMT          Extended       PMT gaps      Optimal
                                     PMT                               PMT                                   PMT                      (nonlinear)
  Constant         0.228***        0.209***         0.080***        0.079***             0.110***          0.106***         0.001       0.041**
                    (0.029)         (0.024)          (0.021)         (0.022)              (0.025)           (0.024)        (0.028)      (0.012)
Initial poverty       n.a.            n.a.           -0.079           -0.048              -0.055            -0.038        0.927***      0.298**
   measure                                           (0.273)         (0.263)              (0.219)           (0.195)        (0.239)      (0.106)
R2 from PMT        -0.113*         -0.085*         -0.071***       -0.071***            -0.107***         -0.102***        -0.027       -0.027*
  regression       (0.052)         (0.038)           (0.019)         (0.018)              (0.026)           (0.023)        (0.028)      (0.013)
       R2           0.401           0.415             0.767            0.803               0.796             0.827          0.847         0.842
   F (prob)         4.682           4.964             9.875          12.240               11.735            14.301         16.559        15.969
                   (0.067)         (0.061)           (0.013)         (0.008)              (0.008)           (0.005)        (0.004)      (0.004)
                                Note: Standard errors in parentheses. ***: significant at 1% level; **: 5%; *: 10%. N=9.
