                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                   CORRECTIVE POLICY AND GOODHART'S LAW:
               THE CASE OF CARBON EMISSIONS FROM AUTOMOBILES

                                        Mathias Reynaert
                                        James M. Sallee

                                      Working Paper 22911
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w22911


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   December 2016




We thank seminar participants at Arizona State, ENSAE-CREST, Fundacao Getulio Vargas, the
NTA Annual Conference on Taxation, the NBER Summer Institute, the Stanford Institute for
Theoretical Economics (SITE), the Norwegian School of Economics, Resources for the Future,
the Toulouse School of Economics, UC Davis and Yale for helpful comments. Special thanks to
Meredith Fowlie for introducing us to the term Goodhart's Law in this policy context. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2016 by Mathias Reynaert and James M. Sallee. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Corrective Policy and Goodhart's Law: The Case of Carbon Emissions from Automobiles
Mathias Reynaert and James M. Sallee
NBER Working Paper No. 22911
December 2016
JEL No. H2,L5,Q5

                                         ABSTRACT

Firms sometimes comply with externality-correcting policies by gaming the measure that
determines policy. We show theoretically that such gaming can benefit consumers, even when it
induces them to make mistakes, because gaming leads to lower prices by reducing costs. We use
our insights to quantify the welfare effect of gaming in fuel-consumption ratings for automobiles,
which we show increased sharply following aggressive policy reforms. We estimate a structural
model of the car market and derive empirical analogs of the price effects and choice distortions
identified by theory. We find that price effects outweigh distortions; on net, consumers benefit
from gaming.


Mathias Reynaert
Toulouse School of Economics
21 Allee de Brienne
31000, Toulouse, France
mathias.reynaert@tse-fr.eu

James M. Sallee
Department of Agricultural and Resource Economics
University of California, Berkeley
207 Giannini Hall
Berkeley, California 94720-3310
and NBER
sallee@berkeley.edu
1        Introduction
Goodhart’s Law proclaims that “when a measure becomes a target, it ceases to be a good mea-
sure.”1 It captures the notion that strategic actions will alter the meaning of a measure once stakes
are introduced. This truism creates a regulator’s dilemma that is particularly nuanced when the
measurement plays a coordinating role for economic activity among private agents. In such cases,
the existence of the regulation may reduce the efficiency of private transactions by altering the fi-
delity of the measurement itself. Thus, a regulation subject to gaming may not only fail to achieve
regulatory goals, but may also lower private welfare from market transactions.
        We take up this problem theoretically and empirically, with a focus on the case in which
regulation is intended to mitigate an externality. We first develop our theoretical model, which
characterizes the welfare effects of corrective policy in the presence of strategic gaming. We then
apply these insights to the case of the regulation of carbon emissions from automobiles in Europe.
We use a novel data set to show that the roll out of aggressive carbon policies coincided with
a remarkable decline in the accuracy of laboratory-based carbon emissions ratings, which is the
measure used by policy. This is Goodhart’s Law; policy alters the accuracy of the measure. To
conduct welfare analysis, we estimate a structural model of the European car market and use the
parameters to directly quantify the welfare effects identified in our theoretical model.
        Our theoretical model considers a monopolist who sells a good to a representative consumer.
The good has some attribute that is desirable to consumers, but also creates a negative externality
that motivates corrective policy. The attribute is not directly observable, however, so consumer
demand and government regulation are based on a signal sent by the firm. The firm can raise the
signal either by changing the true attribute or by gaming, both of which are costly. Goodhart’s
Law for externality-correcting policies manifests when the introduction of corrective policy induces
gaming.
        In our model, we assume that some fraction of gaming is undetected by consumers. Absent
policy, this leads consumers to dislike gaming for two reasons. First, gaming causes consumers to
mis-optimize (choose the wrong quantity of the good), which leads to a loss in consumer surplus
that we call choice distortion.2 Second, gaming causes the firm to raise price, because consumers
perceive an improvement in the product. This further reduces consumer surplus. As a result,
consumer incentives are misaligned with firm incentives regarding gaming; consumers lose from
gaming and would shift demand away from firms that game if given the opportunity.
        Corrective policy disrupts this logic by flipping the sign of price effects. Regulation raises the
cost of production. Gaming allows the firm to lower its costs, and this benefits consumers through
lower prices in the same way that a reduction in a tax would. When this price effect dominates
choice distortions from faulty information, consumers benefit from the firm’s gaming, even when
    1
      Goodhart’s original concern was monetary policy (Goodhart 1981). A similar notion, also focused on monetary
policy, is captured in the Lucas critique (Lucas 1976).
    2
      The choice distortion that we identify is conceptually identical to the consumer surplus loss due to cognitive
frictions or information limitations in several prior papers, including Leggett (2002), Allcott (2013), Sallee (2014) and
Dubois, Griffith, and O’Connell (2016).


                                                           1
they are fooled by it. Collectively, consumers would prefer to prevent gaming because the loss in
private surplus would be outweighed by gains from mitigating the externality. But individually
rational consumers wish to free ride and would thus choose an environment with gaming to one
with honest firms if given the choice.
      Our theory articulates Goodhart’s Law for externality-correcting policies: stronger policy in-
centives lead to more gaming. This is intuitive, but less obvious are the welfare results we point
out. Policy-induced gaming creates two welfare effects. First, firms spend real resources on gaming,
which is socially wasteful. Second, gaming induces choice distortion. Combined with Goodhart’s
Law, this means that strengthening corrective policy will exacerbate choice distortions and wasteful
gaming, which together lower the social value created in the market. But, perhaps surprisingly,
consumers may actually benefit (in terms of private welfare, not including the externality) from
gaming, even when they are fooled by it, because of price effects. This means that consumers
will prefer gamed products. In turn this suggests a challenge for enforcement. In most markets,
consumer backlash is a powerful deterrent that keeps firms honest and provides market “self regula-
tion.” But when consumers benefit from gaming, such self regulation will break down. We suggest
that this break down of self regulation is precisely what happened in our empirical application.
      Our empirical analysis concerns a setting that closely matches our theoretical model: the regu-
lation of carbon emissions from automobiles in Europe. In the automobile market, fuel economy is
a characteristic valued by consumers, and it is directly linked to an externality (carbon emissions).
In terms of the model, fuel economy ratings, which are isomorphic to carbon emissions ratings,
are the true attribute. But, true on-road fuel economy is observed by neither consumers nor the
regulator. Instead, regulations and consumer-facing fuel-economy labels are based on laboratory
tests. Firms can improve a test result either by increasing a vehicle’s true fuel economy or by
gaming the test.
      Our empirical analysis begins by establishing a correlation between the accuracy of laboratory-
based fuel-economy test ratings and changes in policy. Prior to 2007, there were no policies in
Europe that hinged directly on fuel-economy tests. In 2007, the E.U. announced an aggressive
Europe-wide fuel-economy mandate similar in structure to the U.S. Corporate Average Fuel Econ-
omy (CAFE) standard.3 The law was finalized in 2009 and has been phasing in since. In addition,
a collection of nation-specific tax reforms changed, mostly between 2008 and 2010, which reformed
registration and sales taxes so that they explicitly tax vehicles more heavily if they emit more
carbon. All of these policies use measures of carbon emissions based on a common laboratory test
called the New European Driving Cycle.
      We compare these official test ratings to direct measures of on-road fuel economy constructed
from a data set that tracks fuel consumption and kilometers traveled for a panel of more than
250,000 drivers over twelve years in the Netherlands. Using these data, we estimate the percentage
difference between the laboratory test and on-road performance, which we call the performance gap.
Figure 1 summarizes our findings; it plots the official rating, our estimated on-road performance,
  3
      See Reynaert (2015) for an analysis of the economic effects of the European regulation.



                                                           2
                      Figure 1: On-road and official fuel consumption per release year




                                                                                                    60
               8




                                                                                                    50
               7




                                                                                                    % Difference
                                                                                                             40
            L/100km
                6




                                                                                                     30
               5




                                                                                                    20
               4




                                                                                                    10
                      98 99 00 01 02 03 04 05 06 07 08 09 10 11 12 13 14
                                          Release Year

                                      Official Ratings                On-road Ratings
                                      % Difference




and the corresponding performance gap by release year (model year) for vehicles in our sample.
Vehicles produced before the introduction of the carbon regulation showed a small, and relatively
stable, performance gap. Vehicles produced after the introduction of the standard exhibit a large
and rising performance gap, so that 2014 model year vehicles now have performance gaps in excess
of 50%. Below, we show that this result is robust to a number of specification checks and various
controls, and that the performance gap is similar for all automakers. The rise in the performance
gap implies that around 65% of the gains in fuel economy as measured by laboratory tests are false.
Using conventional estimates of lifetime distance traveled and a social cost of carbon of $40 per ton
of carbon, the difference between apparent and actual emissions reductions amounts to $1.2 billion
annually from 2010 to 2014 when extrapolated to all of Europe.
       Our results are consistent with a growing set of media accounts and with analysis performed
by the International Council for Clean Transportation, which has documented a similar gap in a
number of European countries (The International Council on Clean Transportation 2014, 2015).4
The media accounts offer insight into how gaming may occur.5 Tests are performed in third-party
facilities, but these are funded by the automakers. The test procedure provides considerable latitude
   4
      The ICCT reports include analysis of the Netherlands based on the same data that we use here. Our results
are qualitatively similar, but we offer a number of critical methodological improvements, including the calculation
of standard errors, the introduction of time of driving fixed effects and other controls, a variance decomposition, an
Empirical Bayes correction, and extrapolation to the entire European market through matching.
    5
      For example, see “Europe’s Auto Makers Keep Test Firms Close” in the March 21, 2016 Wall Street Journal :
http://on.wsj.com/1o5h47B.


                                                          3
for automakers to modify the vehicle submitted for testing in ways that differ from the units sold
to consumers. For example, test vehicles are fitted with special low rolling resistance tires just for
the test, optional equipment is removed (to reduce weight), and the outside of the body is altered
(mirrors are removed, seams are taped down) to improve aerodynamics.
   The historical data pattern is consistent with our theoretical model of Goodhart’s Law. The
same test procedure that is now being brazenly gamed was the basis of consumer-facing labels
that are displayed by law on all new cars during our entire sample period. As such, as long as
consumers cannot see through gaming perfectly, then automakers could have benefitted from test
gaming during the early 2000’s (prior to the roll out of policies), during which time fuel prices
were quite high. Gaming in this time period, however, would have harmed consumers. Because
the performance gap is observable over time (drivers observe their fuel economy), we would expect
consumers to be fooled temporarily, but not permanently. Thus, gaming that harms consumers
in one period may lead to a reduction in demand in future periods that acts as a self regulatory
check on the market. The introduction of policy disrupts this logic. The implementation of a strict
regulation and a suite of tax incentives moved automakers away from relatively honest behavior
towards brazen gaming. Individual consumers (privately) benefited from gaming by avoiding costly
price increases that would have been required by regulation.
   Our theoretical model shows that corrective policy creates price effects and choice distortions
that have countervailing effects on consumer surplus, but it does not tell us in general which will
dominate. To estimate the magnitude of these welfare effects and to see which dominates, we
turn to structural analysis. We estimate a demand model of the European car market and use
the structural parameters to simulate market outcomes from gaming with and without a policy.
When there is no corrective policy and when consumers are completely unaware of gaming, we find
that lowering perceived fuel costs by 5% reduces consumer welfare by e25 per car. A significant
majority of this loss comes through the price effect rather than choice distortion. As a result, the
profits of firms that game rise by an amount similar to the loss in consumer surplus.
   As suggested by the theory, the welfare effects of gaming change when we introduce a corrective
policy. Specifically, we model a short-run regulation that requires firms to raise fuel economy by 5%.
When firms comply honestly, private consumer surplus declines significantly. When we allow all
firms to game, the constraints imposed by the regulation are relaxed, which creates a beneficial price
effect for consumers. Gaming with or without a policy induces a similar sized choice distortion, but
we find that this is an order of magnitude smaller than the price effect. In the presence of a policy,
gaming causes private consumer surplus to rise by e200 per car. This provides empirical validation
for our theoretical explanation: gaming benefits consumers. We also show that a corrective policy
roughly triples the private benefit to a single firm that games when all others are honest. This
shows that the incentives to game in the market are increased by the policy.
   We contribute to several literatures. First, we make an important contribution to the emerging
literature that assesses whether or not energy efficiency policies deliver the gains predicted by ex
ante engineering-based procedures. Fowlie, Greenstone, and Wolfram (2015) show that building


                                                  4
insulation programs deliver a modest fraction of the expected benefits. Davis, Fuchs, and Gertler
(2014) show a similar result for appliance rebate programs in Mexico. Levinson (2016) argues that
building codes in California failed to produce the expected energy conservation. We contribute by
showing similar results for the transportation sector; we estimate that two-thirds of the apparent
gains based on laboratory tests are not realized. This literature is especially important for policy in
light of the shift towards “bottom-up” contributions in international climate negotiations embodied
in the 2015 Paris Climate Accord. In those proceedings, each country pledges expected emissions
reductions based on ex ante assessments of future conservation programs. Energy efficiency policies
play a large role in these estimates, and if the programs fail to produced the pledged gains, future
rounds of negotiation will be greatly strained.
       Second, by analyzing externality-correcting policies in a setting with market power, we con-
tribute to the literature on instrument choice and policy design in the presence of multiple market
failures. Buchanan (1969) argued against Pigouvian taxation on the grounds that such policies
could lower welfare by exacerbating inefficiencies due to market power. Subsequent theoretical
work demonstrated how to balance these two considerations (Barnett 1980), but relatively little
empirical work followed. Recent empirical papers have begun to fill this void, including Fowlie
(2009) and Fowlie, Reguant, and Ryan (2016), who use structural models of the electricity and
cement markets in order to compare the efficiency of alternative policy instruments in the presence
of market power and leakage. We add to this literature first by providing an empirical application
to the automobile sector; second by introducing a new market failure, choice distortion due to
gaming; and third by establishing an intuitive analytical model that shows how all three market
failures interact.
       Third, we contribute to the instrument choice literature. Reviews of this literature often list
ease of enforcement and compliance differences as one reason to prefer some policy instruments
over others, but they typically cite little in the way of empirical evidence (e.g., Goulder and Parry
2008).6 We provide a key empirical lesson, and we also add to the instrument choice literature
by establishing a novel theoretical point about how instrument choice can affect the ease of en-
forcement by aligning the interest of consumers either with firms that wish to evade or with the
regulator. Specifically, we argue that gaming implies that a gasoline tax would have better enforce-
ment properties than a fuel-economy regulation because a gasoline tax would align the interest of
consumers with the regulator.
       Finally, a long literature considers the economic efficiency of fuel-economy standards versus a
gasoline tax (see Anderson and Sallee (Forthcoming) for a recent review). Recent articles have
pointed out new concerns about the efficiency of regulation due to interactions with the used car
market (Jacobsen and van Benthem 2015), safety (Jacobsen 2013), and heterogeneity in vehicle
lifetimes (Jacobsen, Knittel, Sallee, and van Benthem 2016). We add to that literature by pointing
out the importance of rating accuracy and gaming.
   6
    Some recent papers have highlighted enforcement problems in environmental regulation with a focus on developing
countries (e.g., Duflo, Greenstone, and Ryan 2013, Oliva 2015). We add to this literature by highlighting enforcement
problems in a rich-country context, as well as through our theoretical insights.


                                                         5
    The balance of the paper is structured as follows. In section 2 we describe a theoretical frame-
work that adapts Goodhart’s Law to a setting in which private transactions are based on the target
of regulation, and regulation is motivated by an externality. Section 3 describes the European
automobile carbon emissions standard and the test procedure. Section 4 describes our data, and
section 5 includes our descriptive analysis of the performance gap in Europe. Section 6 estimates a
structural model of the automobile market and uses the estimates to calculate changes in consumer
surplus from gaming. Section 7 concludes.


2     A model of gaming
This section develops a model to describe the welfare consequences of strategic gaming in response
to an externality-correcting policy. We consider the simplest case—a monopolist selling a single
product to a consumer in a single period—that allows us to highlight the competing effects of
consumer mistakes and endogeneous prices. We focus our discussion on private surplus (excluding
the externality) because our goal is to understand the compliance decision of individual firms and
consumers, who would rationally free ride if given the chance.

2.1   Setup
We model a monopolist who sells a good that has an externality which depends on some mutable
attribute of the good. The externality motivates regulation. The attribute that is regulated is
of direct interest to the consumer and influences demand for the product. The attribute is not
immediately verifiable, however, so consumers and the regulator must act on a signal provided by
the firm. Deviation between the true attribute and the signal provided constitutes gaming.
    Additional assumptions are motivated by the application we have in mind, where the attribute
is energy efficiency of a durable good. First, where the attribute is efficiency, consumers care about
efficiency to the degree that it affects operating costs, and we can thus model demand as determined
by the full cost, including up-front price and lifetime operating cost. Second, motivated by media
discussion of how emissions tests are gamed, we assume that gaming incurs only fixed costs for the
firm; it does not change the marginal cost of the good. Both assumptions can be relaxed without
altering our main conclusions.
    Our notation is as follows. The full cost of owning and operating the good is denoted f = p+βx,
where p is the up-front purchase price, x is the energy consumption rating of the product and β is a
coefficient that translates energy consumption ratings into dollars (e.g., for a vehicle, β is the price
of fuel per liter times the number of present discounted lifetime kilometers driven, while x is the
L/100km rating). Note that x is a bad. Consumers and the regulator do not observe x directly, but
instead receive a message m from firms (e.g., the fuel consumption label rating). Gaming occurs
when a firm sends a message m that differs from x, where gaming g is defined as the difference
between the true attribute and the message (g = x − m).
    For simplicity, we assume that all attributes of a good are fixed other than x and p; this can


                                                   6
be interpreted as a short-run assumption. The firm chooses x, p and g. We assume that the costs
of gaming and of producing the true attribute are separable. The marginal cost of production for
a product is c(x), which is decreasing (x is a bad) and convex (c0 < 0, c00 > 0). Consistent with
media discussions of gaming in the automobile market, we assume that gaming is all fixed cost,
which we denote h(g), which is increasing and convex (h0 > 0, h00 > 0).
   Under full information, consumer demand D for the product depends on its various attributes
(held fixed and thus suppressed in notation) and lifetime cost, which depends on x and p: D(f ) =
D(p + βx). Consumers, however, observe m not x, so they use the observed signal to form beliefs,
labeled x̃, where f˜ = p + β x̃. We assume risk neutrality.
   Consumer beliefs x̃ are assumed to be a weighted average of the truth and the signal:

                               x̃t = αx + (1 − α)(x − g) = x − (1 − α)g.

This is a tractable form of beliefs that encompasses a variety of possibilities. When α = 1, con-
sumers can see through gaming completely. When α = 0, consumers are completely fooled. For
intermediate cases, (1 − α) represents the fraction of gaming that fools consumers.
   Policy intervention is motivated by a negative externality associated with x, which we assume
is linear and equal to φx. The regulator observes m, so policy must be based on m. One possible
policy is a regulatory standard, which requires that the (reported) attribute be below a threshold:
σ: m = x − g ≤ σ. We will use λ to denote the shadow price of the regulation per unit; i.e., the
constraint on the firm’s profit function is written λ × (σ − x + g) × D.
   Second, as an alternative, the regulator could raise the price of fuel consumption through a tax
on fuel τ . We model this as a level increase in β, so that fuel costs with a tax are equal to τ + β.
Note that either policy will end up affecting a product’s full cost. A firm facing a regulation may
change x and/or change price p, both of which affect demand only by shifting f . Likewise, a fuel
tax affects consumer demand by raising f .
   Finally, while the regulator cannot observe the true attribute x at any moment in time, it may
be able to observe it in later periods, or it may be able to conduct an investigation. Thus, we could
add an additional cost function that is rising in the amount of gaming that represents expected
regulatory penalties. But, rather than add a second term, we interpret h(g), the cost of gaming
function, as encompassing both private costs incurred directly by the firm to game as well as the
expected value of penalties.
   The monopolist chooses p, x and g to maximize profits, given the consumer demand system,
the degree of consumer sophistication, and policy interventions. The firm’s Lagrangean is:

                L = (p − c(x) + λ(σ − x + g))D(p + (β + τ )x − (1 − α)βg) − h(g).                (1)

Observe that, absent policy, the monopolist will invest in x in a manner consistent with private
efficiency. That is, if there were no externality, then the monopolist and the planner would choose




                                                  7
the same level of x. When λ = τ = 0, the monopolist will choose −c0 (x) = β.7 This says that
they will lower x until the marginal cost of doing so equals the marginal value of increased energy
efficiency to the consumer. The monopolist makes this privately efficient investment because any
improvement in energy efficiency that is cost effective allows them to raise prices.
       When there is a binding policy, it drives a wedge between the private cost and private benefit
of energy efficiency. The monopolist will choose x to solve −c0 (x) = β + λ. This is the standard
“internalization” of the externality suggested by the Pigouvian tradition. If there were perfect
compliance and there was no distortion to quantities sold due to market power, then the first-best
solution would be obtained by setting σ so that λ = φ.

2.2      Absent policy, gaming lowers consumer surplus
Our main interest is in establishing how gaming affects consumer welfare in this setting. We start
by showing how the firm alters its choice of p and x for any given level of g, which allows us to
then characterize consumer surplus. The optimal degree of gaming will depend on the regulatory
punishment function, which is embodied in h(g), so this exercise can be thought of as examining
how shifts in the punishment function that alter g would influence consumer surplus. We return to
the endogenous choice of g in subsection 2.5, but for now we focus on characterizing how changes
in g (which determine changes in p and x) influence consumer surplus.
       Our first proposition shows that, when there are no corrective policies, an increase in gaming
hurts consumers. To the degree that consumers (falsely) perceive gaming as a reduction in lifetime
operating costs, gaming causes them to shift out their demand for any given up-front price p. This
has two effects. First, firms will raise prices. Second, consumers will choose the wrong amount of
the good, given their misperception about the full cost f . Both channels lead to a loss in consumer
surplus when there is no policy.
       How does gaming affect x? If there is no policy, then changes in gaming do not affect the firm’s
choice of x. The profit-maximizing x satisfies −c0 (x) = β, which is unaffected by gaming because
the costs of x and g are assumed to be separable. As a result, the true attribute of the product will
be unchanged when gaming is introduced, and private welfare losses come not from a misallocation
of x but from misperceptions and market power.
       How does gaming affect p? Prices depend on perceived fuel costs. Gaming shifts out demand
by lowering perceived costs. The firm, facing higher demand, raises prices. Specifically, totally
differentiate perceived full cost f˜ : df˜ = dp + βdx − (1 − α)βdg. We just showed that dx = 0.
Thus, firm costs are constant. For a given p, consumers perceive a change in full price equal
to −(1 − α)βdg < 0. This acts exactly like a (perceived) subsidy. Firms will raise prices in
response according to the standard rules of incidence. Specifically, up front price p will change by
dp/dg = ρ(1 − α)β > 0, where ρ is the pass-through coefficient that describes how consumer price
changes in response to a tax. Weyl and Fabinger (2013) show that ρ = (1 + (D − 1)/S + 1/ms )−1 ,
   7
     The first-order condition for x is 0 = −c0 (x)D + (p − c(x))βD0 . Substituting in the optimal markup from the
first-order condition for price (p − c(x) = −D/D0 ) yields the result.



                                                        8
where  is the elasticity of demand D, supply S and the inverse of the marginal surplus curve ms.
   The good that consumers receive is unchanged, so consumer surplus can be evaluated using
the original demand curve and the new price. Weyl and Fabinger (2013) show that the marginal
decrease in consumer surplus from a tax increase is −ρD. To get our result, we need to scale the
change in g to turn it into a change in perceived “subsidy”, so the welfare impact from changed
prices is −ρ(1 − α)βD. We call this the price effect.
   A second welfare effect comes from what we call choice distortion; the consumer misperceives
the true full cost f of the product due to gaming and thus purchases too much of the good given
its true ownership cost. This misoptimization creates deadweight loss that is directly analogous
to a Harberger triangle. Its width is the difference in demand, at the final price, induced by the
gaming: D(p + βx − (1 − α)βg) − D(p + βx). Its height is the perceived gap in fuel cost induced
by gaming: (1 − α)βg. Thus, the area of this loss triangle is:

            Choice Distortion = 1/2 × (1 − α)βg [D(p + βx − (1 − α)βg) − D(p + βx)]
                                      | {z } |                   {z               }
                                           height                  width

                               ≈ 1/2 × (1 − α)βg [−D0 (1 − α)βg]
                                       | {z } |         {z     }
                                           height         width

                               = −1/2 × (1 − α)2 β 2 g 2 D0 ,

where the approximation assumes that the demand curve is locally linear. Where the demand
curve has a large second derivative (curvature) and the amount of gaming is significantly away
from zero, there will be an additional term ignored in this approximation. Choice distortion has
properties common to Harberger triangles: it is zero when g = 0; it is rising with the square of the
distortionary wedge; and it is larger when demand is more elastic.
   Importantly, in the absence of policy, both the price effect and the choice distortion work to
lower consumer welfare. The consumer experiences a price increase, which lowers welfare. Then,
they choose the wrong amount of the good according to their degree of misperception and their
price sensitivity. Proposition 1 expresses this formally.

Proposition 1. In the absence of policy (σ = ∞, τ = 0), consumer surplus falls with the level of
gaming. Specifically:
                          dCS
                              ≈ − ρ(1 − α)βD + (1 − α)2 β 2 D0 g ≤ 0.
                           dg     |    {z    }  |     {z       }
                                  price effect choice distortion


When consumers are fully sophisticated (α = 1), gaming causes no change in consumer surplus;
both terms go to zero. Both effects are larger when the degree of misperception (1 − α) is larger.
The price effect scales with the level of demand. The choice distortion scales with the slope of
demand.




                                                    9
2.3    With a regulation, gaming raises consumer surplus
Now suppose that there is a binding regulation, but no tax on fuel (λ > 0, τ = 0). Absent policy, the
monopolist chooses x efficiently by setting −c0 (x) = β. If there is no gaming, a binding regulation
forces x below that private optimum. Lowering x improves the product for the consumer, but it
raises costs for the firm by even more than the improved private value to consumers. The difference
is the shadow price of the regulation: −c0 − β = λ > 0. As such, the regulation imposes a burden
on the market, which will be shared between consumers and producers according to the standard
logic of tax pass through.
   Now, consider the introduction of gaming. First, suppose that consumers are fully aware of
gaming (α = 1). Then, for a binding regulation σ, a marginal increase in gaming effectively lowers
the implicit wedge λ. It is then obvious that the producer and the consumer both share in the
benefits of gaming. Gaming lowers the regulatory wedge, and the benefits of this gaming will be
shared by the producer and the consumer. That is, when the consumer is fully aware of gaming, the
consumer will benefit from gaming in just the same way that they would benefit from a reduction
in a tax.
   When α < 1, the consumer may still gain, but only when the benefits from the price effect
outweigh the choice distortion. How does gaming affect x? With a binding standard, any increase in
gaming will cause a corresponding increase in x: dg = dx. That is, the firm substitutes compliance
with g for compliance with x.
   How does gaming affect p? Price is determined by perceived demand and marginal cost. Gaming
lowers marginal cost by raising x, in the amount c0 (x)dx = c0 (x)dg. This functions like a subsidy to
firms. Partly offsetting this is an increase in perceived costs. An increase in g with a corresponding
increase in x holds constant reported fuel consumption costs, but not perceived fuel costs. For a
given price, perceived costs rise by βdx − (1 − α)βdg = αβdg > 0. Together, the “subsidy” to the
firm and the “tax” to the consumer create a net change in perceived costs of c0 (x) + αβ < 0. The
sign is unambiguous because a binding standard implies that c0 (x) + β < 0, and α < 1. This net
subsidy will lead to a decrease in up-front price. Thus, according to the principles of incidence, the
change in up-front price will be dp/dg = ρ(c0 (x) + αβ) < 0.
   Perceived demand determines the up-front price, but actual demand determines welfare. The
full lifetime cost of the good rises according to pass through, as well as by βdx, because the increase
in gaming allows the firm to raise true fuel costs. The up-front price change will be a decrease, but
this is balanced against an increase in the true cost, so the combined effect has an ambiguous sign.
Specifically:
                                     df /dg = ρ(c0 (x) + αβ) + β.

This combined effect is what we call the price effect under a standard. It is more likely to be
negative as pass through is large, or as the marginal cost is higher (the standard is tighter).
   In sum, even when the consumer is completely fooled by gaming, they can benefit from the
price effect of gaming because gaming lowers firm costs. The full effect of gaming on consumer



                                                  10
surplus combines the price effect with choice distortion, which is stated in Proposition 2.

Proposition 2. In the presence of a binding standard but no tax (λ > 0, τ = 0), a change in
gaming affects consumer surplus as follows:

                         dCS
                             ≈ (−ρ(c0 + αβ) − β)D + (1 − α)2 β 2 D0 g .
                          dg   |        {z      }   |     {z        }
                                   price effect    choice distortion


   Gaming does create a choice distortion here, just as in the situation without a policy. The
choice distortion triangle has the same formula in either case. It depends on the gap between the
true fuel cost and the perceived fuel cost, as well as the elasticity of demand. The price effect,
however, is changed significantly from the case with no policy, including a potential change in sign.
As described above, the price effect can be positive, and thus consumers might benefit from gaming.
The next two corollaries describe one set of criteria that ensure that consumers do in fact benefit
from gaming. Specifically, for a given level of gaming, dCS/dg will be positive for a sufficiently
stringent standard, and, whenever the price effect is positive, dCS/dg is positive for a sufficiently
small amount of gaming.

Corollary 1. The price effect is positive when the standard is sufficiently tight. Specifically, λ >
β/ρ − (1 − α)β, implies a positive price effect.

   The tighter is the standard, the larger will be the net effective subsidy created by an increase
in gaming, which leads to larger pass through to consumers. When the standard is tight enough
(λ is high enough), the price effect will be positive. Next, corollary 2 points out that the choice
distortion will be arbitrarily small for small levels of gaming. As a result, when the price effect is
positive, consumer surplus definitely rises for some values of g.

Corollary 2. For a binding policy that induces a negative price effect, a marginal increase in
gaming starting at zero will increase consumer surplus. That is, ∂CS/∂g > 0 at g = 0 whenever
λ > 0.

   The choice distortion has the shape of a Harberger triangle, so the initial distortion starting at
g = 0 will be zero. This implies that, whenever the price effect is positive (whenever the condition
stated in corollary 1 is satisfied), consumers will benefit from the first unit of gaming. That is,
consumers want at least some gaming whenever the price effect is positive.
   To recap, when consumers are fully aware of gaming and there is a binding policy, increases
in gaming benefit consumers because it lowers the policy wedge. The benefits of mitigating the
wedge between private value and private cost is shared between consumer and producer in just the
same way that an output tax would be. Even when the consumer is fully unaware of gaming, it is
possible that they benefit. The full price of the product may go up or down, but if the initial wedge
(the shadow price of the standard) is sufficiently large, then the consumer will benefit due to lower


                                                   11
prices, despite their ignorance. The consumer will purchase the wrong amount of the product,
however, because they perceive an even lower price. This choice distortion must be sufficiently
small for the fully unaware consumer to benefit.
   Importantly, this discussion of consumer surplus ignores the externality. If the policy is set
optimally by a planner who assumes perfect compliance, then by definition the representative
consumer will benefit more from the externality reduction than they lose in private surplus. But,
where individual consumers act according to their individual self interest, they will prefer to avoid
the regulation where possible. Note also that if the policy is set too tightly, then consumer surplus
can rise with gaming even accounting for the externality benefit. This appears to be true in our
empirical application.

2.4    With a fuel tax, gaming lowers consumer surplus
When the planner uses the fuel price instrument instead of the regulation, the benefits of gaming no
longer accrue to consumers in the same way. Conceptually, a tax raises the value of x to consumers.
This leads the firm to provide more x, which will satisfy the first-order condition: −c0 (x) = β + τ .
But, gaming does not help the consumer avoid the fuel tax τ , so it provides them no benefits.
Unlike the case of a regulation, gaming under the fuel tax operates just like gaming in the case of
no regulation. The only difference is that β has been raised by policy.
   Proposition 1 showed that consumers lose from increases in gaming, for an arbitrary value of
β, in the absence of a binding regulation. The situation with a fuel tax is exactly the same as that
situation, but with an increased value of β. Thus, Proposition 1 implies that, when a fuel tax is
used as the corrective policy instead of a regulation, the introduction of gaming causes a loss of
private consumer surplus, both through a price effect and through choice distortion. Proposition 3
states this result.

Proposition 3. In the presence of a tax but no standard (σ = ∞, τ > 0), consumer surplus falls
with the level of gaming. Specifically:

                      dCS
                          ≈ − ρ(1 − α)(β + τ )D + (1 − α)2 (β + τ )2 D0 g ≤ 0.
                       dg     |       {z      }   |         {z          }
                                 price effect       choice distortion


   Normally, the statutory incidence of a tax is irrelevant to its ultimate economic incidence; i.e., it
does not matter if a retail sales tax is levied on buyers or sellers. But, this irrelevance need not hold
when there are opportunities for avoiding or evading the tax (Kopczuk, Marion, Muehlegger, and
Slemrod 2016). Our result here is a manifestation of this same result. In our model, a regulation
σ creates a shadow price λ that corrects the externality associated with x. A tax τ does exactly
the same thing. If there were no evasion, the two policies would be identical whenever τ = λ, but
gaming offers an opportunity to avoid a regulation but not a fuel tax, which breaks the symmetry
and provides an enforcement rationale for preferring the tax over a regulation.

                                                   12
2.5      Goodhart’s Law: policy induces gaming
The above derivations considered how a change in the amount of gaming would influence consumer
surplus, but it did not specify the profit-maximizing amount of gaming. The first-order condition
for g, taken by differentiating equation 1, with a regulation (but no tax) is:

                         h0 (g) =        λD
                                        |{z}        + (p − c) × [−(1 − α)βD0 ] .                                (2)
                         | {z }                       | {z } |        {z   }
                          MC      Regulatory benefit Markup Demand shift

This is not a closed form solution, but it provides clear intuition. The firm will increase gaming
until the marginal cost from h0 (g) reaches the marginal benefit, which is a combination of the
regulatory benefit, captured by the shadow price of the regulation, plus the increased profit due
to a shift out in demand. Intuitively, a tighter policy (higher λ) raises the benefits of gaming and
thus will lead to a higher g.
       Note that when the consumer is sophisticated, α = 1, the second term is zero. This is the case
when consumer’s see through gaming completely. Then, a regulation induces the firm to game,
where they would do zero gaming absent policy. A higher value of λ (a tighter policy) will increase
gaming.
       Our version of Goodhart’s Law is a comparative static result that says that gaming will rise
when the policy tightens. When the regulator raises the stakes associated with the measure m, this
gives rise to further gaming.

Proposition 4. (Goodhart’s Law for externality-correcting policies) As long as h0 /D is rising in
λ, a tighter standard induces greater gaming:

                                                     dg
                                                        > 0.
                                                     dλ



The regularity condition in Proposition 4 is due to the fact that we assume gaming is only a fixed
cost, which is amortized over the total sales in the firm’s cost minimization problem. As a result,
if a tighter policy causes demand to shrink very rapidly, then it is possible that this raises the cost
of gaming per unit so rapidly that there is less gaming under a tighter standard, as it is more cost
effective to comply via x. Goodhart’s Law holds unambiguously (dg/dλ > 0) when gaming is a
marginal cost instead of a fixed cost, or if demand is held constant.8
       Note that Goodhart’s Law is not necessarily bad for consumer welfare, on net, as implied
by Proposition 2. But, it does create a negative effect through choice distortion. And, it will
reduce externality mitigation. That is, gaming trades-off consumer welfare and firm profits for less
mitigation, which simply undoes the effects of the policy. In the meantime, it induces socials costs
to the degree that gaming requires real resources.
   8
    Specifically, when D is held constant (for the sake of exposition): dg/dσ = D/h00 > 0, which is just the inverse
of the marginal cost of gaming per unit sold.


                                                        13
2.6      Policy implications and model extensions
Our model is deliberately simple so as to highlight as clearly as possible how the introduction
of corrective policy can induce gaming, and how that gaming can have counterintuitive welfare
impacts on consumers. Our main results are, first, that tighter corrective policy will induce more
gaming, which incurs real resource costs from firms and induces choice distortion among consumers,
and second, that gaming, even when it causes consumers to make mistakes, can lead to increases
in private consumer surplus through price effects. What do these results imply for policy design?
       Standard second-best reasoning implies that optimal corrective policy when gaming is a concern
will be attenuated away from the Pigouvian benchmark. When consumers can see through gaming
completely, the regulator can tighten the standard sufficiently so as to actually achieve the desired
change in x, but this will come at an added cost because gaming will nevertheless occur, and
the costs embodied in h(x) represent pure social waste. When consumers are at least partially
fooled by gaming, then policy also creates choice distortion, which the planner will balance against
externality gains.
       An additional implication relates to self regulation of markets. In many markets, consumers
play a key role in self regulating a market. When firms cheat, consumers shift demand away from
that firm in the future. This consumer backlash is often a more potent check on firm behavior than
the explicit penalties imposed by a regulator. But, when consumers benefit from cheating, they will
not have the same incentive to regulate the market. Intuitively, consider a consumer with a choice
between two scenarios, one where they know that gaming exists, but in which gaming still creates
a choice distortion, and another where there is no gaming. When price effects outweigh choice
distortion, individual consumers would choose the scenario with gaming. To formalize this, we
could extend our model to consider two firms, one that credibly signals its true x and another that
does not. When gaming helps consumers, consumers will prefer the gaming firm, which captures
the notion that market fails to self regulate. Honesty can only be sustained by a sufficiently strong
punishment.9
       Our model focused on the case of a monopolist. How would introducing competition affect our
results? Weyl and Fabinger (2013) show that the basic intuition of pass through applies to a very
broad set of market structures, including the differentiated products competition that matches our
empirical setting. As a result, our core results about how gaming can have positive price effects
will hold. All that changes is that pass through depends on a conduct parameter that summarizes
each firm’s degree of market power. Thus, the formulas would change somewhat, but the basic
intuition about price effects is generalizable.
       Regarding choice distortion, the qualitative results from our monopoly case will also generalize.
But, with multiple products, the choice distortion comes from switches between products as well
as a reduction in the overall size of the market; that is, from the outside good. Moreover, some
   9
     Prior models of deception, like Gabaix and Laibson (2006) and Heidhues, Kőszegi, and Murooka (2016), allow
the possibility that one firm could reveal the deception for all firms in the market. A key difference between those
settings and ours is the role of corrective policy, which creates a mechanism in our model for how deception can create
private welfare gains for consumers.


                                                          14
additional insights are possible in the case where there are multiple competing firms.
         First, choice distortions will be larger when a single firm (or a subset of firms) game than when
all firms game, unless the elasticity to the outside good is large. The reason is that, when all firms
game by a similar amount, the relative price of products will change little. Thus, we might expect
choice distortions to be small. The exception is if the outside good is very elastic, then a change
in the overall price level brought about by gaming would cause consumers to purchase too much in
aggregate.
         Second, from the point of view of a single firm, gaming confers a competitive advantage. Con-
versely, when other firms are gaming, an honest firm would be at a competitive disadvantage.
Thus, we expect competitive pressures to induce gaming. This is much the same intuition as in
the monopolist; in either case the residual demand curve faced by the firm can be shifted out by
gaming.
         Below, we use estimates of demand and marginal cost from a structural model in a simulation to
calculate welfare impacts. The effects in our simulations relate directly to the components of welfare
analysis that we describe above for the monopolist, but they are calculated under an assumption
of Nash-Bertrand competition among firms with multiple differentiated products, and thus we can
explore these possibilities empirically.


3         Fuel-economy regulation, measurement, and the potential for
          gaming
Our empirical application concerns carbon policies for automobiles in Europe, which include an
E.U.-wide regulation, as well as national tax and subsidy schemes. The E.U.-wide regulation man-
dates that automakers sell vehicles that have a sales-weighted average carbon emissions rate below
a certain level. Note that a vehicle’s carbon emission rate is measured as a linear transformation
(to convert units) of fuel consumption, which itself is just the inverse of fuel economy. Thus, while
the E.U. policy is described as regulating carbon, it is directly analogous to the U.S. Corporate
Average Fuel Economy standards, which are described as regulating fuel economy.10
         Prior to 2007, there was no legally binding fuel-economy regulation in Europe. The standard was
announced in 2007, passed into law in its final form in 2009, and phased in over several subsequent
years. The first year of enforcement was 2012, with a ramp-up in the standard taking place from
2012 to 2015. Fully phased-in, the regulation is quite aggressive by historical and international
standards. Monetary standards for non-compliance are stiff. When the standard was announced,
if they left their fleet unchanged, automakers would have faced an average fine of 1,250 euros per
vehicle.
         An automaker whose fleet is out of compliance can meet the standard by improving the fuel
economy of their vehicle or by shifting the sales mix of their vehicles towards cleaner models. The
    10
    To be precise, there are now parallel regulations in the U.S., one which regulates fuel economy that is administered
by the National Highway Traffic and Safety Administration, and another that regulates carbon emissions that is
administered by the Environmental Protection Agency.


                                                          15
standard is weight-based; vehicles that are heavier are allowed to consume more fuel. This weight-
basing limits the ability of automakers to comply through mix shifting by shrinking the variance in
compliance status for individual models. This can be expected to push compliance actions towards
deployment of additional fuel-saving devices or technologies (Anderson and Sallee Forthcoming, Ito
and Sallee 2015). Reynaert (2015) studies the early years of the program and finds exactly this;
automakers have responded to the standard primarily through the adoption of improvements in the
official fuel-consumption rating of vehicles, with only modest changes in the composition of their
fleet.
       On top of the E.U. standard all member states have separate taxation schemes for new vehicles.
During the roll out of the E.U.-wide regulation, many member states adjusted their national policies
so that tax schemes were based explicitly on carbon emissions. France introduced a feebate, which
taxes heavily-polluting cars and subsidizes cleaner models, in 2008. In 2009, Germany switched its
annual road taxes so that they depend on carbon emissions rates, rather than engine cylinders. In
2008, Spain introduced registration taxes that depend on emissions ratings. The Netherlands did
the same in 2010.11
       Carbon emissions ratings for all of these policies are based on a laboratory test, called the New
European Driving Cycle (NEDC). This test procedure, which is conducted by third-party facili-
ties that are funded by the automakers, measures fuel consumption in liters per 100 kilometers
(L/100km). A test vehicle is put onto a chassis dynamometer (a treadmill for cars), and a pro-
fessional driver “drives” the car through a specified series of speeds and accelerations. Emissions
are captured directly from the tailpipe and used to determine gaseous outputs, which are used to
determine fuel consumption. Two different test cycles are run to simulate city and highway driving.
A coast down test is also performed to measure aerodynamics.
       The NEDC is not only the basis of CO2 regulation, but also the basis of consumer-facing
information about fuel consumption ratings and the test used for determining emissions limits
on local air pollutants, such as NOX , PM and CO. The test procedure captures local pollutants
and measures their quantities to determine vehicle compliance with emissions limits. In terms
of consumer information, the NEDC rating is the rating that automakers are required to use in
consumer advertising, and it is the rating that appears on mandatory energy efficiency labels for
new vehicles. As such, the NEDC was used as a regulatory and market instrument for roughly a
decade before the carbon regulation was passed into law.
       How might automakers game the test? According to media and industry accounts, the European
test procedure offers the tester considerable “flexibility” in test procedures. For example, automak-
ers are not expressly prohibited from submitting test vehicles that have been modified. Firms
remove optional equipment, thereby changing the weight of the vehicle to improve performance.
They also tape down seams in the vehicle, remove side mirrors and roof racks, and over-inflate
tires to improve results of the coast down test. Alternatively, automakers may install technologies
  11
    See the ACEA tax reports (www.acea.be) for an overview of all vehicle taxation in the EU and Gerlagh, van den
Bijgaart, Nijland, and Michielsen (Forthcoming) for an overview of the change towards carbon taxation in EU member
states after 2007.


                                                       16
that perform particularly well on the test cycle, or they could even calibrate an engine to perform
in a particularly efficient way during the highly specific test cycle’s series of speeds and accelera-
tions.12 To detect gaming, we compare laboratory test ratings with a direct measure of on-road
fuel consumption, which we describe next.


4         Measuring on-road carbon emissions
Our goal is to compare official test results and true on-road performance of vehicles. Official test
results are straightforward to obtain from industry data sources, but true on-road performance
measurement is challenging. For this task, we obtained data for a large sample of drivers in the
Netherlands that includes information on their fuel consumption and distance traveled. We use
that to construct estimates of on-road performance. We then estimate how on-road performance
changes with vehicle vintage and relate that pattern to the roll out of policy.

4.1        Data
We obtained data from TravelCard NV, a company providing fuel services in the Netherlands. These
panel data contain information on 66 million fuel station visits from drivers using a TravelCard NV
card between January 2004 and May 2015. Most of the individuals in this sample drive a vehicle
provided to them by their employer, who also pays directly for fuel. This implies that we have a
selected sample, though the provision of a company car is quite common in the Netherlands due to
tax advantages and the high cost of personal vehicle ownership. Nearly half of new vehicles sold in
the Netherlands are registered as company cars (Booz & Company 2012).
         When visiting a fuel station, Travelcard NV users swipe a smart card to pay for fuel. When
a driver swipes her card we observe the drivers’ license plate and the date, time and location of
the fuel station visit. We also observe the exact amount and the type of fuel purchased and a self-
reported odometer reading at the time of fueling. Regarding the latter, drivers are asked to enter
their current odometer reading into the fuel pump’s keypad during the transaction. Transactions
are linked to an account, which is a unique combination of a driver with a particular vehicle, which
corresponds to a unique license plate. Unfortunately, if the same individual drives one vehicle for
some time and then switches to another vehicle, we have no way of linking those data and must
treat them as separate accounts. We refer to this panel variable as a driver, which should be
understood as a unique combination of a driver with a particular vehicle.
         TravelCard NV provides us with a second dataset that matches each license plate with the
vehicle brand, model name, weight, fuel type and the official fuel consumption rating of the vehicle.
These characteristics allow us to match the Dutch data with a panel on European car sales and
prices from 1998-2011 used in Grigolon, Reynaert, and Verboven (2014) and Reynaert (2015). We
    12
   These “flexibilities” differ significantly from analogous tests in the U.S., where the law is much more explicit
about the details of the test vehicle and test procedures.




                                                        17
match each vehicle to sales volume, list price and a broader set of characteristics, including length,
width and several engine characteristics.
      The raw data include 66 million transactions, but many of the individual data points include
unreliable self-reported odometer readings. Many odometer entries are missing, zero or apparently
random entries. To deal with these data limitations, we take several steps to purge the data
of unreliable observations, which cuts our final sample to 24 million transactions. In robustness
tests, we find that censoring our data less severely only impacts our estimate of the level of the
performance gap, not of the change in the performance gap over time.
      Our data selection process first eliminates a number of drivers (accounts) that have unreliable
information or too few observations. With the accounts that remain, we then consider several ways
to account for mismeasurement in odometer readings for individual transactions. Specifically, we
first limit the sample to gasoline- or diesel-fueled vehicles, which eliminates 6.7 million transactions.
Second, we drop vehicles that use the wrong type of fuel for their engine in more than 1% of the
visits, e.g., putting diesel fuel in a vehicle that is labeled as gasoline in our data. Inconsistencies
might be in the data because drivers use their card for a different vehicle, or these observations might
be mistakes in the assignment of vehicle type. This drops 7.5 million transactions. Third, we pose
some minimum requirements on the driving patterns of the drivers that produce the transactions.
We drop drivers that never report an increase of more than 150km in their odometer reading (2.5
million transactions).13 We drop car models with fewer than 10 drivers, and drivers with fewer than
10 fuel station visits (1.3 million transactions). We drop drivers that did not report driving more
than 5,000km in total or reported driving more than 500,000km in total (11.3 million). Having
isolated a set of drivers (accounts) with ample data, within those accounts we drop individual
transactions in two steps. First, we drop transactions where the odometer difference is lower than
100km or higher than 3000km (7.6 million). Second, we drop transactions that result in a fuel
consumption that is outside 1.25 times the interquartile range of estimated fuel consumption for
each car model in the data (5.1 million). This results in the final dataset of 24 million observations.
      The final data include over 2,500 unique types of cars driven by 266,000 different drivers. A
car type is defined as a unique combination of brand (Volkswagen), model name (Golf), fuel-type
(Diesel) and official fuel consumption. We define the release year for a car type as the first time
we observe a unique combination of these variables in the data between 1998 and 2014.
      Table 1 gives summary statistics for the raw data. The average vehicle in our sample has a fuel
consumption of 6.65 L/100km and a weight of 1,354kg. Somewhat less than half of the vehicles
(46%) have diesel engines. We observe an average of 107 drivers per car with a maximum of
3,228 drivers. For each of these drivers we observe an average of 134 visits to the pump with a
maximum of 1,135. Driver mean total consumption is 6,015 liters of fuel purchased corresponding
to 111,726 km travelled. Finally, the average fuel station visit involves 45 liters of fuel purchased,
corresponding to an odometer increase of 671 km with a standard deviation of 192 km.
      Our sample is drawn from company cars, but our data provide estimates that characterize a
 13
      Note that the range of a combustion engine is easily more than 800km.



                                                        18
                                   Table 1: Summary statistics

                                                               Mean     St. Dev.
                        Car Characteristics
                        Fuel Consumption (L/100km)              6.65         1.73
                        Vehicle Weight in kg                   1,354          245
                        Diesel Engines                          0.46         0.50
                        Drivers per car                          107          219

                        Driver Characteristics
                        Pump visits                              134           80
                        Total liters purchased                 6,015        3,666
                        Total distance (km)                  111,726       53,942

                        Pump Visit Characteristics
                        Liters per visit                         45.3        10.8
                        Odometer increase per visit               671         192
                          The table gives summary statistics for the 2,696 vehicles,
                          266,616 drivers and 23,989,576 pump visits in the sample.


majority of the market. In appendix Table A.1, we show that vehicles in the Travelcard data are
cheaper, lighter, more fuel efficient and more likely to be a diesel than the average new vehicle
in the Netherlands. One explanation of the difference is that our data contain almost no luxury
vehicles or sports cars. Also, company cars are driven more than the average household car, which
likely explains the higher share of diesels in our sample.
   Nevertheless, the models in our final sample are the models that account for 76% of all sales
in the Netherlands. Moreover, the Dutch car market is very similar to the entire E.U. market;
it features a mix of French, German and foreign brands that is very similar to the E.U. average.
Thus, our data provide estimates of on-road performance that cover the broader market fairly
well. However, we wish to stress that we have no way of directly assessing whether drivers of
company cars drive their vehicles differently, and thereby exhibit a different performance gap, than
the average Dutch driver. Fortunately, we are focused on changes in the performance gap over
time, so as long as differences between company car drivers and other drivers are stable over time,
this will not be a major concern for our conclusions.

4.2   On-road fuel consumption
We construct a measure of on-road fuel consumption rnij for each pump visit n of driver i in car j
as the ratio of the liters purchased and the change in reported odometer between the visit and the
previous visit:
                                                litersn
                              rnij =                           ∗ 100.                            (3)
                                       odemetern − odemetern−1
This measure of on-road fuel consumption, in units of L/100km, will vary between pump visits of
a driver for three reasons. First, variable driving conditions such as outside temperature, route

                                                   19
choice, driving style and congestion will differ across observations. Second, the driver may over or
understate the odometer reading. We are not aware of any incentive for the drivers to deliberately
misreport distance traveled, but from the data it is obvious that there are many mistakes. Third,
there might be variability due to stockpiling effects. If the consumer does not always fill the tank
of the vehicle completely there will be variation in rnij . If a driver visits the fuel station with an
empty tank and fills half of it we will observe a very low fuel consumption for visit n and a higher
fuel consumption for the next visit if she refills the tank completely.
    Next, we construct the percentage gap between on-road and tested fuel consumption as:

                                                          rnij − lij
                                                 dnij =              ,                                             (4)
                                                              lij

in which the official rating lij is constant for each car j and the on-road rating varies across
observations.
    We are interested in estimating the mean and variance of dj , defined as the average dnij across
n and i for a given vehicle type j. In particular, we are interested in the mean and variance of dj
across vehicle types from the same vintage (release year). We take two approaches to estimating
dj .14 In the end, both approaches yield similar estimates. In a first exploratory approach we
estimate regression equations on the microdata with release year fixed effects, and we interpret
those fixed effects as estimates of the average dj across models from a given vintage, ranging from
1998 to 2014. The regressions control for changes in driving behavior, sample selection and other
factors that vary over time by including time of driving and vehicle-type fixed effects. For example,
we observe both a 2008 and 2009 vehicle type being driving in 2010, and so we can estimate vintage
effects (2008 versus 2009) while controlling for time of driving (2010).
    To study potential heterogeneity in gaming at the vehicle level we need vehicle level estimates
of the performance gap. This motivates our second approach. In obtaining these estimates we want
to take into account the underlying data quality for each vehicle controlling for the large variance
in reported odometer readings, and the variation in the number of drivers and visits observed for
different types of cars. Therefore, we follow the teacher value added literature, specifically Chetty,
Friedman, and Rockoff (2014) and Kane and Staiger (2008), to estimate on-road fuel consumption
rj using precision weights and an empirical Bayes correction. We construct a precision-weighted
mean of rj and shrink it according to the reliability of the observations for j. Because of the
measurement error in rnij it is optimal, from a prediction standpoint, to use a biased but more
precise estimate of each vehicle gap.15
    We start by decomposing the total variance in the sample V ar(rnij ) = σr2 into three components:
  14
     We have also worked with a third approach which is to take long differences between last and first visit of each
driver. Estimates of the gap computed with long differences are reported in the appendix. Taking long differences
might be more robust to bias from reporting errors but does not allow us to control for time of driving effects in the
regressions. Results are very similar across approaches.
  15
     Note that this approach does not allow us to control for selection issues where drivers with different performance
gaps select into different type of vehicles. Correlations between driving style and vehicle selection could influence
our results, but again we emphasize our focus on changes in the performance gap over time, which mitigates these
concerns.


                                                          20
variance in performance of vehicles σj2 , drivers σi2 , and pump visits σn2 . We estimate the variance
between pump visits of the same driver as:

                                                  N
                                               1 X
                                     σn2   =        (rnij − rij )2 ,
                                             N −I n

in which rij is the mean fuel consumption of driver i, N is the total number of observations and I is
the total number of drivers. Next, we estimate the covariance between drivers of the same vehicles
as:

                                             σj2 = cov(rij , rkj ).

The estimated covariance is obtained as a weighted average of covariances between randomly sorted
pairs (i, k) of drivers of the same car. We weigh each pair of drivers (i, k) by the sum of their visits.
Finally, we obtain σi2 as the remaining variance: σi2 = σr2 − σn2 − σj2 . The precision of the estimated
gap for each driver is then defined as:

                                           hi = 1/(σi2 + σn2 /ni ),

so that drivers with a high number of visits have a higher precision. We obtain precision weighted
means per car as the weighted average of rij with hi as weights. Second we shrink these precision
weighted means with an estimate of their reliability:
                                                             X
                                      ψj = σj2 /(σj2 + 1/          hji ),
                                                               i

where the reliability is defined as the signal σj over the total variance. We use the per vehicle
shrunken on-road estimates rbj to construct an alternative estimate of the gap defined in (4) and to
inform us about the distribution of the gap between vehicles.


5      Estimates of the degree of gaming
5.1     Mean fuel consumption and gap
Figure 1, which we discussed in the introduction, plots the mean official rating lij , the mean on-road
rating rnij and the percentage-gap dnij for each release year. Between 1998 and 2006 we see that
both official fuel consumption and on-road consumption vary between 6.1 and 7.5 L/100km. The
percentage gap remains steady, between 12% and 20%. From 2006 onward we see a spectacular drop
in official consumption from 6.2 to less than 4 L/100km. This translates to a rise from the already
high value of 38 mpg in 2004 to a truly remarkable 67 mpg in 2014. Official fuel consumption
decreases by almost 50% over the sample period.
      The on-road ratings follow a trend similar to the official ratings up until 2008. After 2008


                                                      21
                Figure 2: Gap between on-road and official fuel consumption per firm

                    Audi
                   BMW
                 Citroën
                    Ford
                    Opel
                Peugeot
                 Renault
                  Toyota
             Volkswagen
                   Volvo
                    Audi
                   BMW
                 Citroën
                    Ford
                    Opel
                Peugeot
                 Renault
                  Toyota
             Volkswagen
                   Volvo
                    Audi
                   BMW
                 Citroën
                    Ford
                    Opel
                Peugeot
                 Renault
                  Toyota
             Volkswagen
                   Volvo
                           0           10           20           30            40            50
                                                          % Difference

                                                  1998-2006                    2007-2009
                                                  2010-20014

Figure shows estimated coefficients and standard errors from regressing the performance gap on three sets of model
release years (early, middle and late) per automaker, the data is restricted to the ten brands with most observations.



the on-road fuel consumption decreases much more slowly than the official rating, going from
6.5 to 5.9 L/100km. As a result, the percentage gap between the official and on-road ratings
increases dramatically: from around 12% at the beginning of the sample to almost 55% by 2014.
This divergence is remarkable in magnitude, and it coincides exactly with the new EU-wide fuel
consumption regulation, which was announced in 2007, finalized in 2009, and phased-in over the
remainder of the sample, as well as the phase-in of national policies described in Section 3.
    The divergence in test ratings and on-road performance is not isolated to a particular automaker.
Figure 2 plots the estimated mean gap dnij for three sets of model years (early, middle and late)
separately for each automaker. All automakers show a substantial increase in the gap over time,
and all show an economically important gap in the later years. The performance gap is a global
phenomenon: the three largest gaps are for a European firm (Renault), a Japanese firm (Toyota),
and an American firm (Ford).

5.2    Fixed Effects Regression
Figure 3 plots the coefficients and their 95% confidence intervals (with clustering on vehicle type
j) from two regressions with individual refueling transactions as the unit of observation. In the
first regression (red markers) we estimate the percentage-gap dnij as the coefficients on release year

                                                         22
dummies. We interpret the release year dummy variables as estimates of the mean performance gap
among vehicles that were released in that year. The omitted category is vehicles that are present
in the first year of our data, which implies that they were released in 1998 or before.
       The second regression (blue markers) adds controls for time of driving and model fixed effects.
Specifically, we add year and month of driving dummies to control for driving conditions that change
over time.16 We add fuel-type (e.g., diesel) and model fixed-effects to control for compositional
changes in the car market over time. If some vehicles have a bigger gap than others, then our time
trend could reflect compositional changes. Controlling for model, which is more aggregate than our
vehicle type j (e.g., a Toyota Camry is a model, whereas a 2010 Toyota Camry with 2.0L engine is
a vehicle type), isolates variation between different engine releases over time of the same model.
       Figure 3 shows that the introduction of controls has little impact on our results, which suggests
that compositional changes or changes in driving conditions do not explain the time trend. The
same coefficients are presented in columns (1) and (2) of Table 2.17
       Our interpretation of the time trend is that policy caused a rise in gaming. What else might
explain the pattern? One possible alternative is a form of the rebound effect. If more recent vintages
are more fuel efficient, consumers may respond by driving less carefully or using temperature
controls or other equipment more often. In this case, reduced average fuel consumption rates will
lead to an increasing gap. One might expect the same mechanism to create a significant difference
in the gap between gasoline and diesel powered vehicles, as diesel vehicles are about 30% more
energy efficient. Therefore, we estimate the release year fixed effects separately for gasoline and
diesel engines in columns (3) and (4) of Table 2. There is initially no difference in the gap between
diesels and gasolines, and this changes substantially over time. But, the coefficient patterns do not
point to a larger gap among diesels commensurate with what would be implied by a rebound effect
that could explain the magnitude of the pattern across vintages.
       Finally, one might be concerned that the fuel consumption might differ with the age of the car.
Typically, we expect older cars to become less fuel efficient leading to an overestimate of the earlier
release year dummies. There might also be sample selection, however, such that cars with good
on-road fuel economy stay in our sample longer creating bias in the other direction. To control
for this we keep only observations of dnij that take place in the release year of the vehicle, so that
we are capturing fuel consumption gaps only among the newest cars. Note that we are observing
driving only from 2004 onwards, so that we can only estimate on-road performance from the year
2004 onwards. Column (5) reports those results, which show the same stark increase in the gap
towards the end of the sample.
  16
      We observe later year vintages disproportionately in later years, so changes in congestion or other driving patterns
could potentially bias our results if we omit time of driving controls.
   17
      Note that the R2 for the model without controls is .28, which suggests that release years explain an impressive
fraction of the variation, given that the unit of observation here is an individual fuel transaction.




                                                           23
                          Figure 3: Release year coefficients from fixed effect regressions
                50
                40   30
           % Difference
            20  10
                0




                          99   00   01   02   03   04   05 06 07 08       09    10   11    12   13    14
                                                         Release Year

                                                    No controls     Controls

Figure plots coefficients from a regression of the performance gap (dnij ) on release year fixed effects. Coefficients
                                 correspond to regressions (1) and (2) from Table 2.




                                                           24
Table 2: Release year fixed effects from regression of performance gap on controls

                                 All      Controls     Gasoline      Diesel     1st Year
                                 (1)         (2)          (3)          (4)         (5)
        Constant                11.69      13.59        11.44        11.94       10.28
                                (0.66)     (0.60)       (0.67)       (1.13)      (1.39)
        1999                     2.00        0.50        0.96         2.33
                                (1.45)     (0.88)       (1.10)       (2.10)
        2000                     0.32        0.73        0.13         0.40
                                (0.88)     (0.73)       (1.21)       (1.33)
        2001                     2.33       -0.20        2.08         2.40
                                (0.98)     (0.96)       (1.16)       (1.50)
        2002                     1.77        1.28        2.40         1.33
                                (1.56)     (1.07)       (1.50)       (2.32)
        2003                     2.46        1.35        3.79         1.16
                                (1.32)     (0.80)       (1.60)       (2.03)
        2004                     3.30        2.60        3.93         2.80
                                (1.41)     (0.78)       (2.69)       (1.56)
        2005                     4.71        4.29        8.55         2.54        2.50
                                (1.43)     (0.97)       (1.84)       (1.99)      (2.39)
        2006                    10.59        3.93       14.71         3.40        5.80
                                (5.09)     (1.08)       (5.96)       (1.67)      (1.73)
        2007                     7.38        8.55       10.75         5.02        2.79
                                (1.39)     (1.04)       (1.50)       (1.92)      (2.09)
        2008                     9.53        9.00       10.78         8.53       12.60
                                (1.37)     (1.00)       (1.09)       (2.33)      (2.47)
        2009                    18.50      13.92        19.14        17.61       15.66
                                (2.24)     (1.42)       (2.94)       (3.18)      (2.21)
        2010                    22.57      18.13        16.85        25.36       19.85
                                (2.10)     (1.43)       (1.42)       (2.80)      (2.09)
        2011                    23.43      18.54        23.10        23.54       23.28
                                (1.57)     (1.11)       (3.64)       (1.42)      (2.10)
        2012                    35.16      28.81        27.51        40.81       36.96
                                (2.95)     (2.07)       (2.17)       (2.52)      (4.38)
        2013                    41.24      36.06        35.26        43.38       43.16
                                (1.89)     (1.64)       (1.97)       (1.90)      (2.48)
        2014                    42.68      40.92        39.98        48.99       41.50
                                (2.47)     (3.49)       (1.69)       (2.46)      (2.52)
        Year/Month F.E.                      Yes
        Fueltype                             Yes
        Model F.E.                           Yes
        #Obs. (*106 )           23.98      23.98          10.17       13.81       0.91
        R2                      0.28         0.40         0.21        0.36        0.26
          Table reports coefficients from a regression of the performance gap (dnij ) on
          release year fixed effects. The unit of observation is an individual refueling
          transaction. Standard errors clustered by car type in parentheses. Columns
          vary as follows: (1) contains all data, (2) all the data with year and month, fuel
          type and vehicle model fixed effects, (3) only gasoline engines, (4) only diesel
          engines, (5) keeps observations only in the first year of driving.


                                               25
5.3       Distribution of the vehicle level gap
In this subsection, we consider the variation in the performance gap across drivers and across
vehicle types, which serves two main purposes. First, our procedure provides an alternative way to
estimate the performance gap that employs an empirical Bayes correction to account for variation
in precision across drivers and vehicle types. Second, we show that variation in the performance
gap has been relatively constant, which informs our subsequent welfare analysis. Specifically, in our
final section we estimate a structural model of the automobile market and simulate counterfactuals.
We choose to model a mean shift in the performance gap because of our finding that heterogeneity
is stable.
       Table 3 describes the variation in the on-road fuel consumption (σr2 ) across release years, as well
as its decomposition across three components: variation across refueling transactions for the same
driver (σn2 ), variation across drivers of the same vehicle (σi2 ) and variation across vehicles (σj2 ).
We decompose the variation separately for each release year and describe the mean and standard
deviation across release years in the table.
       More than 25% of the variance is attributable to within driver variance. This variance is due to
driving conditions, stockpiling effects and errors in odometer reporting. We find that the variance
across drivers of the same car σi2 is 0.21. This is an economically large number; it means that the
on-road fuel consumption is estimated to be 0.28 liter/100km higher at the third quartile than at
the first quartile of drivers in the same car.18 A policy that would shift a driver from the third
quartile of the fuel consumption gap to the first quartile would decrease fuel consumption by 3%.
These numbers are interesting from a policy perspective as they give an indication of the extent
to which fuel consumption and emissions can be reduced by teaching and incentivizing drivers to
drive a vehicle more efficiently.19 The remaining part of the variance σj2 is the co-variance between
drivers of the same car and can be seen as the information available to estimate the car specific
component of on-road fuel consumption. We estimate this to be 1.35, which is more than 60% of
the total variance. Table 3 also shows that the variance components are relatively stable over time;
each component has a low standard deviation across release years. There is variation in the size of
the fuel consumption gap between cars and between drivers, but this variation is stable over time.
Given this variance decomposition we turn next to the estimates of the distribution of rj and dj
for each release year.
       Table 4 reports the unweighted mean estimate of rj and rbj , obtained with the empirical Bayes
correction. The mean value of both rj and rbj are decreasing over the release years. In all years
the corrected means are lower than the raw means, because on average vehicles with high rj have
less precise underlying data, but overall shrinkage and precision weighting has small effects. The
resulting gap dbj is estimated to be an imprecise 10% up until 2006. From 2007 onwards we see
a significant increase in the performance gap, consistent with the previous estimates. Note that
  18
    If we assume that conditional on car j, r has a normal distribution, the interquartile distance is 1.349*σi2 .
  19
    Significant variation across drivers of identical cars is consistent with results reported in Langer and McRae
(2014), who analyze extremely detailed driving data from a few dozen drivers of an identical car, the Honda Accord.
In contrast, our data come from a large sample and cover many models.


                                                        26
                                  Table 3: Variance decomposition


                                                           σr2    σi2       σj2      σn2
                    Mean                                   2.11   0.21      1.35     0.56
                    Standard deviation                     0.57   0.03      0.45     0.11

                    Variance decomposition (%)             100    10.36     62.34    27.30
                    Standard deviation                            2.54      6.76     4.40

                      σd2 is the total variance in rnij , σi2 is the variation attributable to
                      differences across individuals driving the same vehicle, σj2 is the co-
                      variance between drivers in the same vehicle, σn2 is the variation
                      across refueling visits of the same driver in the same vehicle. The
                      variance decomposition is performed separately for each release year,
                      and the mean and standard deviation across years are reported in
                      table.




                       Figure 4: Distribution of vehicle level fixed effects
       60    40
  % Difference
20     0




                  98 99 00 01 02 03 04 05 06 07 08 09 10 11 12 13 14
                                       Release Year

                                               Quartile 1                 Median
                                               Quartile 3                 St. Dev.




                                                      27
Table 4: Estimated vehicle gaps by release year, with and without empirical Bayes correction


                   Release    Unweighted rj         rbj      Shrinkage        dbj
                   1998           7.91             7.87         0.99         7.85
                                 (1.41)           (1.39)       (0.00)       (7.82)
                   1999           7.90             7.88         0.99         8.70
                                 (1.49)           (1.46)       (0.01)       (6.90)
                   2000           7.96             7.94         0.99         8.60
                                 (1.44)           (1.43)       (0.01)       (7.36)
                   2001           7.73             7.72         0.99        11.15
                                 (1.44)           (1.41)       (0.00)       (7.12)
                   2002           7.63             7.60         0.99        11.02
                                 (1.58)           (1.57)       (0.00)       (9.17)
                   2003           7.83             7.80         0.99        11.01
                                 (1.61)           (1.56)       (0.00)       (9.18)
                   2004           8.31             8.29         0.99         9.52
                                 (1.68)           (1.64)       (0.00)       (9.58)
                   2005           7.87             7.82         0.99        12.56
                                 (1.71)           (1.59)       (0.01)       (9.14)
                   2006           8.10             8.06         0.99        12.55
                                 (1.57)           (1.53)       (0.00)       (8.17)
                   2007           7.71             7.68         0.99        17.66
                                 (1.37)           (1.34)       (0.00)       (9.67)
                   2008           7.46             7.45         0.99        17.57
                                 (1.36)           (1.34)       (0.00)       (9.00)
                   2009           7.24             7.21         0.99        22.34
                                 (1.30)           (1.28)       (0.00)      (10.07)
                   2010           7.15             7.13         0.99        26.38
                                 (1.33)           (1.32)       (0.00)      (10.68)
                   2011           6.92             6.90         0.99        29.74
                                 (1.24)           (1.21)       (0.01)      (10.29)
                   2012           6.64             6.62         0.99        37.46
                                 (1.08)           (1.06)       (0.01)      (11.05)
                   2013           6.23             6.23         0.99        44.23
                                 (0.92)           (0.89)       (0.01)      (11.34)
                   2014           6.18             6.15         0.98        52.90
                                 (1.20)           (1.13)       (0.02)      (12.04)
                     Table reports mean and standard deviations for the distribution
                     of estimated on-road consumption rj , Bayes corrected on-road
                     consumption rbj , shrinkage factor and Bayes corrected efficiency
                     gap dbj by release year.




                                                  28
the mean of the estimated gaps increases over time but its standard deviation remains relatively
constant between 7% and 12%. To see this, Figure 4 plots the quartiles of the estimated gaps for
all release years as well as the standard deviation of the estimated fixed effects. Again we see a
clear increase in the estimated gap over time but somewhat surprisingly this increase in the gap
is not associated with a considerable changes in the distribution of the gap. If firms game only
some of their models, but not others, we would expect to see a significant increase in the spread
between the quartiles and a rise in the standard deviation. However, the standard deviation of the
estimated fixed effects is constant and does not reveal this pattern.
       To perform our simulations, we need to decide how to model gaming. Should we model gaming
as a shift in the performance gap common to all vehicles, or should we try to assign different
levels of gaming to different models? With our data, it is difficult to assign heterogeneity in the
performance gap to heterogeneity in gaming. Some of the heterogeneity in the performance gap
comes from selection of different types of drivers, who drive different routes on average and who
may be more or less aggressive in driving style, into different models. when we regress the gap
on vehicle characteristics we find evidence supporting this: more fuel efficient vehicles have higher
gaps, consistent with aggressive drivers sorting into more fuel efficient vehicles. In later years,
however, we are not able to disentangle selection from heterogeneity in gaming. Given that we
find a constant spread in the gap between vehicles, the assumption that selection is constant over
time would be sufficient to conclude that gaming is an industry wide phenomenon. This motivates
our main assumption for the simulations, which is that changes in gaming should be modeled as
a common level of gaming across products, though in the appendix we consider simulations that
introduce heterogeneity in gaming.
       We conclude from this empirical section that there is very strong evidence for substantial gaming
on fuel consumption ratings. Depending on our estimation method the gap between on-road and
tested fuel consumption varies between 10% to 15% before regulation. By 2012 this gap has
increased to 30% and all estimates give a gap of more than 45% in 2014. We do not find a
single robustness check where this spectacular increase in the gap does not occur. Our aggregate
findings are consistent with industry analysis performed by the International Council for Clean
Transportation (The International Council on Clean Transportation 2014, 2015).20 Strikingly and
somewhat against our expectations we find the gap to be increasing for all vehicles and brands in
the sample. The distribution of the gap is shifting, but the shape is relatively constant. We now
consider the implications of industry wide gaming for the evaluation of environmental policy.
  20
     The ICCT reports results from various sources including the data from Travelcard NV we obtained. The other
sources include consumer self-reports uploaded to websites and consumer car testing magazines. The data from
Travelcard are by far the most extensive in terms of number of vehicles and drivers included, but it is reassuring that
all data in the ICCT reports point to very similar results.




                                                          29
6         Quantifying the effects of gaming
To quantify the welfare effects of gaming, we first estimate a demand model for new vehicles
in order to obtain taste parameters for consumers. Given these estimated taste parameters, we
simulate counterfactuals and calculate changes in consumer surplus that result from gaming, under
alternative assumptions about the policy environment. Our simulations are informed by our reduced
form results and by our theory. Specifically, we show that there is a direct analog to the choice
distortion and price effects identified by our theory that can be decomposed from the standard
log-sum welfare formula for discrete choice models. And, we model a mean shift in the distribution
of gaming, consistent with our reduced form results. We proceed by describing the estimation,
simulation and computation of consumer surplus and conclude with the results of the counterfactual.
Throughout, our focus is on private consumer surplus. In our last step, we return to the externality
and consider the welfare consequences of gaming related to externality mitigation.

6.1         Estimation of the automobile demand system
We begin by modeling the choice of a consumer making a discrete choice about which vehicle to
buy. Each consumer i chooses the vehicle that maximizes her indirect utility, which we write as:

                                         uij = ∆j γi − ηpj + βi xj + ξj + εij ,

where ∆j is a vector of vehicle characteristics, pj is price and xj is the operating cost of the vehicle
for driver i, measured as fuel consumption (in euros per kilometer). Utility from the outside good
(not buying a new vehicle) is normalized to zero, ui0 = 0. We estimate a random coefficient
logit model and assume that βi and γi are independently normally distributed. We estimate the
mean and standard deviation of βi and γi . All remaining consumer heterogeneity is contained in
the additive idiosyncratic error term εij . The ξj term represents the value of product attributes
unobserved by the researcher but observed by firms and consumers.
         Following Berry, Levinsohn, and Pakes (1995), we integrate out εij to construct choice proba-
bilities. After inverting the choice probabilities to obtain ξj , we use a GMM estimator such that
the vector of parameters θ is the solution of:

                                                     min ξj Z 0 ωZξj
                                                       θ

in which Z is a matrix of instruments and ω is a weighting matrix.
         We use a panel containing sales, prices and characteristics for all new vehicle sales in seven
European countries between 1998 and 2007.21 We only use data from before 2008 to estimate
demand, so that our estimates come from a period in which the performance gap was stable.
We thus assume variation in xj is informative about actual fuel cost differences. The vector ∆j
contains information on horsepower, weight, footprint (a measure of vehicle size), height and a
    21
         The seven countries are: Belgium, France, Germany, Great Britain, Italy, Netherlands and Spain.


                                                            30
                                     Table 5: Estimation Results

                                            Mean Taste                St. Dev.
                                         Coeff. St. Error         Coeff. St. Error
                        Price/Inc.       -6.51    (0.45)
                        Fuel Cost        -0.53    (0.01)           0.05       (0.03)
                        Horsepower        1.48    (0.21)           1.78       (0.10)
                        Weight            0.22    (0.21)           4.32       (0.16)
                        Footprint         0.88    (0.05)           0.58       (0.04)
                        Foreign          -0.92    (0.03)           0.02       (0.16)
                        Height            0.02    (0.02)
                        Doors             0.50    (0.11)
                       The table shows estimated taste parameters from a random co-
                      efficient logit estimation on the the car market for seven EU
                      countries using data from 1998 to 2007. Taste distributions are
                      assumed to be normal, and mean and standard deviations are es-
                      timated for selected characteristics. Additional controls are fuel
                      type by market dummies, months for sale if less than 12, country
                      fixed effects, linear time trend, body type fixed effects, vehicle
                      class fixed effects and brand fixed effects. Model is estimated
                      using a two-step GMM using approximate optimal instruments
                      with sum of characteristics and cost shifter instruments for prices.


dummy specifying if the car is of a foreign brand (e.g., Fiat in France). Additionally, we include
fuel type by market dummies, dummies for the number of months a vehicle was on sale in a country-
year, country fixed effects, a linear time trend, body type fixed effects, vehicle class fixed effects
and brand fixed effects. We divide prices by income per capita in each country-year, so that price
sensitivity varies with income in the market. We instrument for prices using both cost shifters and
sums of characteristics instruments. The sums of characteristics instruments are the sum of fuel
costs, horsepower, weight, footprint and height across all other products in the market and across
all other products within the same firm in the market. We also include the number of competing
products and the number of products in the same firm. The cost shifters are the log of labor
costs in the country of production and a dummy specifying if the vehicle is sold in the country of
production. Approximate optimal instruments for the standard deviations of the taste distributions
are constructed using a two-step procedure as described in Reynaert and Verboven (2014).
   Estimated taste parameters and standard errors are reported in Table 5. Price and fuel costs
have the expected negative effect on utility. The mean of the estimated own price elasticities is
-5.45, in line with the previous literature. We estimate considerable heterogeneity in the taste for
horsepower, weight and footprint. Vehicles perceived as foreign are less attractive for consumers.
Cars with four doors are preferred over cars with two doors. We next use these estimates to study
market outcomes when firms game.




                                                      31
6.2    Counterfactual market outcomes from gaming
Simulation setup:          Our theoretical model establishes how gaming affects consumer welfare, em-
phasizing how the presence of a corrective policy interacts with gaming. In this section, we use
our structural estimates to quantify changes in consumer surplus due to gaming under alternative
assumptions about policy. Our theory focused on the case of monopoly, while the simulations con-
sider a differentiated product oligopoly. We show that direct analogs to our theoretical objects are
available in a decomposition of the log-sum formula for this case.
    In all simulations, we start with a base market, which is the observed market in the Netherlands
in 2007. We compute consumer surplus from this observed market and our parameter estimates.
We assume that firms can game by 5%, which is roughly consistent with the yearly change in gaming
estimated in our data. To model gaming, we first lower the fuel cost of firms that game by 5%.
Second, with these new fuel costs, we solve for demand and prices using the first-order conditions
for profit maximization. Third, we compute changes in welfare relative to the base market.
    We model the policy as a requirement that each firm decrease its sales-weighted emissions by
5%.22 Absent gaming, firms must comply by changing prices to shift their sales to efficient models
in order to become compliant. When we introduce gaming, firms that game can meet the policy
requirement without this sales shift. Note, however, that the market equilibrium will nevertheless
change to the extent that consumer demand, and hence prices and quantities, shift in response to
gaming.
    Our procedure assumes that gaming is a fixed cost: it does not shift the marginal costs of the
firms. This is in line with evidence on how firms are gaming the test in Europe. Our procedure
also assumes that consumers do not see through gaming and thus base their choices on the stated
fuel costs at the time of purchase. In each scenario we discuss what happens if consumers are
sophisticated, and the procedure could be scaled to reflect any ratio of consumer sophistication
(α, in terms of the theoretical model). The obtained changes in welfare are the changes in yearly
utility, profits and emissions from new vehicle sales. Next, we describe how we compute consumer
and producer surplus.23

Computation of consumer surplus and profits:                         To compute consumer welfare when con-
sumers are affected by gaming (α < 1, in terms of our theory) we follow Dubois, Griffith, and
O’Connell (2016), who describe the welfare effects of persuasive advertising. As described in Sec-
tion 2, gaming changes prices, as firms will exploit higher demand from lower perceived fuel costs.
We label the price without gaming p0j , and the prices with gaming as p1j . The misperception of
fuel costs also distorts consumer choice. To separate the two effects we make a distinction between
  22
     We use the actual formula used by the E.U. in its emission standard, so that the policy is based on vehicle weight.
For each firm we compute a sales weighted average emission rate, with emissions for heavier (lighter) cars receiving
a bonus (penalty) in the weighted sum. See Reynaert (2015) for a detailed description.
  23
     Note that we limit ourselves to reporting changes in consumer welfare from purchasing a new vehicle. We do
not consider effects on the second hand market or on the amount that consumers drive. Consumers could potentially
react to gaming by changing the amount they choose to drive in the purchased vehicle.



                                                          32
decision (at the moment of purchase) and experience utility (at the moment of utilization).24 When
                                                                                      ej = dj ∗ xj , in
there is gaming, a naı̈ve consumer will perceive fuel costs, following her belief, as x
which dj is the increase in gaming. The consumer will make her choice based on x
                                                                               ej and will perceive
her decision as yielding a utility of:

                                  Veij (d, p1 ) = ∆j γi − ηp1j + βi x
                                                                    ej + ξj + εij .

After purchasing the vehicle, true fuel costs are revealed, and the consumer has experience utility:

                                  Vij (d, p1 ) = ∆j γi − ηp1j + βi xj + ξj + εij .

The difference between decision and experience utility is the optimization error, which in this case
is the value of the additional fuel costs for the consumer βi (xj − x
                                                                    ej ) = βi (1 − dj )xj . Consumer
surplus with gaming can then be written as:

                                 fi (d, p1 ) = Eε [Veij ] − Eε [β(1 − dj )xj ]
                                 W
                                                               X
                                             = Wi (d, p1 ) −      [sij β(1 − dj )xj ],
                                                                j


where sij are the choice probabilities obtained from maximizing the decision utility. We compute
Wi (d, p1 ) by applying the log-sum formula of Small and Rosen (1981). We can then decompose the
change from the equilibrium with honesty (0, p0 ) to a the equilibrium with gaming (d, p1 ) into a
price effect and choice distortion:

                 Wi (0, p0 ) − W
                               fi (d, p1 ) = Wi (0, p1 ) − W
                                                           f (d, p1 ) + Wi (0, p0 ) − Wi (0, p1 ) .
                                             |           {z i      } |              {z         }
                                                  Choice Distortion               Price Effect

When there is a policy we will have exactly the same decomposition but the price effect will now
consist of two parts: the shift in prices due to gaming and the shift in prices from lowering the tax
wedge (a decrease in λ).
    Profits of firms are given by:
                                                 X
                                          πf =        [(pj − cj )sj (d, p)A],
                                                  j


in which A is the size of the market. Profits will depend on the markup and demand, both of which
are a function of the price vector. Policy forces a non-gaming firm to change its price schedule,
  24
     This is conceptually the same as the choice distortion described in Allcott (2013) and Sallee (2014) who study
misperception of fuel costs, but our approach here is more general because we allow firms to change prices in response
to gaming. Leggett (2002) also models a similar distortion in a discrete choice setting. Note that we implicitly assume
that consumers have on average a correct belief about future fuel costs before gaming is introduced. If there were
undervaluation of fuel costs, gaming could have a third effect in mitigating internality costs as described in Allcott
and Wozny (2014). However, several papers find that undervaluation is small or non-existent. See Busse, Knittel,
and Zettelmeyer (2013), Sallee, West, and Fan (2016) and Grigolon, Reynaert, and Verboven (2014), the latter of
which studies the E.U. market.


                                                          33
                         Table 6: Market changes from industry wide gaming

                                                   No Policy           Policy
                                                   Consumer Surplus (eper household)
                    Total                           -24.78             208.27
                    Choice Distortion               -17.09             -16.72
                    Price Effect                     -7.70             224.99
                                                           Changes in pollution
                    Total Sales (% point)            3.05               4.58
                    Emissions per vehicle %          0.44               5.82
                                                            Changes in Profits
                    Average Firm Profit %             8.84              15.90
                       Column (1) gives changes in consumer surplus, pollution and profits from
                       5% gaming when no policy is in place. Column (2) presents the changes
                       when there is a binding 5%-policy in place.


while gaming shifts demand and also changes the optimal prices chosen by firms.

Market outcomes from industry wide gaming:                        Results describing the market effects of
gaming are given in Table 6. The column on the left shows the effects on consumer surplus,
pollution and profits when there is no binding policy. The column on the right gives the effects of
gaming with a 5% policy in place.
    Absent policy, total consumer surplus per household decreases by e24 when gaming is intro-
duced. The choice distortion is responsible for e17 of the decrease. Because fuel consumption
ratings are shaded by the gaming, consumers purchase the wrong amount and the wrong type of
vehicle. The remaining decrease in consumer welfare, e7, comes from the price distortion. Con-
sumers believe cars have lower fuel costs, so firms raise prices. The perceived lower fuel costs also
lead to an increase in total sales of 3.05% points. Gaming thus leads to considerable changes in
the size of the market.25 Consumers also substitute to more polluting cars as they substitute lower
fuel costs for more horsepower and size. This drives up emissions per vehicle by 0.44%. Profits in-
crease for two reasons: firms obtain a higher markup when gaming and they have higher sales. We
interpret these as short-term gains from gaming that firms may trade-off against future consumer
backlash or possible legal punishment over time.
    Contrast this with the column on the right in Table 6, which shows the effect of gaming when a
policy is in place. Gaming now increases consumer surplus, with the price effect switching sign and
rising in magnitude to e225. Consumers benefit from the price schedule with gaming relative to the
price schedule that would result from honest compliance to the regulation. The price effect is now
much higher than the choice distortion, estimated to be e17, which is similar to the corresponding
value without a policy.
  25
     These numbers are obtained from a model in which we assume that one out of seven households are potentially
interested in purchasing a new car such that the outside good share is 61%. This results in a relatively high price
elasticity of the industry. All our main results hold if we scale down the market price elasticity by changing the
outside good share to 10%. We show these results in the appendix, in Table A.3.



                                                        34
       Note also that gaming has very large effects on pollution when there is a policy. Two forces are
at play. First, the effects of the policy are undone and the goal of reducing emission is not obtained.
We achieve this mechanically by letting firms game 5% in response to a 5% policy. Second, the
choice distortion drives pollution per vehicle above 5%. This means that a policy with a gameable
target results in more pollution relative to doing nothing. Firms benefit from gaming by avoiding
compliance cost and by increasing sales and markups. The short-term profit change from gaming
almost doubles from 9% to 16% when a policy is in place.
       Proposition 2 in our theory showed that it was possible that consumers benefit from gaming,
even when they are fooled by it. These results suggest that this is indeed the case in the European
auto market. In line with Proposition 1, we find that consumers unambiguously lose from gaming
when there is no policy. But, this result is overturned with the introduction of a policy. Consumers
no longer benefit from honesty, which is likely to erode self regulation of the market because
consumers want firms to game. Moreover, when choice distortions are significant, emissions actually
rise in response to the policy, due to a combination of weak enforcement and significant shifts in
the market due to choice distortions. We believe this to be an important finding in general, and
specifically it speaks to the current state of international climate bargaining, which is based on
voluntary emission saving statements rather than effective and credible measurement.

Market outcomes of asymmetric gaming:                          In Table 7 we compute market outcomes with
asymmetry in gaming. In the left panel only one firm games, while in the right panel all but one
firm games. We simulate these asymmetric cases separately for each firm, and present average
impacts in the table. In all scenarios we confirm the results obtained with industry-wide symmetric
gaming: gaming hurts consumers when there is no policy, while consumers benefit from gaming
under the policy. Consumer surplus and pollution effects are much smaller when only one of the
car makers games. Effects are almost equal to symmetric gaming when all but one firm games. The
profit changes show an interesting pattern. The average gain from gaming unilaterally is a whopping
20% increase in profits, even in the absence of policy. But the profitability from gaming rises still
further to 38% with policy. This shows that firms have a very strong incentive to unilaterally
deviate from honesty, and this incentive rises with policy.
       The profit losses from not “gaming along” (remaining honest while all others game) are also
large, which is shown in the column on the right. Being the sole honest firm leads to a 10% decrease
in profits without policy and a 16% decrease with policy. Thus, if competitors start to game, it is
very costly not to follow along, and this incentive is enhanced by the policy. We conclude that the
policy thus clearly increases the incentive to game in a multi-firm context: the unilateral profits
from deviating from honesty increase and the costs from not deviating when others do increases.26
       The size of our welfare effects could, of course, be sensitive to our assumptions. We discuss two
  26
    Note that this setting is not necessarily a prisoner’s dilemma. The total industry profit from the price equilibrium
with gaming relative to the price equilibrium with honesty will depend on the total legal and regulatory costs of
gaming relative to the total costs of compliance. The evidence presented here shows that an honesty becomes harder
to support when the policy is in place.



                                                          35
                        Table 7: Market changes from asymmetric gaming

                                               Gaming Alone      Not Gaming Along
                                              No Policy Policy No Policy Policy
                                               Consumer Surplus (eper household)
                Total                           -3.83    15.79     -24.31   189.94
                Choice Distortion               -3.17    -3.24     -17.23   -16.79
                Price Effect                    -0.66    19.20      -7.08    206.7
                                                       Changes in pollution
                Total Sales (% point)            0.27     0.42       2.81    4.24
                Emissions per vehicle %          0.04     0.62       0.41    5.45
                                                        Changes in Profits
                Gamer/non gamer %              20.41     37.94      -9.86   -15.83
                  Column (1) and (3) give changes in market equilibrium when one firm games.
                  We present the average of letting each firm game (we run a separate simulation
                  per firm). Changes in profits are the average for the firms that game (not for
                  the industry). Column (2) and (4) give changes in market equilibrium when all
                  but one firm games. We run a separate simulations for each firm not gaming
                  along when all others game. Changes in profits are the average for the firms
                  that do not game along.


important robustness checks here. First, choice distortion might increase if gaming varies across
vehicles. That is, by modeling a common level of gaming on all products, we may reduce the
choice distortion because most consumers will end up purchasing the same vehicle they would have
purchased absent gaming, as all vehicles will be made to have similar (false) improvements. We
focus on symmetric gaming because our reduced-form evidence shows an industry-wide shift in the
performance gap, but not an increase in heterogeneity. Nevertheless, it might be that gaming is
more pronounced on vehicles for which it is more beneficial to game. To have an idea to what
extent this determines the choice distortion, we run a simulation where gaming is drawn randomly
from the uniform distribution on [0%, 10%], so that mean gaming is 5% as in the main scenario.
The results are reported in the appendix, in Table A.2. We find indeed that choice distortions
increase to e31, but this is still 7 times lower than the price effect of the regulation.
   Second, the change in the total sales and therefore total emissions and profits depends on the
price elasticity of the industry, a function of the outside good. Since we decide on the size of
the outside good when fixing the potential market results might look different if we assume a
larger or smaller potential market. Currently we make the assumption that one in seven European
households are in the market each year as potential car buyers which results in an outside good
share of 61%. In the appendix, in Table A.3, we shrink the size of the outside good to 10%. This
lowers the change in profits and sales as the overall size of the market is less elastic to changes
caused from gaming. All main results are also confirmed in this setting.




                                                     36
6.2.1        Stated versus obtained externality savings

While the E.U. commission has released an external evaluation of the emission standard, the official
ratings are still the basis for the evaluation of the program and external communications about the
program’s impact. In Figure 1 it is apparent that the majority of the stated decline in emissions
is due to gaming. The commission claims that average emissions have fallen by 17g CO2 /km since
the start of measurement in 2010.27 Our estimates suggest that about 65% of the reported decline
in emissions from new vehicles is due to gaming. Thus, between 2010 and 2014, the actual decrease
is 5.95 grams of CO2 /km. This translates to 27 million more tons of CO2 emissions than the naı̈ve
estimate would suggest. At $40 per ton, this equates to $1.11 billion per year.28 Analysts who
perform cost-benefit analyses of the regulation may significantly mis-evaluate the program if they
calculate savings based on official ratings.29


7         Conclusion
Our empirical analysis demonstrates a remarkable and growing divergence between official and on-
road carbon emissions for automobiles in Europe. Regulators in Europe have recently become aware
of these trends, and it remains to be seen how they will respond. Combined with the Volkswagen
scandal related to local air pollution from diesel vehicles, the facts we report here suggest a veritable
crisis in the administration of environmental regulations for automobiles. Moreover, combined with
other findings that call into question the efficacy of other energy efficiency policies (Davis, Fuchs,
and Gertler 2014, Fowlie, Greenstone, and Wolfram 2015, Levinson 2016), we believe our findings
point to a serious challenge for the future of climate negotiations, which are now built upon bottom-
up pledges based on unreliable ex ante estimates of program conservation.
         Our theoretical model offers an explanation for the evolution of emissions gaming in Europe
based on Goodhart’s Law, and it gives guidance on how to assess the welfare impacts of gaming. The
model points out how the introduction of corrective policies can alter the allegiance of consumers,
who dislike gaming in the absence of policy, but may ultimately benefit (privately) from gaming
once a policy is introduced. In addition, our model points out how policy-induced gaming alters the
efficiency of private transactions by inducing choice distortion. Our structural estimation verifies
the economic importance of these effects and shows that price effects operating through cost pass-
through dominate choice distortion, which implies that consumer do indeed privately benefit from
gaming. It is important to emphasize, however, that this private benefit will be outweighed by the
failure to mitigate the externality, so long as the policy was well designed to begin with.
         We anticipate that these same concerns are present in a variety of regulatory settings, and
we expect that both our theoretical and empirical approach can be applied elsewhere. Critical to
our setup is that the measure which can be gamed is used by the regulator and is instrumental
    27
     See for example http://ec.europa.eu/clima/policies/transport/vehicles/cars, read on 09/13/2016.
    28
     We assume that 12 million vehicles are sold across Europe, and that they are driven 14,000km per year for a
15-year period.
  29
     This is for example the case in work of one of the current co-authors, see Reynaert (2015).


                                                      37
to consumer choice. For example, in education, test scores of current students might be gamed
to satisfy policy mandates that affect resource transfers. The test scores also affect the demand
for admission from future waves of students. Consumers (students) can benefit from gaming when
gaming frees up resources at a school that would otherwise be expended to satisfy policy and obtain
transfers. Or, in finance, capital requirements can be used to minimize an individual bank’s role in
creating systemic risk. Customers can privately benefit if a bank is able to rebalance its portfolio
more profitably after gaming the regulated measures.


References
Allcott, Hunt. 2013. “The Welfare Effects of Misperceived Product Costs: Data and Calibrations
  from the Automobile Market.” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy 5 (3):30–66. URL
  http://www.aeaweb.org/articles.php?doi=10.1257/pol.5.3.30.
Allcott, Hunt and Nathan Wozny. 2014. “Gasoline Prices, Fuel Economy, and the Energy Paradox.”
  Review of Economics and Statistics 96 (5):779–795.
Anderson, Soren T. and James M. Sallee. Forthcoming. “Designing Policies to Make Cars Greener:
 A Review of the Literature.” Annual Review of Resource Economics .
Barnett, A.H. 1980. “The Pigouvian Tax Rule Under Monopoly.” American Economic Review
  70 (5):1037–1041.
Berry, Steven, James Levinsohn, and Ariel Pakes. 1995. “Automobile Prices in Market Equilib-
  rium.” Econometrica 64 (4):841–890.
Booz & Company. 2012. “Company Cars and Fring Benefit Tax: Understanding the Impacts on
  Strategic Transport Targets.” NZ Transport Agency research report 474.
Buchanan, James M. 1969. “External Diseconomies, Corrective Taxes, and Market Structure.”
  American Economic Review 59 (1):174–177.
Busse, Meghan R., Christopher R. Knittel, and Florian Zettelmeyer. 2013. “Are Consumers My-
  opic? Evidence from New and Used Car Purchases.” American Economic Review 103 (1):220–
  256.
Chetty, Raj, John N. Friedman, and Johan E. Rockoff. 2014. “Measuring the Impacts of Teachers I:
  Evaluating Bias in Teacher Value-Added Estimates.” American Economic Review 104 (9):2593–
  2632.
Davis, Lucas W., Alan Fuchs, and Paul Gertler. 2014. “Cash for Coolers: Evaluating a Large-Scale
  Appliance Replacement Program in Mexico.” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy
  6 (4):207–238.
Dubois, Pierre, Rachel Griffith, and Martin O’Connell. 2016. “The Effects of Banning Advertising in
 Junk Food Markets.” URL https://dl.dropboxusercontent.com/u/21832052/site/dgo.pdf.
 Manuscript: Toulouse School of Economics.
Duflo, Esther, Michael Greenstone, and Nicholas Ryan. 2013. “Truth-telling by Third-party Au-
 ditors and the Response of Polluting Firms: Experimental Evidence from India.” Quarterly
 Journal of Economics 128 (4):1499–1545.

                                                38
Fowlie, Meredith. 2009. “Incomplete Environmental Regulation, Imperfect Competition, and Emis-
  sions Leakage.” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy 1 (2).

Fowlie, Meredith, Michael Greenstone, and Catherine Wolfram. 2015. “Do Energy Efficiency In-
  vestments Deliver? Evidence from the Weatherization Assistance Program.” Manuscript: UC
  Berkeley.

Fowlie, Meredith, Mar Reguant, and Stephen P. Ryan. 2016. “Market-Based Emissions Regulation
  and Industry Dynamics.” Journal of Political Economy 124 (1):249–302.

Gabaix, Xavier and David Laibson. 2006. “Shrouded Attributes, Consumer Myopia, and Informa-
 tion Suppression in Competitive Markets.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 121 (2):505–540.

Gerlagh, Reyer, Inge van den Bijgaart, Hans Nijland, and Thomas Michielsen. Forthcoming. “Fiscal
 policy and CO2 emissions of new passenger cars in the EU.” Environmental and Resource
 Economics .

Goodhart, Charles. 1981. Problems of Monetary Management: The U.K. Experience. Springer.

Goulder, Lawrence H. and Ian W. H. Parry. 2008. “Instrument Choice in Environmental Policy.”
 Review of Environmental Economics and Policy 2 (2):152–174.

Grigolon, Laura, Mathias Reynaert, and Frank Verboven. 2014.      “Consumer Valua-
  tion of Fuel Costs and the Effectiveness of Tax Policy:   Evidence from the Eu-
  ropean Car Market.”     URL http://docs.google.com/viewer?a=v&pid=sites&srcid=
  ZGVmYXVsdGRvbWFpbnxmcmFua3ZlcmJvfGd4OjZiMzQ4YzUwYjhiNjdjOTk. Manuscript: University
  of Leuven.

Heidhues, Paul, Botond Kőszegi, and Takeshi Murooka. 2016. “Inferior Products and Profitable
  Deception.” Review of Economic Studies .

Ito, Koichiro and James M. Sallee. 2015. “The Economics of Attribute-Based Regulation: Theory
   and Evidence from Fuel-Economy Standards.” Manuscript: University of Chicago.

Jacobsen, Mark R. 2013. “Fuel Economy and Safety: The Influences of Vehicle Class and Driver
  Behavior.” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 5 (3).

Jacobsen, Mark R., Christopher R. Knittel, James M. Sallee, and Arthur A. van Benthem. 2016.
  “Sufficient Statistics for Imperfect Externality-Correcting Policies.” Manuscript: University of
  California at Berkeley.

Jacobsen, Mark R. and Arthur A. van Benthem. 2015. “Vehicle Scrappage and Gasoline Policy.”
  American Economic Review 105 (3):1312–1338.

Kane, Thomas J. and Douglas O. Staiger. 2008. “Estimating Teacher Impacts on Student Achieve-
 ment: An Experimental Evaluation.” NBER Working Paper 14607.

Kopczuk, Wojciech, Justin Marion, Erich Muehlegger, and Joel Slemrod. 2016. “Does Tax-
 Collection Invariance Hold? Evasion and the Pass-through of State Diesel Taxes.” American
 Economic Journal: Economic Policy 8 (2):1–36.

Langer, Ashley and Shaun McRae. 2014. “Step on It: Evidence on the Variation in On-Road Fuel
  Economy.” Manuscript: University of Arizona.

                                               39
Leggett, Christopher G. 2002. “Environmental Valuation with Imperfect Information.” Environ-
  mental and Resource Economics 23:343–355.

Levinson, Arik. 2016. “How Much Energy Do Building Energy Codes Save? Evidence from Cali-
  fornia Houses.” American Economic Review 106 (10):2867–2894.

Lucas, Jr., Robert E. 1976. “Econometric Policy Evaluation: A Critique.” Carnegie-Rochester
  Conference Series on Public Policy 1:19–46.

Oliva, Paulina. 2015. “Environmental Regulations and Corruption: Automobile Emissions in Mex-
  ico City.” Journal of Political Economy 123 (3):686–724.

Reynaert, Mathias. 2015. “Abatement Strategies and the Cost of Environmental Regulation: Emis-
  sion Standards on the European Car Market.” Manuscript: KU Leuven.

Reynaert, Mathias and Frank Verboven. 2014. “Improving the performance of random coefficients
  demand models: The role of optimal instruments.” Journal of Econometrics 179 (1):83–98. URL
  https://ideas.repec.org/a/eee/econom/v179y2014i1p83-98.html.

Sallee, James M. 2014. “Rational Inattention and Energy Efficiency.” Journal of Law and Eco-
  nomics 57 (3):781–820.

Sallee, James M., Sarah E. West, and Wei Fan. 2016. “Do Consumers Recognize the Value of Fuel
  Economy? Evidence from Used Car Prices and Gasoline Price Fluctuations.” Journal of Public
  Economics 135:61–73.

Small, Kenneth A. and Harvey S. Rosen. 1981. “Applied welfare economics of discrete choice
  models.” Econometrica .

The International Council on Clean Transportation. 2014. “From Laboratory to Road: A 2014
  Update of Official and “Real-World” Fuel Consumption and CO2 Values for Passenger Vehicles
  in Europe.” ICCT White Paper.

———. 2015. “From Laboratory to Road: A 2015 Update of Official and “Real-World” Fuel
 Consumption and CO2 Values for Passenger Cars in Europe.” ICCT White Paper.

Weyl, E. Glen and Michael Fabinger. 2013. “Pass-Through as an Economic Tool: Principles of
 Incidence under Imperfect Competition.” Journal of Political Economy 121 (3):528–583.




                                             40
    APPENDIX MATERIAL: NOT FOR PUBLICATION


A    Appendix: Additional Tables

             Table A.1: Summary statistics: Netherlands and Travelcard

                                             Mean St. Dev.         Mean St. Dev.
                                                TravelCard          Netherlands
          Price (euro)                       31,672   13,367       40,767 29,676
          Fuel Consumption (L/100km)          6.74     1.60         7.89   2.46
          Vehicle Weight in kg                1,344    230         1,409    308
          Diesel Engines                      0.45     0.50         0.36   0.48
           Summary statistics for the TravelCard sample and the full dutch market between
           1998 and 2011.




                                              41
Table A.2: Market Changes from Gaming - Heterogenous Gaming

                    All Game   Own Gaming All other game
                                   No Policy
                        Consumer Surplus (eper household)
    Total             -39.74       -5.21          -38.14
    Choice Dist.      -31.10       -4.46          -30.18
    Price Effect       -8.64       -0.75           -7.95
                              Emissions % changes
    Sales              3.06         0.26           2.82
    Per vehicle        0.53         0.05            0.49
                               Profits % changes
    Profit             8.68        20.37           -9.77

                                      Policy
                        Consumer Surplus (eper household)
    Total             186.29       13.82          169.54
    Choice Dist.      -30.74       -4.63          -29.83
    Price Effect      217.04       18.54          199.37
                              Emissions % changes
    Sales              4.52         0.42           4.19
    Per vehicle        6.19         0.65           5.78
                               Profits % changes
    Profit            15.29        37.35          -15.84
      Column (1) gives changes when all firms game, column (2) gives the
      average changes when each firm games on its own, column (3) gives
      the average changes when all but one firm games.




                                   42
Table A.3: Market Changes from Gaming - Low Outside Good Share

                     All Game   Own Gaming All other game
                                    No Policy
                         Consumer Surplus (eper household)
     Total              -6.61       -8.32          -12.69
     Choice Dist.       -8.73       -8.77          -14.88
     Price Effect        2.12        0.45           2.19
                               Emissions % changes
     Sales               0.49        0.04           0.45
     Per vehicle         0.56       0.05            0.52
                                Profits % changes
     Profit              1.25       21.43          -16.79

                                       Policy
                         Consumer Surplus (eper household)
     Total             627.60       46.83          572.11
     Choice Dist.       -8.60       -9.18          -14.00
     Price Effect      636.20       56.01          586.12
                               Emissions % changes
     Sales               0.51        0.05           0.47
     Per vehicle         5.68        0.60           5.31
                                Profits % changes
     Profit             2.63        38.46          -26.01
       Column (1) gives changes when all firms game, column (2) gives the
       average changes when each firm games on its own, column (3) gives
       the average changes when all but one firm games.




                                    43
B    Appendix: Proofs

Proposition 1. In the absence of policy (σ = ∞, τ = 0), consumer surplus falls with the
level of gaming. Specifically:

                      dCS
                          ≈ − ρ(1 − α)βD + (1 − α)2 β 2 D0 g ≤ 0.
                       dg     |    {z    }  |     {z       }
                              price effect choice distortion

    We derive this by starting with the definition of consumer surplus as the integral under
the inverse demand curve. Because the true attribute of the good x is unaffected by gaming,
we can analyze consumer surplus using the true demand curve. The standard portion of
consumer surplus is the integral from the final price, denoted p∗ up to infinity. Denote by
p̃ the upfront purchase price that would induce a sophisticated consumer to purchase the
amount of the good that is in fact purchased at price p∗ by the consumer with perception
(1 − α). The choice distortion can be written as the difference between the revenue generate
between p∗ and p̃ and the consumer value generated between those points.

           Z   ∞                      Z   p∗                     Z   p∗
  CS =          D(z + βx)dz +           D(z + βx)dz     −       D(p̃ + βx)dz . (B.1)
            p∗                       p̃                      p̃
           |       {z      }       |       {z      }       |       {z       }
         CS of correct quantity Value of excess quantity Cost of excess quantity

    Differentiation of equation B.5, in which p∗ and p̃ are endogenously determined by g,
yields the result. Note that the inside of the third integral is a constant with respect to the
variable of integration, so it can be pulled out of the integral, leaving only the constant 1
inside. Specifically:

                                      dp∗                 dp∗
                                                                               
                dCS           ∗                   ∗                         dp̃
                      = −D(p + βx)        + D(p + βx)          − D(p̃ + βx)
                 dg                    dg                 dg                dg
                                                               ∗         
                                             dp̃                 dp    dp̃
                      − (p∗ − p̃)D0 (p̃ + βx) + D(p̃ + βx)           −        .           (B.2)
                                             dg                  dg    dg

Using the pass through coefficient ρ, a change in g scales to a change in tax by (1 − α)β, so
dp∗ /dg = ρ(1 − α)β. This simplifies the first term to yield the result.
    For the second term in B.2, note that p̃ = p∗ − (1 − α)βg by definition. Then, substitute
a first-order Taylor approximation to write demand at p̃ as a function of demand at p∗ and




                                               44
D0 × (p̃ − p∗ ):

            dp∗               dp̃
  D(p∗ + βx)     − D(p̃ + βx)
            dg                dg
               ∗
            dp                            dp̃
=D(p∗ + βx)      − D(p∗ + βx − (1 − α)βg)
            dg                            dg
                                                                dp∗                          dp̃
≈ {D(p∗ + βx − (1 − α)βg) + D0 (p∗ + βx − (1 − α)βg)(1 − α)β}       − D(p∗ + βx − (1 − α)βg)
                                                                dg                           dg
                         ∗                                                ∗
                          dp     dp̃                                      dp
=D(p∗ + βx − (1 − α)βg)      −         + D0 (p∗ + βx − (1 − α)βg)(1 − α)β          (B.3)
                          dg     dg                                       dg

   Now consider the third term in B.2. After substituting p̃ = p∗ − (1 − α)βg, we see that
the term that multiplies the difference in derivatives will cancel in the third term of B.2 and
the second-term, defined using B.3. This means that B.2 can be written:

            dCS                                                           dp∗
                = −D(p∗ + βx)ρ(1 − α)β + D0 (p∗ + βx − (1 − α)βg)(1 − α)β
             dg                                                           dg
                                           
                                        dp̃
                − (p∗ − p̃)D0 (p̃ + βx)       .                                          (B.4)
                                        dg

Substitute p∗ − p̃ = (1 − α)βg and dp̃/dg = (ρ − 1)(1 − α)β, which follows from differentiating
the definition of p̃ and using the pass through result for p∗ . Then, simplification yields the
final result:
        dCS
            = −D(p∗ + βx)ρ(1 − α)β + D0 (p∗ + βx − (1 − α)βg)(1 − α)βρ(1 − α)β
         dg
              − {(1 − α)βgD0 (p̃ + βx)(ρ − 1)(1 − α)β}
              = −D(p∗ + βx)ρ(1 − α)β + D0 (p∗ + βx − (1 − α)βg)(1 − α)2 β 2 ρ
              − (1 − α)2 β 2 gD0 (p̃ + βx)(ρ − 1)
              = −D(p∗ + βx)ρ(1 − α)β + (1 − α)2 β 2 gD0 (p̃ + βx).

Note that, with the local linear demand assumption, the derivative of D evaluated at either
p̃ or p∗ is the same. 

Proposition 2. In the presence of a binding standard but no tax (λ > 0, τ = 0), a change
in gaming affects consumer surplus as follows:

                       dCS
                           ≈ (−ρ(c0 + αβ) − β)D + (1 − α)2 β 2 D0 g .
                        dg   |        {z      }   |     {z        }
                                 price effect    choice distortion

    Proposition 2 is derived in a similar way to Proposition 1, but we define surplus using
integrals over the demand function starting with full prices f . (This same could have been

                                                45
done in the prior proof, yielding the same result.) Recall that f = p + βx and f˜ = p + βx −
(1 − α)βg.

              Z   ∞                         Z   f∗                       Z   f∗
  CS =            D(z)dz       +           D(z)dz       −          D(f˜)dz       . (B.5)
               f∗                       ˜
                                        f                       ˜
                                                                f
              |    {z    }            |    {z    }            |    {z    }
         CS of correct quantity Value of excess quantity Cost of excess quantity

   Differentiating, using the same Taylor approximation as above to simplify, yields:
                                                                     !
                     dCS               ∗                     ∗     ˜
                                  ∗ df                    df     d f
                          ≈ −D(f )       + D (f )(f − f˜)
                                            0  ∗   ∗
                                                               −       .
                      dg            dg                     dg    dg

     Substitute the pass through result described in the text: df ∗ /dg = ρ(c0 (x) + αβ) + β).
Substitute the definition of f˜, which shows that f ∗ − f˜ = (1 − α)βg. And substitute
df ∗      ˜
 dg
     − ddgf = (1 − α)β:


            dCS
                ≈ −D(f ∗ )(ρ(c0 (x) + αβ) + β) + D0 (f ∗ ) {(1 − α)βg} {(1 − α)β}
             dg
                    = −D(f ∗ )(ρ(c0 (x) + αβ) + β) + D0 (f ∗ )(1 − α)2 β 2 g.             (B.6)

This yields the result. 

Proposition 3. In the presence of a tax but no standard (σ = ∞, τ > 0), consumer surplus
falls with the level of gaming. Specifically:

                    dCS
                        ≈ − ρ(1 − α)(β + τ )D + (1 − α)2 (β + τ )2 D0 g ≤ 0.
                     dg     |       {z      }   |         {z          }
                               price effect       choice distortion

   Proposition 4 follows directly from Proposition 1 once it is recognized that this is the
exact same problem with β replaced by β + τ at all points. Thus, the exact same proof as
Proposition 1 holds, yielding the result. 

Corollary 1. The price effect is positive when the standard is sufficiently tight. Specifically,
λ > β/ρ − (1 − α)β, implies a positive price effect.

    The proof of this corollary just requires showing that the stated condition is sufficient
to sign the price effect. The price effect is (−ρ(c0 + αβ) − β)D. This is positive iff −ρ(c0 +




                                                     46
αβ) − β > 0. Manipulating algebraically:

                                         0 < −ρ(c0 + αβ) − β
                                         0 < −ρ(c0 + αβ + β − β) − β
                                         0 < −ρ(c0 + β − (1 − α)β) − β
                                         0 < ρλ + ρ(1 − α)β − β
                          β
                            − (1 − α)β < λ
                          ρ



Corollary 2. For a binding policy that induces a negative price effect, a marginal increase
in gaming starting at zero will increase consumer surplus. That is, ∂CS/∂g > 0 at g = 0
whenever λ > 0.

   This corollary follows immediately from the result in Proposition 2 that defines dCS/dg,
noting that the choice distortion term is 0 when g = 0. The setup of the corollary says that
the price effect is negative, which delivers the result immediately. 

Proposition 4. (Goodhart’s Law for externality-correcting policies) As long as h0 /D is rising
in λ, a tighter standard induces greater gaming:

                                              dg
                                                 > 0.
                                              dλ
    The first-order condition of profits with respect to g is:

                                0 = λD + (p − c)D0 (−(1 − α)β) − h0
                                 −(p − c)D0   −h0 /D + λ
                            ⇒               =
                                     D         (1 − α)β

But note that the left-hand side equals 1 from the first-order condition with respect to price
(the monopoly markup). Thus:

                                      (1 − α)β = −h0 /D + λ

Total differentiation yields:

                                         −h00     h0 D0
                                    0=        dg + 2 df˜ + dλ
                                          D        D

where f˜ is recognized to encompass the full change in perceived price, accounting for changes
in x and p, which can be rewritten in terms of ρ and c00 , but is more intuitive left as is.


                                                47
Rearranging yields:

                                   dg   D     h0 D0 df˜
                                      = 00 +
                                   dλ |{z}
                                        h         h00 |{z}
                                              D |{z}
                                             |{z}      dλ
                                           +         +   −   +


The first term is just the inverse of the marginal cost (per unit) of gaming. It says that the
optimal g rises with the shadow price of the regulation according to the convexity of h, the
cost of gaming function. The D term appears because h is a fixed cost amortized over the
number of units sold. This term is unambiguously positive.
    The second term is a scale effect, which has three factors. The first factor is the inverse of
the marginal cost (per unit sold) of gaming. The second factor is the ratio of the derivatives
of demand and the derivative of the cost function. The third factor is the change in perceived
price that comes from a tighter standard. Together the scale effect is negative. A tighter
standard increases the perceived price, which shrinks the market. This market reduction
inflates the cost of complying via g relative to the cost of complying via x because x is a
marginal cost per unit. If the scale effect is sufficiently large, this could outweigh the positive
first term and cause dg/dλ < 0. This is more likely to be true if the demand derivative at the
profit-maximizing point is very high and pass through is large. But, note that a more convex
h and a larger total market D weight against this. The regularity condition is just one way
to state that the scale effect does not dominate. An alternative derivation is available by
differentiating the full problem and applying Cramer’s rule.
    Note that we describe Goodhart’s Law in terms of λ, but technically the shadow price
is a choice variable. Note, however, that any standard is identical to a tax policy with a
per unit tax rate equal to t(x − g), with t = λ. Starting with the tax policy, identical steps
would be proper and would yield an identical result. 




                                                48
