                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                              FEDERAL DEDUCTIBILITY OF
                                STATE AND LOCAL TAXES:
                               A TEST OF PUBLIC CHOICE
                            BY REPRESENTATIVE GOVERNMENT




                                 Lawrence B. Lindsey




                               Working Paper No. 2292




                        NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      June 1987




The author is grateful to NBER for support of this research. Deep thanks are also
in order for Andrew Mitrusi for outstanding computer assistance and to Gilbert
Metcalf and other members of the project in State and Local Finance for their
thoughtful comments. The research reported here is part of the NBER's research program
in Taxation and project in State and Local Finance. Any opinions expressed are those
of the author and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                           I'fflER Working Paper #2292
                                           June 1987




         Federal Oeductibility of State and Local Taxes:
      A Test of Public Choice by Representative Governments



                             ABSTRACT



    This paper considers the impact of federal deductibility on
the level and composition of state and local taxes. It also
considers the importance of deductibility in determining the

vote of state Congressional delegations on the Tax Reform Act of

1986. Particular emphasis is placed on the mechanism by which
voter preferences are translated into public choices.
Alternative measures of tax price are considered; each
represents a different model of voter behavior. The paper
concludes that tax levels are determined by an equal weighting

of voters, not by a planning mechanism which minimizes the cost
of revenue state wide.   It also concludes that the issue of

state and local deductibility played a negligible role in
determining Congressional votes on the recent tax reform bill.




                                        Lawrence Lindsey
                                        NBER
                                        1050 Massachusetts Ave.
                                        Cambridge, MA 02138
Federal Deductibility of State and Local Taxes: A Test of Public

               Choice By Representative Government


                       Lawrence B. Lindsey



    The recent tax reform debate focussed attention on the

continued deductibility of state and local taxes in the
calculation of federal taxable income. The original tax reform
proposal by the Department of Treasury, issued in November,

1984, called for the complete elimination of deductibility of
state and local taxes. Later proposals by the President, the
House of Representatives, and the Senate, maintained

deductibility of nearly all state and local taxes.      The final
product of the tax reform debate, the Tax Reform Act of 1986,

maintained deductibility of all state and local taxes except for
retail sales taxes.

    The deductibility of state and local taxes is a significant
feature of fiscal federalism. Had deductibility of personal
state and local taxes -—   retail   sales, personal income, and
residential property taxes —— been eliminated in 1983, federal

income taxes would have been $30.4 billion higher.      By contrast,
total federal grants in aid to state and local governments were
$86.2 billion that year.

   Unlike the direct grants in aid, the income tax saving from
deductibility does not accrue directly to state and local
governments. Instead, it is received by individual taxpayers in
                                 2 ——

the form of lower income tax liability. This is likely to
affect state and local tax collections in two ways.   First,

local taxpayers have higher disposable income as a result of

deductibility.   If state and local public services are normal

goods, this higher disposable income will lead to greater demand

for such spending. Second. federal deductibility lowers the net
cost to itemizing taxpayers of incremental dollars of state and

local tax collections. This lower price on incremental public

spending may also increase the quantity of public services
demanded.

    Academic investigation of this issue has properly focussed
on the "price" effect. The entire tax saving from state and
local tax deductibility amounted to 1.25 percent of disposable
personal income in 1983. On the other hand, deductibility
lowered the price of incremental taxation for itemizers to 69

cents per dollar collected. Given these results, even modest
price elasticities and large income elasticities are likely to
show that price effects are dominant. This paper therefore
follows the existing academic literature in focussing on price
effects.

    Unlike ordinary price changes, changes in the price of local
taxation do not translate directly through consumer optimization
into changes in the equilibrium quantity of services demanded.

The quantity and type of taxes and services are not determined

by individual consumers but by collective decision making

aparati. The elasticity of demand for public services therefore
depends on the mechanism by which price changes are translated

into changes in public policy.
                             —— 3 --

    The dominant model of converting individual preferences into

collective actions has been the median voter model, first

proposed by Hotelling (1929) and formally developed by Bowen
(1943).   in this model, the collective decision reflects the

preferences of the swing or median voter. Half of the remaining
voters are assumed to want Lore of the given commodity, half

less of the commodity. A change in the price of local taxation
for some voters will only affect the outcome if the price facing
the median voter is changed, or if the ranking of voters is
changed in a way so that the median voter becomes someone new.

    The median voter model places enormous stress on the

capacity of representative governments to accurately reflect
voter preferences. Rules controlling the election process, the
setting of the legislative agenda, and the process of coalition

formation, may well produce a different outcome than that
preferred by a majority of the voters.

    The present paper tests a number of different modes of
public choice focussing on the subject of state and local tax

deductibility. Three issues are considered: the effect of
deductibility on the level of state and local taxation, the

effect of deductibility on the type of tax used at the state and
local level, and the effect of proposed changes of federal tax

rules regarding deductibility on Congressional voting on tax
reform. On each issue, a number of different methods for

translating individual taxpayer preferences into collective
decisions are tested.
                             —— 4 ——

    The first section describes the theoretical issues involved

and reports on academic findings to date. The second section
describes the data used in this analysis, and discusses its

appropriateness to the issues at hand. The third section
produces the results of the tests of various types of models of

translating individual preferences into collective actions. The
paper concludes with a brief summary of the findings.



I.Theoretical Issues and Academic Findings

    Most academic investigations of the price elasticity of

demand for locally provided public services have relied on the

geographic variability of the cost of public good provision, and
the variations in the demographic makeup of communities. There
are two •aJor explanations for this emphasis. The obvious
reason is that the available data lends itself to such a

construct. The second reason is a theoretical one: the reliance
on the median voter model of public choice.                    -




    Many communities rely on the sequential referendum method of

budgetting for local public goods, particularly education. Such
referenda generally begin with a high proposed level of spending
and reduce the figure in subsequent referenda until the budget

proposal passes. This voting procedure lends itself nicely to
both empirical testing and to the theoretical attraction of the
median voter model.

    In practice, the median voter model requires a far more

restrictive set of assumptions. The first is that there be a

single public good in question so that log rolling and coalition
                              —— 5 ——

formation   do not dominate the voting procedure. This condition
is arguably present in these referenda systems where the local

public good in question is typically education. However,

Bergstrom and Goodman (1973) lay out an extremely rigorous set
of assumptions needed to establish the result of a referendum as

representative of the preferences of the median voter in the

community. These include restrictive assumptions on the income
distribution in the community and the price and income
elasticities of demand for housing —-   a   necessary condition
where local public spending is financed by taxation of
residential real estate.

    Even laying aside the theoretical problems of establishing
meidan voter criteria, there are a number of practical problems
with the model. The first is the problem of agenda setting. If
sequential referenda are not guaranteed, or if the change in the
amount of taxation in each referendum is substantial rather than
marginal, it may be that the preferences of the median voter
will not result. Romer and Rosenthal (1978) argued that the
tendency for spending to revert to some substantially lower
level if a referendum were defeated would lead voters who prefer

a modestly lower amount of spending than that proposed to
support the referendum. They argued that this procedure would
produce a higher level of spending than that supported by the
median voter.

    The process of voting is also not free, especially given the
time commitment necessary for the sequential referendum process.

A series of papers by Rubinfeld et.al. (1980.1981,1982) tested
                              —— 6 --

for   differences between voters and non—voters. An earlier paper
by Rubinfeld (1977) found that renters were less likely to vote

than were homeowners. A high price of voting puts constraints
on the sequential referendum process, and will produce outcomes
which are not consistent with the median voter hypothesis.
      Ladd (1975) showed that the existence of a tax base other

than residential real estate might produce a higher level of

taxation. The existence of commercial and industrial property
in the local tax base opens the possibility that the tax will be

shifted forward in the form of higher prices, and not borne by

the local residents.

      Gramlich (1977) investigated the use of grants by higher
levels of government to subsidize local public goods and
services. This can be a substantial issue. For example,
federal grants in aid to states and Municipalities in 1983
exceeded collections from state personal income taxes that year.

Gramlich concluded that many grants produce corner solutions and
thus affect the income or wealth of the community but not the

marginal price of public services.
      These issues are of consequence in the present paper as
well. The issues of differential voting patterns, shifting of
business taxes, and grants in aid, are all dealt with
explicitly. This paper also raises a further practical
objection to the median voter model: that the functioning of

representative governments is quite different from the

sequential referendum procedure in determining the level of

spending.
                                7


    The representative system offers the potential for greater

economic efficiency in determining the level of municipal
spending, than does the median voter model. One clear fault of
the median voter model is that, if it works, it is unlikely to
produce the efficient level of public services. Samuelson's
condition that the sum of the •arginai rates of substitution for

the residents equal the marginal rate of transformation requires

that the mean demand for public services, not the tastes of the
median demander, be reflected in the outcome. Representative

government offers the possibility that majoritarian outcomes may
yield to more economically efficient outcomes such as those
favored by the "omniscient" planner. This possibility is
explicitly tested in the present paper.

    This paper uses the federal tax deductibility of state and
local taxes as the basis for empirical investigation. Studies

designed to estimate the demand for state and local services
based on tax deductibility have been fairly recent. Zimmerman
(1983) uses an explicit median voter model to determine the

demand for public goods. His analysis assumes that the median
voter and the median income household in the state are

synono.ous. This is equivalent to assuming that all taxpayers
have identical demands for local services, and all variation in
quantity demanded is the result of price differences. The fact
that a median income family is unlikely to itemize drives

Zimmerman's conclusion that federal deductibility has no effect
on state and local spending.
                                -— 8   -—

   Hettich     and Winer (1984) examined the share of state taxes

derived from the personal income tax in the context of federal

deductibility. Their results on the deductibility variable has

the wrong sign, meaning that greater deductibility leads to a
lower share of income taxes in total taxes. Their study has a

number of statistical flaws. Furthermore, some of their
findings on tax sources' own price and cross price elasticities
are counterintuitive. Nonetheless, their public choice model of

maximization subject to political constraints may well be

appropriate.
    lnman (1985) examined 41 large cities over the period 1960

to 1980 using an estimate of the average federal tax price

prevailing locally. Like I3ettich and Winer, Inman reports

counterintuitive signs for cross price elasticities between
property and income and sales taxes. Again, an implicit median
voter model was used to calculate tax prices. Incomes at the
25th, 50th, and 75th Percentile! of local incomes were applied

to the national probability of itemizing at those incomes to

obtain a federal tax price.

    Feldstein and Metcalf (1987) substantially remedied the
problems with estimating federal tax price. They used the
National Bureau of Economic Research TAXSIM model to calculate
the probability of itemizing and the tax rates faced by
itemizers in each state. The highly disaggregated data provided
by TAXSIM allowed the construction of instrumental variables to
avoid the problems of statistical endogeneity between tax
collections and tax price. They find very high elasticities of
                                       —- 9   --

demand for deductible personal taxes with respect to after

federal tax price. Feldstein and Metcalf's parameter estimates

generally have very large standard errors, but the robustness of
the results with respect to model specification lends support to

their findings.

     Feldstein and Metcalf experiment with three measures of

deductibility: the average tax price facing itemizers and non-

itemizers, the proportion of taxpayers itemizing, and the tax

price facing itemizers. They find that the decomposition of the
weighted average tax price into its two components: the
proportion of taxpayers itemizing and the itemizers' price, has
no substantial effect on their conclusions.

     The present paper takes Feldstein and Metcalf as a starting

point for analysis, but has a different methodological emphasis.

While Feldstein and Metcalf sought a quantitative estimate of

the elasticity of state and local spending with respect to tax
price, this paper focusses on the mechanism by which the tax
price facing individuals is translated into a collective

decision, although the present text also quantifies the effect
of federal deductibility on state and local tax collections.

Several different models of state and local legislative behavior
are considered.

     First, this paper considers the appropriateness of modelling
the expenditure process as representing the wishes of the

electorate. This requires a departure from the Feldstein—
Metcalf approach, to use the voter, rather than the taxpayer, as

the unit of analysis. There are two key differences between
                              —- 10 —-
voters   and taxpayers. First, taxpayers may be family units
consisting of more than one voter. Married taxpayers who file a

Joint return are counted as a single taxpayer by the IRS and on
the TAXSIM file. On the other hand, such taxpaying units are
likely to have two qualified voters in them.    Second. survey
evidence suggests that voting is positively correlated with

income. Data from exit polls following the 1984 election1 was
used to estimate the likelihood of each tax return producing a
voter.

    For examination of voter based models, this analysis adopts,

with some modification, two of the Feldstein and Metcalf

indicators of tax price: average tax price for all taxpayers and

proportion of taxpayers itemizing. The first indicator assumes
that the price facing each voter is weighted equally in the
legislative process.    In the standard version of this model, the

price facing non—itemizing voters is unity while the price
facing itemizing voters is unity less the value of their tax
deduction. The sum of the prices facing all voters is divided
by the number of voters to obtain the average price. This

measure of price will be termed the Average Price Facing Voters
(APFV) model. This is a more complex version of the median

voter model. In that model, all voters are ranked by price and
the median voter selected as representative. This model weights

the price facing all voters equally, including the prices facing
inframarginal voters.

    The second voter based model is the naive deductibility

model, or naive write-off (NW0) model. This assumes that
                             —— 11 ——

taxpayers only care about "whether they can write it off",
without regard to the va1ue of the income tax deduction.

Although seemingly irrational to public finance economists, this
model is in keeping with survey data suggesting that the great
majority of the public do not know the marginal tax rate they

face. This model is essentially identical to the proportion
itemizing model of Feldstein and Metcalf.

    The final Feldstein and Metcalf model: average price facing

itemizers, is not considered here. Such a model would be

appropriate to a dominant party arrangement where itemizers were
the dominant party, selected their •edian price in a primary

election in which only itemizers could vote, and then carried
that choice to victory in an election decided strictly by
itemizer status.

    Unlike Feldstein and Metcalf, the present paper also
considers a planner model of public decision making.   In this

model, the legislative process is viewed as a collective

decision based on maximizing collective well being. Here, the
price of taxation is the weighted average price of taxes. To

compute this weighted average price, the tax saving due to
deductibility of a tax is divided by the total revenue collected
from that tax. This fraction is then subtracted from unity to

obtain the weighted average price to the state of collecting a
particular   tax.

    Unconstrained, the planner model would levy taxes on the
taxpayer with the lowest post—federal tax price first, until

that taxpayer was pushed to a higher tax price. Then all
                                  —— 12 ——

taxpayers at the higher tax price would be taxed until they were
pushed to the next higher tax price. Such a model would
maximize the federal share of the total cost of the revenue

collected. States might be constrained in adopting extreme
versions of this approach due to the mobility of high federal
income tax rate voters.

     The adoption of this model required consideration of the

Feldstein—Metcalf arguments regarding endogenously determined
prices. A specification of the effect of prices on taxes is
given by equation 1:


(1) T. =        +        +        + a3 Z +
           a0       a1       a2


In this model, T is per capita tax collections, V per capita
income, Z, a vector of demographic attributes of the state, and
?,   some measure of prices facing voters.

     Ordinary least squares will produce unbiased parameter

estimates only if values of u are independent of price and
income. There are two reasons to suspect such independence.
First, higher levels of taxation will increase the likelihood

that taxpayers will itemize, thus depressing the price
variable. Second, among itemizers, as taxes are increased, the
taxpayer is pushed into lower tax brackets, thus increasing the
value of the price variable.

     Feldstein and Metcalf choose 3 instrumental variables to
avoid this problem. The first is the "first dollar price" which
is computed by excluding state and local tax deductions from the
                               —— 13 ——

itemizer   calculus. A marginal tax rate is then assigned to each
return from the tax table as is the probability of itemizing

based on the national proportion of taxpayers itemizing at the
taxpayer's income level. The second instrument is constructed
in the same manner as the first, except that the national

average amount of state and local tax deductions for the

taxpayer's income class replaces the taxpayer's actual deduction
before the marginal tax rate is computed. The third instrument
is the proportion of taxpayers in the state who would be
expected to itemize if each taxpayer's probability of itemizing

was equal to the national average for his adjusted gross income
class

    The case for such an instrumental variables approach relies

on the assumption that an exogenous positive taste for state
taxes reduces the federal tax price and induces a negative

correlation between the price variable and the stochastic
disturbance. Such a situation would overstate the magnitude of    -




a negative price elasticity.

    This paper adopts two of these instruments, with some
modification, and omits the third. The first dollar price is
computed for each of the three measures of price by eliminating
the state and local tax deduction before computing the

taxpayer's itemizer status or tax rate. This first dollar price
is then used as the first instrumental measure of the actual

price.

    Feldstein and Metcalf's second measure is to substitute the

average state and local deduction in each taxpayer's income
                            —— 14 ——

class for the actual deduction claimed by that taxpayer. This
instrument seems appropriate for some classes of taxpayers, but
not for others. On the one hand, this measure is appropriate
for taxpayers who will itemize regardless of their level of
state and local taxes. Substitution of the national average
level of state and local tax deduction for the actual level

eliminates the simultaneity between tax rate and the level of

deductions for taxpayers whose itemizer status is not dependent
on their level of state and local deductions.

    On the other hand, for taxpayers whose itemizer status
depends on their level of deductions, the Feldstein-Metcalf

method of calculating the instrument may be inappropriate. The
key issue is whether or not the taxpayerts deductions are above

or below the national average for his or her income class.     In

the case of taxpayers who have above average levels of state and

local deductions, no problem exists. Substituting the average
level of such deductions for the actual level impli!s lowering

the level of deductions claimed by that taxpayer. Some of these
taxpayers may become non—itemizers as a result. For these
taxpayers, with above average state and local deductions, the
average level of deductions properly instruments their itemizer
status.

    But, this instrument is not symmetric for taxpayers with

below average state and local deductions. For these taxpayers,
substituting the average level of such deductions for the

taxpayer's actual level implies raising the total deductions

claimed by the taxpayer. Some of these taxpayers should switch
                                —— 15 ——

from being non-Itemizers to being itemizers as a result. But,
because no data exists on their deductions, simply adding the

average level of deductions to their existing deduction level of

zero will not properly instrument their itemizer status. The
result is an underestimate of the number of itemizers in states

with below average levels of taxes, This underestimate produces
a measure of price which is too high in states with low levels
of taxes. As a result, it is likely to underestimate the
sensitivity of taxes to tax price.

    The present study mitigates this proble. by determining an
estimate of non—state and local tax deductions for these

taxpayers. This is accomplished by creating a distribution of
non—state and local taxes paid deductions for taxpayers in each
income group who would not itemize in the absence of the state
and local tax deduction. These taxpayers are assigned a level
of non—state and local tax deductions based on this distribution

via a Monte Carlo procedure. The average level of state and
local tax deductions is then added to the synthetic level of
non—state and local deductions to determine the taxpayer's
itemizer status and tax rate.

    The third instrument used by Feldstein and Metcalf,

determining the tax price based solely on the state's income
distribution, is not used. This instrument, by substituting a

national average measure of price for the actual state price may
be omitting a factor which is uncorrelated with the tastes for
spending, but is correlated with the actual price in the state.
For example, the state of Utah has the highest proportion of
                               —— 16 —-

itemizers   of any state in the union. The probable reason for
this is that the dominant religious group in the state, the

Latter Day Saints, practice tithing with regard to their

charitable contributions. Substituting a nationally determined
instrument for itemizing behavior will overstate the price of
taxes in Utah, even though tastes for state spending and for

Mormonism are uncorrelated.

    Thus, for the voter model, two instruments were selected for

each of the two measures of price. For the planner model of
behavior, the same kind of instruments were computed for the
weighted average price of each tax. Federal taxes were
calculated for taxpayers in each state with the deduction for

the particular tax in question removed. This zero deduction
level of federal taxes was compared with the regular level of
federal taxes to calculate the saving from the deductibility of
the particular type of taxes. The saving was divided by the
total state tax collection from the tax, from itemizers and

non—itemizers alike, and the resulting ratio subtracted from
unity to obtain a price.

    In the case of the first—dollar price instrument, only the

deductions of taxpayers who would itemize in the absence of the
state and local tax deductions were considered in computing the

saving.     In the case of the second instrument, only the
deductions for taxpayers who were considered itemizers were
considered in computing the saving.       In both cases, the
denominator of the measure of price, total state tax

collections, was unaffected.
                             —— 17 ——

    The price thus obtained was the average price of collecting

revenue from the tax. Except in the case of taxpayers who
switched tax brackets as a result of the deduction, this is the

same as the marginal price of collecting the tax. This measure
of price differs fro. the others considered in that it weights

the marginal price faced by each taxpayer by the amount of the
tax that taxpayer paid.

    The contrast between the voter models and the planner model
is based on a choice of perception of the political process as

derivative of voter preferences or as exhibiting maximizing
behavior on its own.   In the case of the state and local

legislative process, the dependent variables in the exercise are
the level and composition of state taxes. A similar contrast of
models can be made at the federal level. The voting of

Congressional delegations on the tax reform bill is modelled as

functions of both a direct voting procedure by taxpayers and by
the impact of the tax reform on the state overall.

    The direct voting measure of support for the tax reform bill
was computed using the NBER TAXSIM program to conduct a
"referendum" among voters.   Voters who saw their taxes reduced
by at least 0,2 percent of income were assumed to vote yes,
while those who saw their taxes increased by at least 0.2

percent of income were assumed to vote no. Thevoting results
were calculated by state for comparison with the vote of the

state's Congressional delegation.

   The planner •odel of Congressional behavior is based on the
effect of the tax reform bill on the total federal taxes paid by
                            —— 18 ——

the state. In this case, Congressmen may be assumed to ignore
the will of the majority in the referendum if the impact on the

state was adverse. The ratio of new to old federal taxes paid
by the state was used as the independent variable.

    Both models of Congressional behavior also provide a means
to check on the importance of federal deductibility of state and

local taxes in the delegation's set of preferences. State and

local elected officials, coupled with municipal employee
organizations, are known to be a potent and organized political
force. If the rise in the price of state and local revenue
collections is indeed a serious matter, Congressional voting on

the tax reform bill should reflect that fact. The various
measures of the cost of state and local revenue before and after
tax reform are therefore entered as independent variables in the

Congressional voting equations.
    Three sets of tests of the importance of federal

deductibility of state and local taxes emerge. First, how does
the deductibility affect the level of state and local tax

collections? Second, how does deductibility affect the mix of
taxes used to collect revenues? Finally, was the rise in the
price of state and local tax collections (no matter how

measured) of sufficient importance to affect Congressional
voting on the tax reform bill? The next section considers the
issues involved in generating the data to examine these
questions.
                              -— 19   -—

II.   Sources and Construction of the Data Base

      The data used in this study come from two primary sources:

Facts and Figures on Government Finance, prepared by the Tax

Foundation, and simulations performed using the National Bureau
of Economic Research TAXSIM model. The former source provided
data on the aggregate levels of tax collection, by source, for
each state. The latter source was used to calculate the level
of itemized deductions and the price of revenue, for each

revenue source, by state. Data for 1983 were used both for
revenue collection and for tax simulation purposes.

A. Deductibility of Non-personal Taxes

      In 1983, state and local governments collected $487 billion,

or $2080 per capita. Of this, $385 per capita, or about 18
percent. represented transfer payments from the federal

government. An additional $480 per capita represented various
charges and miscellaneous sources of revenue, while $1216 was
collected in direct taxes for each person. This latter figure
includes both personal taxes such as personal income, retail

sales and residential real estate taxes, as well as direct taxes
on businesses such as corporate profits taxes and taxes on
commercial and industrial real estate. These direct forms of
taxation comprised only about 60 percent of all state and local
revenue.

      Personal taxes made up about three fifths of these direct

taxes, so that typically, only 36 percent of state revenues come
from direct personal taxes. Map 1 shows the importance of
personal taxes in each state. Personal taxes are most i.portant
            F-
            z
            LU
            (-3
            ft
            Li]
            ft
z           LU


            CU




0                 H
                  3?

            zu
            F—U]
            LU C
       1    ad]
      (n    ft ft
z
Cl)
      S
      L
      I
      4-J
            W
            aol
            Cu
                  (Y)


                  U]
      C
            10>
      C

U)    n>
      (0
       a
              II
U)    I0

            H
            3?

            0C
            U]
                  4—
                  3?

            a Uft
            Li-' Li]


            10W
            (-"ft
            001
z0          F- Cl
            ftLU
            DC]

U-i



            F-
            3?
            LU
            U
            ft
            a
            LU
                              —— 20 ——

in   the industrial states of the northeast and midwest, plus

California. On the other hand, personal taxes are least
important in the resource extraction states. Severance taxes
are of major import in Alaska, Texas and Louisiana. and the

surface coal Mining states of Montana, Wyoming, and the Dakotas.
     The net cost to state residents of these various types of
revenue is an issue subject to a substantial amount of

interpretation. For example, aid from the federal government
was treated as exogenous to the price of raising state and local
taxes for the purposes of this study. However, a signficant
amount of federal aid is in the form of matching grants which

requires some spending by the state or locality. This matching
may alter the effect of differences in the cost of raising
revenue. However, the benefits of Latching are separable from
the benefits of subsidized tax revenue since matching is done

based on the gross expenditures of the municipality and not on

the net—of—federal—tax cost of raising the money for those

expenditures. The assumption of exogeneity of federal aid
programs is therefore appropriate.   In this conclusion we are

largely following the findings of Graplich (1977).
     The various charges levied by the states and municipalities

are also subject to interpretation regarding the appropriate
measure of their cost. Fees which are levied on the basis of
use, rather than wealth or income, are not—deductible from the

federal personal income tax. Water bills and highway tolls fit
into this category. However, the bulk of these charges are
borne, at the level of first incidence, by business. These
                              -— 21 -—

include   utilities taxes, airport use fees, highway use charges,
and severance taxes. To the extent these taxes are passed along
in product prices, the effect on business profits, and on the

net cost of raising the revenue, is nil. This argument makes a
case for assuming no federal offset in the cost of raising these
taxes.

    However, the final consumers who bear the incidence of these
taxes may be found in a diffuse national market. So, such a
conclusion would also represent a case for the municipality to

view the levying of such taxes as a "free" good since

non-residents would pay the tax. Ladd (1975) investigates this

hypothesis.
    The possibility that firms may be mobile produces a Tiebout
model of location at the firm level. A •unicipality which is
small relative to the national market might therefore view

increments to business taxes as falling on land rents. To the
extent these taxes are levied by all municipalities, there will

be no diminution of local land rents, since there is no change
in relative location values. This study therefore models these
taxes in a two-step procedure. First, a base amount equal to
the state's revenue from these other sources up to 80 percent of
the 50 state average is viewed as passed through to final

consumers and therefore non—deductible at the federal level.
The excess over this amount is viewed as deductible at the
federal corporate rate.

    Taxes paid by corporations to states and localities are

deductible against the federal corporation income tax. This
                                -— 22 -—
reduces the net cost of the state tax payment if the corporation
has positive profits.   If the corporation does not have positive
profits, the effect of the state taxes paid is to increase the

loss carryforward of the corporation. When the corporation
returns to profitability these losses will then be used to
offset profits and tax liability.     It is not clear from the

available data how much state and local taxes are paid by

taxable corporations and how much by corporations not subject to

tax. This study assumes that state corporate income taxes are
fully deductible, since profitability at the state level implies
profitability at the federal level. The Statistics of Income
shows that roughly 80 percent of total sales were made by
taxable corporations in 1983.     This study therefore assumes that
80 percent of business taxes are deductible.

    The available data does not specify the source of property

tax revenue. However, the Census of Governments provides data
on the gross assessed value of locally assesed taxable real
property in each state. This study apportioned total property
tax collections in proportion to assessed values. Residential
real estate was assumed to be taxed to individuals while
commercial and industrial real estate plus vacant land was
assumed to be taxed to corporations. This neglects the fact
that some residential real estate is owned by corporations and

that some commercial and industrial real estate is owned by

proprietorships and partnerships.
                            —— 23 ——

B. Personal Taxes

    The three major sources of personal tax revenue are personal

income taxes, sales taxes, and property taxes. As mentioned
above, residential property was assumed to be owned by

individuals and real estate taxes on such property deducted at
the individual level. Individual income and sales taxes

required no such apportionment.
    Map 2 shows which of these taxes is the primary source of
personal tax revenue in each of the states. As the map clearly
shows, the largest source of personal taxes is the retail sales

tax, being the dominant tax in 25 states. Property taxes
dominate in 10 states while personal income taxes are the

dominant form of personal taxation in 15 states. The regional
variation is quite marked. Sales taxes are the most popular in
the south and west. Income taxes dominate in the east, except
New England, where residential property taxes generate the most
revenue.

    The deductibility of these personal taxes depends on the
itemizer status of the taxpayer, and the value of the deduction

depends on the taxpayer's marginal tax rate. In order to
compute these values, the National Bureau of Economic Research
TAXSIM model was used. This computerized model, like similar
models at the Department of Treasury and the Joint Committee on
Taxation relies on a large data base of actual tax returns. For
this study, the 1983 Individual Tax Model File Public Use Sample
was used. This data base contains a stratified random sample of
roughly 120.000 individual tax returns for 1983, Due to cost
            uJ



Cf          In
            LU
            -j




z0          U

            U•)
Cf D        LU

            -J
            C
            LU
            a

            Lii
ra
0
C)


C           U-)
            Lii
cc          'C
            C

            Di
Cf D

       If
C


            LU
            Li
            II
            0
            Li)

            'C
            C
            F—
                              —- 24   --

considerations,   a one in four random sample of the data was

used.

    The TAXSIM routine calculates the itemizer status, tax

liability, and marginal tax rate of each taxpayer by simulating
the effect of the tax law on the data contained on the
taxpayer's tax return. Values for 1983 were computed based on
the tax law and tax rates prevailing in that year.

    In order to simulate the effect of the new tax law, the Tax

Reform Act of 1986, the 1988 version of that law was selected.

The dollar values contained in that version were deflated to

1983 levels using the estimated change in the consumer price
index between those years. Thus, the tax brackets, standard
deduction, and personal exemptions all reflected the real value
of their actual 1988 levels evaluated in 1983. The effect of
the new law was then simulated in the same manner as the old

law, with a new itemizer status, tax liability, and marginal tax

rate for each taxpayer.

    The Individual Tax Model File contains state identifiers for

all taxpayers with incomes under $200,000. State identifiers
are withheld from these top bracket taxpayers in order to

protect confidentiality. These taxpayers comprised only 0.2
percent of the total number of tax returns filed in 1983. Thus,
for measures which weighted all taxpayers equally, such as those
used by Feldstein and Metcalf, neglect of these top bracket

taxpayers was of little consequence. However, these taxpayers
pay state and local taxes, particularly income taxes, out of

proportion to their numbers. Thus, a weighted average measure
                             —— 25 ——

of the price of raising state and local revenue must Include    the
effect of deductibility on these taxpayers,

    To accomplish this, the distribution among the states of

income for taxpayers earning over $200,000 was computed from the
1981 Statistics of Income. (This was the last SOl to include a

state-by—state breakdown by income class.) The national
aggregate values for the income and tax data from the 1983
Individual Tax Model File were apportioned among the states

using this data. This high income data was then added to the
data for taxpayers with incomes under $200,000 to obtain a

state—by—state total level of taxes, deductions, and income.
C. Other Measures

    The TAXSIM program automatically converts the number of
taxpayer files it studies into a representative number of actual

taxpayers by using a sample weight from the taxpayer file. The
analysis done in this paper was not done by tax return, however,
but by voter. Given the objective of measuring the importance
of public sentiment, this is a key transformation. TAXSIM
assigned a number of voters to each tax return based on the
income and marital status of the household filing the return
based on data drawn from exit polls following the 1984 election.

    The probability of voting varies most significantly with
income class. The data showed that 29 percent of eligible

persons with incomes under $5,000 vote, as do 40 percent with
incomes between $5,000 and $10,000) 45 percent with incomes
between $10,000 and $20,000, 66 percent with incomes between

$20,000 and $30,000, 74 percent with incomes between $30,000 and
                             —— 26 --

$40,000 and 85 percent with incomes over $40,000. The Adjusted
Gross Income of elderly taxpayers was augmented by $6,000 for
single returns and $10,000 for joint returns with two elderly

exemptions in order to calculate the likelihood of taxpayers on
those returns voting. Tax returns filed using single taxpayer,
head of household, and married filing separately filing status

were assumed to represent a single potential voter.   Tax returns

filed by married taxpayers filing jointly were assumed to have

two potential voters. The probability of voting given the
income class of the taxpayer was multiplied by the number of

potential voters in the household to assign an actual number of
voters to each tax return.

    The calculations done on deductibility and price used these
new sample weights to determine state wide levels. A tax return
was calculated as itemizing if the total deductions claimed on

the return exceeded the standard deduction for the tax law being
simulated. Households which itemize face lower prices than
those which do not. These taxpayers are therefore more likely
to favor state and local public spending than are other
households.

   Map 3 shows the proportion of voters itemizing in each

state. The earlier study by Feldstein and Metcalf found that
non—itemizers comprised a majority of the tax returns in each
state. As married couples are more likely to itemize than non—
married individuals and as higher income taxpayers are both more
likely to itemize and to vote, their finding is reversed with
the use of this measure. Non itemizers comprise a majority of
                 zw
                Li
                a
                Ui
                0-
                V
                01




0
                      H
                      z
                F-Ui
                ZL)
                uia
z
     In
     z
     L          Ui
                0-31
     a          01
                Va
                I Ui
0    C

     >
     -0

     a
     10
     a
                H
                z
H
IL              Lii
                CH
                az
                Li Ui
CC                a
          411   'Ui
                Vu-
                o a!
                H)
H               0-v
0               =1-0




                H
                zU
                 U
                 LI
                 U
                a
                              —— 27 ——

voters   in 22 states while itemizers dominate in 28. Higher
income states clearly tend to have more itemizers than do lower

income states.
    Separate calculations were done to find the average price
facing itemizers and the cost of all state and local tax
deductions. For these variables, the values for all state and

local taxes were set to zero and taxes recomputed. The price of
state and local taxation facing each itemizer was the difference

between his taxes with and without his tax deduction divided by

the amount of state and local taxes claimed. The total change
in taxes for all itemizers was divided by total personal taxes

collected to obtain a weighted average price of collecting

personal taxes.
    The average price of revenue facing voters, the APFV measure

of price was computed by averaging the prices faced by

itemizers, multiplying this figure by the proportion of the
state's voters who itemized and adding the proportion of the
state's voters who did not itemize. Map 4 shows this average
price measure in the various states. Again, poorer states have
higher prices of revenue than do richer states. The lowest
prices are found in the industrial parts of the northeast and
midwest while the highest prices are found in the south.
    The average price of revenue differs from the average price

facing voters in that it weights each taxpayer's price by the
amount of taxes that taxpayer paid. The average price of
revenue is generally lower than the average price facing voters

because higher income taxpayers, with lower prices, are likely
Cf D

                     H
                     zU
                     C-)



0                    cc
                     cc
                     DI
                     Lu
                     >
(2
z
C-)


                     w
                     H
                     z
z
                     Lu
       34            C-)

                     cc
       -J
       0-J           91
                     LD
       0
       cc
       U
       C
       z             Eli


0                    U)

                     z
                     F—


                     uJ
C-)                  U
                     LL)
                     cc

             cl'k
             &LJ—P
                     0
                     F-
                     EL




(2

                     Lu
                     U
                     cc
                     a
            UI
            H
            zU
             U
            (C
            91




H
zH
                  UI
              H
H           wz
            H UI
            ZU
            Lii
            U (U
H           'I
C     ci    I




            I
                  UJ
      -J    (U>
H     0
      -J
      0
C-)
:1    U
      0
      z
            c-n

H           H
            zU c-n
            UH
            Cli UI
                  z
            WU

H          LH
            o
            aID
                  Cli




            C
            Lii
            I
            H
            LU

            w
                                    —— 28 ——

to pay an above average portion of the state's taxes. The
average price of revenue, known as the weighted average price
(WAP), is shown in Map 5.          The same basic regional pattern
emerges for this measure of price as for the earlier measures of
price.

XXI. Econometric Results

    The objective of this research was to test the mechanism by
which state and local tax deductibility affects decision making
by elected representatives.           Three sets of tests are

considered. First, how much, and by what mechanism, are state
and local decision makers influenced by deductibility in setting
the level of taxes. Second. how much, and by what mechanism,
are state and local decision makers influenced by deductibility

in setting the type of taxes levied? Third, did state

Congressional delegations take account of the effect of the Tax
Reform Act of 1986 on the cost of raising state and local

revenue? Each question is considered in turn.

    To test the relationship between deductibility and the level
of taxes, a reduced form equation was specified with the per
capita level of taxes as the dependent variable. Independent

variables included personal income per capita, price, and other
forms of revenue. Since no single specification is structurally

related to the decision making process, a variety of definitions
of the variables were tried. The general form of the

specification is given by equation 2:


(2) T. =        +           + b2 1' + b3 Ri + b4 Di + e1
           b0       b1 ''
                             -- 29   —-

In this case T represents the per capita level of taxes
collected in the state, Y, the per capita level of personal

income, P, the price of revenue, R, the level of per capita
revenue from exogenous sources, and D is a vector of demographic
characteristics of the state designed to capture tastes for

public expenditure.
    Absent the demographic variables, the expected results would
include positive values for the income coefficient, b1.    In

linear form, the income coefficient tells the fraction of each
additional dollar of personal income which would be taken in

taxes. The demographic variables used to control for tastes are
often correliated with income. Absent these taste
considerations, which also to some extent reflect the costs of

public service provision, there is no particular reason to
expect higher state and local taxes in higher income states.

    The coefficient on the price term, b2, describes how
federal deductibility influences the level of taxes collected.

Greater deductibility lowers the price of raising revenue. If

   is negative, as expected, this will imply greater state and
local revenue collections as a result of deductibility. Three
measures of price are tried. - The first is the proportion of

taxpayers who are not itemizers. This is the "Naive Write—off"
model of deductibility since it implies that itemizers only
consider the fact that state and local taxes are deductible, not

the amount of tax saving such deductibility entails. The second
price measure is the "Average Price Facing Voters", This
measure assigns a price of unity to non—itemizers and unity
                             -— 30   --

minus the taxpayer's marginal tax rate to itemizers. All voters

are counted equally in computing the average price. The final
measure is the "Weighted Average Price" of taxes which weights
the prices facing each voter by the amount of personal taxes
each pays. This measure is designed to test the Planner model
of representative behavior. No individual voter should care

about the amount of taxes paid by other voters, and hence the

weighted average price. But, decision makers who evaluate the
net cost of revenue to the state as whole, and not to individual

voters, should use the weighted average measure. In some
specifications, a weighted average price of revenue, including
business taxes, was also tried. As discussed in the previous

section, two instrumental variables were used for each of these
measures of price: one representing the first dollar price and
the second representing the tax price if the average level of
state and local taxes is assigned.

    The existence of other revenue sources should influence the
level of taxation in the state. For example, states which levy

severance taxes on natural resource extraction, or which run

very successful state lotteries, might be expected to use this
revenue to reduce taxes on the residents. Grants in aid from

the federal government should substitute for locally raised
revenue. As a result, the expected sign on the other revenue

coefficient, b3 is negative. A number of definitions of other
revenue are tried to see if sore forms of revenue affect state

and local tax collections differently from other sources of
revenue.
                             —— SI -—

    In order to control for the role of tastes in determining
the level of state and local taxation, a series of demographic
variables were used.   In the tables which follow, PUPIL

represents the ratio of students in school to the state's total

population. ROAD indicates road mileage per capita. NONWHITE is
the proportion of the state's population which was non—white in

the 1980 census. URBAN is the proportion of the state's
population living in urban areas in 1980. POVERTY is the percent

of the state's population below the poverty line. ELDERLY is
the percent of the state's population over age 65. Finally,
HOMEOWN represents the percent of the state's population living
in a home they own.

    Two independent variables are tried, personal taxes per

capita and personal plus business taxes per capita. A
comparison of the regressions done on just personal taxes with
those done on personal plus business taxes shows the amount of
substitutability between these taxes.

    The results of these regressions are presented in Tables I
and 2.   Table 1 shows the regression results when personal taxes
per capita is the dependent variable while Table 2 presents the
results when the dependent variable is personal and business

taxes per capita. The first set of regressions ignored the
effect of other sources of revenue on tax collections, while the

second set of regressions included federal aid and interest

receipts per capita, and the third set of regressions included

federal aid, interest, and other non—tax revenue per capita as a
dependent variable.
                                      Table I

            REGRESSION RESULTS FOR PERSONAL TAXES PER CAPITA
                    USING VARIOUS MEASURES OF PRICE


                                               Measure of Price
Variable               NW01    NWO2       APFV1       APFV2     WAPI              WAP2

Intercept           2089*       2702*         3054        6069*       1982     2444*
IncomeP.C.         —0.02       -0.02      —0.02 O.O5 —0.02                    —0.02
Price              — 126       —1180k —1073           _4079*      —     12    — 484
Pupils                   11        14           13           8           8          10
Mileage            —0.31       -0.36      —0.29       —0.24       —0.32       -0.29
Nonwhite            2.34        2.33       2.23        1.31        2.25        2.07
Urban               1.58       —1.57       0.99        0.05        2.25        2.00
Poverty            —     34*   —   28*    —     35*   —     31*   —     34*   —     32*
Elderly                  20        32           32          27          17          16
Homeown            —     18*   —   21*    —     19*   —     21*   —     17*   —     18*
R-Square           0.542       0.634      0.549       0.623       0.540       0.549


Intercept           1984        2579*      2930        6118*       1687        2324
IncoLeP.C.         —0.01       —0.01      —0.01       —0.03       -0.01       —0,02
Fed&lnt P.C.       —0.05       —0.06      -0.05       —0.08       —0.06       -0.03
Price              — 120       _1202* —1046           _4302*      — 179       — 417
Pupils                15           21           18          16       13             13
Mileage            —0.36       -0.42      —0.34       —0.31       —0.37       —0,32
Nonwhite            2.08        1.98       1.99        0.82        2.01        1.95
Urban               1.20       —2.20       0.62       —0.77        1.85        1.79
Poverty            —     32*   —   26*    —     33*   -     27*   -     31*   —     31*
Elderly                  17        28           21          23          13          14
Homeown            —     18*   —   22*    —     20*   —     23*   —     j7*   —     18*
R-Square           0.546       0.641      0.552       0.635       0.545       0.550


Intercept           1851        2441*      2785        6034*       1410        2104
IncoNeP.C.         -0.00        0.00      —0.01       —0.02       —0.00       —0.01
Fed,Int,&Oth       —0.02       —0.02      —0.02       —0.03       —0.02       —0.02
Price              — 123       _1210* —1034           _4376*        296       —    320
Pupils                   18        23        20             18       16          16
Mileage            —0.36       —0.42      —0.34       -0.31       -0.38       -0.34
Nonwhite            1.97        1.89       1.87        0.72        1.92        1.84
Urban               0.85       —2.56       0.30       -1.16        1.53        1.48
Poverty            —     30*   -   24*    -     31*   —     25*   —     30*   -     30*
Elderly                  15        26           19          21          11          12
Houiteown          —     18*   —   22*    —     20*   —     22*   —     17*   —     18*
R—Square           0.553       0.650      0.560       0.623       0.554       0.555

*   indicates   significance at 95% confidence interval
                              -— 32 ——
    Six different price measures were used, representing two
different instruments for each of three different prices. The
Naive Write Off Model is indicated by NWO, the Average Price

Facing Voters by APFV, and the Weighted Average Price by WAP.
For each price, the first Measure uses the first dollar method

of instrumenting the variable while the second measure uses the

imputed national average technique. Both techniques are
described in the previous section.

    The results strongly suggest that the first dollar measure
of price is inferior to the imputed national average measure,
particularly in the two Voter Based Models --   NWO   and APFV. in
all of the regressions using these measures of price the

R—square was substantially lower using the first dollar price

than when the imputed national average technique was used. in
addition, the price variable was consistently statistically

significant using the second instrument but never significant
using the first instrument.

    A likely reason for this is that the first dollar technique
ignores the effect of the state and local tax deduction on the

probability of itemizing. Actual decisions regarding the level
of state and local spending are likely to be marginal, with

little likelihood of affecting a voter's price or itemizing
status. The first dollar instrument calculates price on the

extreme assumption that the taxpayer has no state and local tax
deduction. While roughly half the voters actually itemize their
deductions, the first dollar method estimates that less than one
third do. The relationship between the proportion itemizing
                            —— 33 ——

under the first dollar method and the proportion actually
itemizing may be monotonic, but it is likely to be quite complex

and certainly not linear. The first dollar measure therefore is
a poor instrument.

    The data also show that the Voter Based Models ——   NWO   and

APFV, are much better at estimating the level of personal taxes

than is the Planner model using the WAP measure of price. The
R—Square measure of explanatory power shows that the WAP measure
is no better than the first—dollar price measure in the voter

based models. Furthermore, no statistically significant
relationship between price and the level of taxation is found
using the WAP measure of price.

    This evidence strongly supports the conclusion that
deductibility of state and local taxes affects the level of
state and local spending in a rather egalitarian manner. It
seems that the number of voters affected by deductibility is the

primary determinant of support for higher state and local

spending. Legislatures seem to take very little account of the
actual aggregate cost to the state of raising additional

revenue, except as it affects the cost faced by typical voters.
    Under the NWO model, a switch from having all voters itemize
to that in which no voters may itemize would lower personal

taxes per capita by about $1200. Stated in a more realistic
context, a decrease in the fraction of voters itemizing of one

percentage point would lower personal taxes per capita by $12.
This is a very dramatic result. Personal taxes per capita
averaged less than $1000 in 1983, with roughly half of all
                              —— 34 ——

voters   itemizing. An extension of this parameter to the extreme
worlds of universal deductibility and no deductibility suggest

that tax collections would vary from $400 with no deductibility
to $1600 with universal deductibility.

    Three important caveats should be placed on this

interpretation. First, it is always dangerous to extrapolate
parameters estimated from relatively small cross sectional
differences to extreme situations. Second, such extrapolation

is particularly inappropriate if majoritarian decision processes
are involved. Given the current state of between 40 percent and
60 percent of voters itemizing, each one percentage point change
in the number of itemizers is likely to have a major impact on
the outcome of an election. Such an impact would necessarily be
diminished in situations where less than 30 or more than 70

percent of the voters itemized. Third, it is important to keep
in mind that a reduction in personal taxes does not necessarily

mean an equal reduction in spending. Revenue sources such as
user charges would become both more economically rational and

more politically popular when federal deductibility of other
revenue sources is eliminated.

    The results from the APFV model reinforce the findings from
the NW0 regressions.   In these regressions, a rise in the APFV
measure of price by one percentage point reduces personal taxes
by about $4200. More realistically, this measure says that a
one percentage point rise in the average price of taxation for

the typical voter reduces personal taxes by $42. It is
important to consider the determinants of the APFV measure.
                              -- 35   ——

First,   if the proportion of itemizers falls by one percentage
point) the APFV measure of price rises only by the itemizers'

marginal tax rate. Thus, a change in the proportion of
itemizers moves this measure of price by only about 28 percent
as much as it moves the NW0 measure of price. Given this
interpretation, the $4200 parameter in the APFV model has almost

exactly the same meaning as the $1200 parameter in the NWO
model

    Second, the APFv measure of price rises as itemizers'

marginal tax rates falls, but a one percentage point fall in tax

rates moves the price only by the percent of voters itemizing,

or about 0.5 percentage points. Thus, a one percentage point
fall in the average marginal tax rate faced by itemizers would
lower the level of personal taxes by about $21. As a rule of
thumb, it would take a 5 percentage point rise in tax rates,

equivalent to nearly a 20 percent income tax surchange to raise

state and local personal taxes per capita by $l00    The same

change could be accomplished by an 8 percentage point change in
the share of voters who itemize.

    Table 2 presents the same set of regressions as table 1
except that personal and business taxes together form the

dependent variable. Once again, the Voter Based Models
determine the level of taxes better than the Planner Model. The
R-square terms are higher on the NWO and APFV regressions than
on the WAP regressions. Also, the first dollar measure of price
again is inferior to the imputed national average instrument.
                                      Table 2
   REGRESSION RESULTS FOR PERSONAL AND BUSINESS TAXES PER CAPITA
                  USING VA RIOUS MEASURES OF PRICE


                                             Measure of Price
 Variable              NWOI    NWO2        APFV1    APFV2     WAP1            WAP2

 Intercept             1336        2076     1982         6203*        582      1339
 IncoineP.C.           0.05        0.05*    0.05         0.02        0.05      0.05
Price               — 22                   — 669                      709    —
                                                                                 20
Pupils                 45         51            48         44          42       45
Mileage              0.06       0.02        0.08      0.16        0.05        0.07
Nonwhite             0.58       0.65        0.56     —0.56        0.81        0.56
Urban               -1.93      —5.88       —2.59     -4.43       —1.38       —1.83
Poverty             — 33*      —
                                     27*   — 33*     — 29*       —
                                                                       33*   — 33*
Elderly                  21          36         25         33          20.      20
Homeown             — 23*      —
                                      8*   — 24*     — 28*       —
                                                                       21*   — 23'
R—Square           0.609       0.671       0.611     0.678       0.617       0.609


 Intercept             1736     2388*       2468      6115*       1463        2248
 IncomeP.C.            0.01     0.03        0.01     -0.01        0.01        0.00
 Fed&Int P.C.          0.18     0.16        0.18      0.14        0.17        0.21*
 Price             — 45        —1202'      — 773     —4492w        209       — 527
 Pupils               28          35            31      30          28          27
 Mileage            0.24        0.17        0.25      0.28        0.22        0.29
 Nonwhite           1.55        1.51        1.51      0.29        1.53        1.46
-Urban             —0.50       -4.28       -1.14     —2.97       —0.22       —0.29
 Poverty            - 40*      — 34*       — 4j* — 35*           — 40*       — 40*
 Elderly                 31          44         36         40          30       31
 Homeown            — 22*      —
                                     26*   — 23*     — 26*       —
                                                                       21'   — 22*
 R-Square          0.642       0.698       0.644     0.699       0.642       0.647


 Intercept             1796        2461*    2516      6240*          1443     2303
 IncorneP.C.           0.01        0.02     0.01     —0.01           0.01     0.00
Fed,Int,&Oth           0.04        0.04     0.04      0.03           0.04     0.05
Price              — 28                    — 745     —4569'           283    — 487
Pupils                   31       38          34        33             31       30
Mileage             0.16        0.11        0.18      0.23        0.15        0.20
Nonwhite            1.29        1.29        1.27      0.07        1.31        1.21
Urban              —0.52       —4.42       —1.22     —3.13       —0.32       -0.36
Poverty            — 40'       - 34        — 40*     -     35*   — 39*       — 39*
Elderly                  30         44          34         39          29       30
Homeown            —
                         23*   — 27*       — 24*     — 28*       —
                                                                       22*   — 23*
R—Square           0.634       0.691       0.636     0.693       0.635       0.638

* indicates     significance at 95% confidence interval
                            -— 36    —-

    The results in Table 2 also mirror those in Table 1

regarding the relative sizes of the NWO and APFV parameter

values. This Is somewhat surprising as it implies that
increases in the price of personal taxes will not significantly
alter the level of business taxes.    In other words, the expected
drop in personal taxes when the price of such taxes rises, will

not be offset by increases in business taxes. Since only direct
business taxes are measured here, it does not mean that indirect
taxes such as user charges will not be substituted for lower
personal tax revenue.

    A comparison of Tables I and 2 also produces an interesting
conclusion about the use of business taxes as a revenue source.

Although the parameter value is rarely significant, all 18

regressions of personal taxes per capita have a negative sign
for the per capita income parameter. This suggests that, other
things equal, personal taxes are lower in higher income states
than in lower income states. By contrast, the per capita income
parameter has a positive sign in 16 of the 18 regressions in
which business and personal taxes form the dependent variable.

Taken together, it seems that upper income states clearly rely
more on business taxes than do lower income states.

    This calls for a reinterpretation of the Tiebout model with

regard to firms. One possibility is that firms are unable to
move easily, and can therefore be heavily taxed. A second
possibility is that low income states deliberately maintain low
business taxes in order to attract new firms while high income

states need not be as aggressive in attracting new sources of

employment.
                            —- 37 ——

    The existence of non-personal, non—business sources of

revenue does little to change the basic relationships among tax
revenue, income, and price. However, the addition of these
variables to the regressions produces the surprising result of

very little substitution of these other forms of revenue for

personal and business taxes. For example, the regressions show
that each dollar of federal aid and interest received lowers

personal taxes by between 3 cents and 8 cents, while the sum of

personal and business taxes actually rises by between 14 and 21
cents with each dollar of federal aid and interest received!
The addition of other own—source revenue implies that personal
plus business taxes rise only about 4 or 5 cents per dollar

received while personal taxes fall by between 2 and 3 cents per
dollar received.

    This data suggests that at the margin, other own—source

revenue largely substitutes for business taxes. As these other
forms of tax are roughly as large as federal aid and interest,
the coefficients mean that other revenue reduces direct business

taxes by about 10 cents on the dollar. Still, all of these
results are strikingly low. The frequent claim that a new
excise is being introduced to "hold the line" on other taxes is

given a new interpretation; the new excise will mean that
personal taxes will be just as high as they otherwise would have
been.

Tax Price and the Type of Personal Tax Levied

    The preceding section showed that higher costs for raising
personal taxes lower the level of personal taxes raised, other
                               —- 38   --

things    equal.   This section examines the effect of tax

deductibility on the choice of which type of personal tax is

used. While most states raise personal taxes from each of the

three major sources of taxation: income, retail sales, and real
estate, the mix of taxes used varies substantially among the
states.

    Per capita levels of sales, income, and residential property

tax revenues were regressed against the same variables as were

personal and personal plus business taxes in Tables 1 and 2.

Weighted average price measures were dropped due to the
endogeneity of the weights with the type of taxed used.      In each

case, the sum of federal aid plus interest received was used to

control for other revenue sources. The results are summarized
in Table 3.

    The data show radically different explanations for the three

types of taxes analyzed: sales, income, and residential real
estate. The models are not very good at predicting the level of
sales or income taxes, but the R-Square value is quite good in
the case of residential real estate taxes.     In the case of sales

taxes, the R-Square values show that only about one quarter of
the variation in the data is explained by the model. None of

the estimated parameters is statistically signficant. This
suggests that the sales tax may be a "default" tax, collected
unless there is some attractive alternative.

    Income tax collections are negatively correllated with the

price of taxation in a statistically signficant manner. An
increase of one percentage point in the fraction of taxpayers
                                 Table 3

         REGRESSION RESULTS FOR TYPE OF PERSONAL TAX LEVIED
                  USING VARIOUS MEASURES OF PRICE


Dependent Variable: Sales Taxes Per Capita

                                             Measure of Price
Variable             NWO1         NWO2                APFV1      APFV2

Intercept            —     94          27             -1063      -   184
IncomeP.C.           -0.01        —0.01               -0.01      —0.01
Fed&Int P.C.         —0.07        —0.06               —0.07      -0.06
Price                  114        —  44                1051        179
Pupils                     17          19                  15       19
Mileage              -0.04        -0.04               -0.06      —0.04
Nonwhite              2.54         2.64                2.60       2.67
Urban                 2,97         2.27                3.56       2.49
Poverty              —0.13        —0.48                     1    —     1
Elderly              —1.07         2.72               —     5          2
Homeown              —2.53        —3.60               —     I    —     3

R-Square             0.264        0.261               0.282      0.262

Dependent Variable: Income Taxes Per Capita

Intercept                1551      1752                3817*      3934*
IncomeP.C.               0.01     —0.00               —0.01      —0.02
Fed&Int P.C.         —0.13        -0.12               _0.13*     0.13
Price                —    449     —   805*            _2604*     _2714*
Pupils               —    6       -    11             -     3    —   14
Mileage                0.05         0.01                0.10       0.09
Nonwhite               0.66         0.49                0.36     -0.27
Urban                -4.29        —4.42               _4.90*         339
Poverty              —   10       -    6              -   12     -     7
Elderly                     1            0                  6    —     4
Homeown              —     10     —      9            -    12    -     9
R—Square             0.310        0.354               0.365      0.342

Dependent Variable: Residential Real Estate Taxes Per Capita

Intercept            — 344        -    18             -   984     1137
IncomeP.C,            0.03*        0.04*                  ØQ4*    0.03
Fed&IntP.C.          —0.03        -0.02               -0.03      —0.02
Price                     267     — 161                 847      —1254
Pupils                     19        24                  20         23
Mileage              —0.46        —0,46               -0.48      —0.43
Nonwhite             —2.61        —2.35               -2.42      -2.65
Urban                 0.73        —1.10                0.31      —1.26
Poverty              —      6     —     7             -     6    -     7

Elderly                     2          11                   4         13
Homeown              —      4     —     7             —     4    —     7*
k—Square            0.659         0.642               0.653      0.661

*   indicates   significance at 95% confidence interval
                            —— 39

Itemizing produces an $8 increase in the amount of income taxes

collected per capita. By contrast, a cut In the APFV •easure of
price produces about $27 more In income taxes.

    As in the case of the NWO and APFV parameters in the total

tax regressions, these $8 and $27 figures are essentially
equivalent. A one percentage point increase in the proportion
of voters itemizing would raise the NWU measure by one point,

but the APFV measure by only the itemizers' marginal tax rate.

As this rate is approximately 28 percent, the net change in
income taxes is about $8 by either measure. By contrast, a one
percentage point increase in the itemizers' marginal tax rate
would lower the APFV measure by the fraction of voters
itemizing, or roughly one half of one percent. In turn, this
would imply an Increase in income tax revenue of about $13 per

capita.

    Income taxes are the most efficient revenue source to pass
on to the federal government since the amount collected from

each taxpayer rises with the taxpayer's federal tax rate.
Progressive tax systems may be imposed at the state level with

actual burdens which may be quite close to proportional.
    In spite of the advantages of progressivity within a state,
there is no evidence that the income tax is distributed in a

progressive fashion among the states.   In fact, the high
positive intercept term (slgnficant in the APFV model) and

negative, if insignificant, per capita income coefficient ensure
that income tax collections take a smaller share of personal
income in high income states than In low income states. In
                              —— 40 —-

general,   the level of income within a state is a poor explanator
of the level of the states income tax collections.

    By contrast, residential real estate taxes are quite closely
tied to the level of income in the state. The low and

insignificant intercept terms in these regressions coupled with

the statistically significant income coefficients suggests that
residential real estate collections are roughly proportional to
income across the states. The price effect is not signficant
and is of indeterminant. sign.



Voting Behavior of State Congressional Delegations
    The Tax Reform Act of 1986 greatly reduced the federal

subsidy of state and local tax collections, and eroded the

political base for state and local spending. This reduction in
federal tax subsidies occurred in three ways. First, the

deductibility of state and local sales taxes was eliminated. As
the map in the earlier section indicated, sales taxes are the
largest source of personal tax revenue in 25 states. Second,
the tax reform act substantially reduced the proportion of
voters who will itemize their tax returns. This is due to the
elimination of some deductions and to the increase in the
standard deduction, the threshold level of deductions needed to

become an itemizer. Third, the tax reform act reduced tax

rates, thereby cutting the effective federal subsidy for those
taxpayers who itemize.

    The effect of this on the cost of state and local tax

deductions is illustrated by a series of maps. Map 6 shows the
           U)
           U
           U
           Lu

           LU



C
            H
            Iii
           ii
           [Ii;




           — Ui
                      z
C:          Wa
      -1    Li
CID   ID    aa
            Lu
      L
      4)
            r)
      >
0     -n
      4C
      n
      In
      Q
           Li
      CD




                zUi
C')             C-)--
                C-liz
                Ui -r
                ft

C-;             Ca
                ft2
0
            ii
                H
                zU)
                a
                C—)


                Lu
                a
             IT
             C


A           C
            C
C/I         L
            'V


C/I



                  U]
               C
            C: C
      UT
      WE
            C-i
            C—i
      >z
      C        0
            -C C
cI    -J
      C
            o ui
                  LL)
      C-)   C
      C     'VU:
      -J
      C
      z
      C
a     W
            El
z     r
      C
      In
      z0
z
CS
            C
            C
                  Cr)
              C
            C C
                  -J

I:
F-
            C
                  -J
                  C


            Co
            Lfl

            LI
            IL
            C

            C
            C
                             -— 41   —-

change in the fraction of voters itemizing in each state. The
sap indicates that this change is substantial everywhere, with

one voter in six switching from itemizer status to becoming a

non—Itemizer. The preceding results showed that the proportion
of voters itemizing was a statistically significant indicator of
the level of state and local taxes collected.

    Map 7 evaluates the proportionate reduction in the federal
subsidy of state and local tax collections. The map shows that
roughly half of the subsidy which existed under old law is

eliminated. Generally states in the north with progressive
income tax systems fare the best, while states which rely on
sales taxes for their revenue fare the worst. The results in
Map 7 may be viewed as overly dramatic.   In terms of the
weighted average price of revenue, a decline in the federal
subsidy of 50 percent typically means a rise in the price from
85 cents to 92.5 cents. Thus, even the dra.atic reductions in

the federal subsidy should be interpretted as price increases on
the order of 10 percent.

    Map 8 shows the effect of the tax changes on the per capita

level of federal subsidy of personal taxes. Here the effect of
the tax reform is shown as much more modest. The roughly $11
billion reduction in the federal subsidy is spread among sore

230 million people, producing an average per capita change of
about $50. This amounts to about 3 percent of state and local
personal tax revenue.

    Map 9 shows the per capita decrease in federal income taxes

in the various states. As the map shows, some states will show
n
F:
Cl)
m
Cl)   If)
      Lii         IC
      ><

      F-
            ft
      -J     IL1J
            ID>
      U
I:j   0-J
n     0
      z
      C
      Lii
      F-
      C
      F-    ID
      U)    ft
      z0
            F-:)


            ri
U
            F-
            w
            F-)
            a
            IL
Ct
H
H    0
     Lii

     a
     LU
     >

H
n
H
H    0
     LI)

     C
     a
Ct
H    LII



     LU
     In
     Ui
     a
     C)
     7
H
     Ei
C)

H
                             —— 42 ——

net tax increases. This is because the bill is revenue neutral
overall. Persona1 taxes are cut while corporate taxes are
increased.   In this study, the difference between personal taxes
under the old law and personal taxes under the new law was taken

as the amount of corporate tax increase. This increase was
apportioned among taxpayers according to the amount of dividends

they received. The corporate tax increase was therefore
allocated among the states in proportion to the dividends

received by taxpayers in each state. Fully 23 states will see a
rise in their federal taxes under this bill.

    Clearly the effect of the Tax Reform Act varied
substantially among the states. Several indicators of this
differential effect were considered. The primary motivation for
Congressmen was assumed to be the impact on their states

overall, The impact of the tax reform bill on the cost of
raising revenue for state and local spending was viewed as a

secondary, "special interest" concern. A two stage modelling
procedure was therefore undertaken, to first obtain the primary
motivations for Congressional voting, and then to add the effect
of state and local tax deductibility.

    First, we constructed a voter model of the tax reform bill.

The NBER TAXSIM model was used to compute each taxpayer's taxes
under the old law and under the new law.   If a taxpayer's taxes

declined by at least 0.2 percent of income, the votes assigned

to that taxpayer were counted as voting "Yes" on the tax reform
bill.   If the taxpayer's taxes increased by at least 0.2 percent
of income, the votes assigned to that taxpayer were counted as
                              —— 43   —
voting   "No" on the tax reform bill. Other voters were assumed
to abstain. The votes were tabulated on a state—by—state basis
for comparison with the votes of the Congressional delegation.

    The second model of the impact of the tax bill was the ratio
of new tax revenue to old tax revenue. For this purpose two

measures were devised: the change in personal taxes only, and
the change in personal taxes when the added corporate tax was
imputed to individuals.

    Congressional delegations were divided along party lines.
The dependent variable was the fraction of the congressional

delegation voting against the tax reform bill. This fraction
was regressed on various combinations of the variables described
above. As the tax reform bill was largely a committee

compromise bill, the members of the tax writing committees were

not counted in measuring the fraction of the delegation voting
on the bill.

    The voting of Republican Congressional delegations was not
explained in a statistically significant manner by any of the
variables, either separately, or in combination.    In view of the
distributional effects of the tax bill, constituent pressure

would be likely to incline Republican voters to oppose the tax
bill.    In addition, Republicans were generally excluded from the
tax writing process under the •ajoritarian rules of the House of
Representatives. On the other hand, Republicans were under
pressure from the President to support the bill. Republican
voting was therefore determined more by conflicting political

pressure than by the economic variables considered here.
                            —— 44 ——

   The voting of Democratic Congressional delegation8 was

explained by the economic impact variables, although the results
were not clear cut. Democrats' opposition to the tax bill was
positively correlated with the rise in taxes in their state.
Generally, a one percent rise in the ratio of new taxes to old

taxes increased opposition in the Congressional delegation by
about 3 percent. Democrats were more sensitive to the change in
personal taxes alone, than the change in taxes which included

the "pass through" of the corporate tax increase. A one percent

increase in personal taxes reduced support by 3.2 percent, but a
one percent increase in total taxes reduced support by only 2.8

percent. At the margin, the corporate tax increase pass through
had very little effect on Democrats' voting behavior. This may
reflect either a belief in the "corporate veil" or by an

economic expectation that the pass through was not paid by the

constituents Democrats represent.
    Surprisingly, the voter referendum variable was negatively
correlated with the vote of the Congressional delegation.
Generally, a one percent increase in the opposition to the tax

reform among the voters decreased opposition among the
Democratic Congressional delegation by about 1.6 percent. The
standard errors on these coefficients were marginal to
insignificant, however, ranging from 50 to 70 percent of the

parameter estimate.

    Three explanations for this phenomenon are possible. First,
majorities supported the tax reform bill in the TAXSIM

referendum in all 50 states. Thus, a median voter model would
                             —— 45 --

suggest that an increase in marginal opposition would have   no
effect on the outcome. Second. given the distributional

considerations of the tax reform bill, opposition was likely to
be concentrated among constituents supporting the other party.
Finally, voter surveys at the time indicated that most voters

thought their taxes would go up, in contrast to the findings of
TAXSIM. This would indicate that the TAXSIM referendum
procedure did not reflect the underlying views of constituents,

regardless of whether it was TAXSIM or the constituents who were
in error.

    Those models which produced statistically significant

variables for explaining the behavior of Democratic

Congressional delegations were used to see if changes in the
state and local tax situation had any effect. Changes in the

likelihood of itemizing, in the average price facing voters, and

in the weighted average prices of personal and total taxes were
tried. None produced statistically significant results.
Generally the standard errors were five to ten times the
parameter estimates. Nor was any consistent sign discernible on
the results. It is reasonable to conclude therefore, that the
effect of the tax reform bill on state and local taxes had very

little impact on Congressional voting. This is particularly
true about the effect of the tax reform bill on the price of

raising state and local revenue. This is a surprising result in
light of the intense lobbying on this Latter by state and local
public officials and public employee unions.
                              —— 46 --

Conclusion
   The results presented here provide a number of conclusions

regarding the effects of state and local tax deductibility and

the mechanism by which this is transformed by representative

governments
    o The level of state and local spending is significantly

affected by deductibility.
    o The effect of deductibility is stronger on voter based
measures than on aggregate measures of cost.

    o Income tax collections per capita were quite sensitive to

the price of raising revenue. Low prices were associated with
increased use of income taxes.

    o Property taxes were insensitive to price, but were closely
related to personal income.

    o Sales taxes were not easily explained by economic
variables and appear to be a residual form of revenue.

    o Congressional voting seems more influenced by aggregate
effects than by voter based measures, unlike state and local

spending.

  Given the substantial changes in the value of federal
deductibility of state and local taxes, future researchers have

the prospect of sufficient variability in time series data to

test a number of hypotheses suggested by the cross section data
presented here.
                              —— 47 ——

                            BIBLIOGRAPHY



Bergstrom, T. and Goodman, R. 1973. "Private demand for public

    goods." American Economic Review 63: 286—96 June.
Bergstrom, T.C., 1979. "When does majority rule supply public
    goods efficiently? "   Scandinavian Journal of Economics
    81:216—226

Bergstrom, T.C., Rubinfeld, DL. and Shapiro, P.,"Nicro based
    estimates of demand functions for local school
    expenditures," Econometrica 50:1183-1205

Bloom, H,S., Ladd, H.F., and Vinger, J., 1983. "Are property
    taxes capitalized into house values?" in G.R.Zodrow (ed)

    Local Provision of Public Services pp. 145-64

Borcherding, T.E. and Deacon, R.T. 1962. "The demand for the
    services of nonfederal governeants," American Economic
    Review 52, 891—901

Bowen, H.R. 1943. "The interpretation of voting in the

    allocation of economic resources," Quarterly Journal of
    Economics 58, 27—48

Bridges, Benjamin, Jr. 1966. "Deductibility of state and local
   nonbusiness taxes under the federal individual income tax,'
   National Tax Journal 14:1, March

Buchanan, J. and Lee, D.R., 1982. "Tax rates and tax revenues in

   political equilibrium: some simple analytics," Economic
    Inquiry, 20: 344—354, July.
                                   —— 48 ——

Feldstein,      M. and Metcalf. G. 1987. "The effect of federal tax

    deductibility on state and local taxes and spending" Journal

     of Political Economy (forthcoming)
Gramlich, E. and Galper, H. 1973. "State and local fiscal

     behavior and federal grant policy." Brookings Papers on
    Economic Activity 1:15—58

Gramlich, E. , D. Rubinfeld, and Swift, D. •      1981.   "Why Voters
    Turn Out for Tax Limitation Votes" National Tax Journal, 34,
     115—24

Hettich, Ii'.   and Winer, S. 1984. "A Positive Model of Tax

     Structure" Journal of Public Economics 24, 67—87

Hotelling, Harold. 1929. "Stability in Competition." Economic
    Journal 39: 41—57, January.

Inman, Robert p., 1979. "The fiscal performance of local

    governments: an interpretive review", Current Issues in
    Urban Economics, pp. 270—321. P. Mieszkowski and M.

    Streizheim (eds.) Baltimore:Johns Hopkins

_______________ 1979. "Subsidies, regulations, and the
    taxation of property in large u.s. cities," National Tax

    Journal, 32:
    ________         159-168,   June.

______________ 1987. "Markets, government, and the "new"
    political economy." in Handbook of Public Economics Vol. II.
    A. Auerbach and M. Feldstein (eds. )      . North—Holland
______________ "Does deductibility influence local taxation?"
    NBER Working Paper No. 1714
Ladd, Helen F. 1984. "Federal aid to state and local

    governments" Federal Budget Policy in the l98Os. 0.8. Mills
    and J.L. Palmer (eds). Washington, DC: Urban Institute
                                  -- 49   --

______________ "Local education expenditures, fiscal capacity,
    and the composition of the property tax base, National Tax
    Journal 28: 145—58

Noto, N.A. and Zimmerman, D., 1983. "Limiting state-local tax

    deductibility in exchange for increased general revenue

    sharing: an analysis of the economic effects" Senate Print
    98—77, Washington: U.S. Government Printing Office

______________________      1984. "Limiting state—local tax

    deductibility: effects among the states," National Tax
    Journal

Public Opinion, December 1984— January 1985 "Opinion roundup",

    pp.23—43

Romer, T. and Rosehthal, ii. "Political resource allocation,

    controlled agendas, and the staus quo, Public Choice, 33:
    27—4 3

_________________________ "Bureaucrats vs. voters: on the
    political economy of resource allocation by direct
    democracy" Quarterly Journal of Economics 93: 563—587

_______________________________    The elusive median voter" Journal

    of Public Economics 12: 143—70

___________________________"An institutional theory of the
    effect of intergovernmental grants" National Tax Journal
    33:451—58

Rubinfeld, 0. "Voting in a local school election: a micro

    analysis" Review of Economics and Statistics 59:30—42

______________   "On the economics of voter turnout in local

    school elections", Public Choice 35:3i5—331
                              —- 50 --

Rubinfeld,   Daniel L., 1987. "The economics of the local public

    sector." in Handbook of Public Economics Vol. 11. A.

    Auerbach and K. Feldstein (eds) North Holland Press

The Tax Foundation, 1983. Facts and figures on government

    finance, Washington
U.S. Bureau of the Census, 1982. Property taxation, census of

    governments, Washington: U.S. Government Printing Office
Zimmerman, Dennis. 1983. "Resource misallocation from interstate

    tax exportation: estimates of excess spending and welfare
    loss in a median voter framework," National Tax Joural
